The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-15-70 as L. L. No. 1, 1970]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
The local laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Town of Islip referred to
in the table set forth in § 1-2 of this Article shall be known collectively as
the "Code of the Town of Islip," and the various parts and sections of such
local laws, ordinances and resolutions shall be distributed and designated
as provided and set forth in § 1-2 of this Article.
§ 1-2. Distribution of local laws, ordinances and resolutions;
derivation table.1
§ 1-3. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter or of
any local law, ordinance, or resolution cited in the table in § 1-2 hereof
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
1. Editor's Note: Table showing derivation of new chapter and section number from old
numbering of ordinances, local laws and resolutions is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
Chapter 1A
ORDINANCES: NOTICE AND PUBLICATION
§ 1A-1. Notice of public hearing.
At least ten (10) days prior to the date for a public hearing on a proposed
Town ordinance, zoning ordinance or amendment thereto, the Town Clerk
shall give notice of such hearing as follows:
§ 1A-2. Notice of adoption.
Upon the adoption of a Town ordinance, zoning ordinance or amendment
thereto, the Town Clerk shall:
§ 1A-3. Severability.
A. Publish once in at least one (1) newspaper circulating in the Town of
Islip the time when and the place where the hearing will be held,
together with the title, a general description of the proposed ordinance
or amendment, a statement that a copy of the proposed ordinance or
amendment is available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk
and that at the time of the hearing all interested persons will be given
an opportunity to be heard.
B. Post a copy of the proposed ordinance or amendment, together with the
notice of the public hearing, on the bulletin board outside the office of
the Town Clerk.
A. Enter the ordinance or amendment into the Town Board minutes,
except that it shall not be necessary to enter maps adopted in
connection with the Zoning Ordinance or amendments in the minutes.
B. Publish once in the official newspaper of the Town or in a newspaper
designated by the Town Board having general circulation in the Town
an abstract of the ordinance or amendment, together with a statement
that a copy of the ordinance or amendment, as adopted, is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk and available for inspection.
A. Each section and every part of each section of this local law is hereby
declared independent of every other section or part hereof, and the
finding or holding of any section or part hereof to be void or ineffective
for any cause shall not be deemed to affect any other section or part
thereof.
B. No ordinance or amendment previously adopted or approved by the
Town Board shall be void for failure to comply with the provisions of this
local law. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to in any way
affect, limit or contravene any of the notice provisions required under
Article XXXVI of this Code for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.2
§ 1-3 ISLIP CODE § 1A-4
1:4
§ 1A-4. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 1B
ALTERNATE MEMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
2. Editor's Note: See Article XXXVI, Amendments, of Ch. 68, Zoning.
§ 1A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1A-4
1:5

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 1B-1. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
§ 1B-2. Position established; scope.
§ 1B-3. Supersession of state law.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10(1)(i) and (ii)(a)(1) and (3) and is intended to amend
and expand the circumstances under which an alternate member of the
Planning Board may serve.
A. The Town Board finds that New York Town Law § 271(15) permits the
Town to establish the position of alternate member of the Planning
Board to substitute in the event that a member has a conflict of interest.
B. The Town Board further finds that, pursuant to Municipal Home Rule
Law § 10, the Town Board may expand the authority of such alternate
member to substitute in the event of absence or illness of a Planning
Board member.
C. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to establish the position of
alternate member of the Planning Board to assist applicants and the
Planning Board to operate effectively in the event of a conflict of
interest, or absence or illness of one member of the Planning Board.
A. The position of alternate member of the Planning Board is hereby
created.
B. In addition to substituting in the place of a Planning Board member who
cannot participate because of a conflict of interest, the alternate
Planning Board member may also substitute for a Planning Board
member who is absent for any reason, including but not limited to
illness, absence from the jurisdiction or engagement elsewhere.
§ 1B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1B-3
1:7
Chapter 2
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants of the Town of
Islip to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations of
state statutes, local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of the Town
which the public servants are authorized or required to enforce.
§ 2-2. Authorization for issuance. [Amended 9-18-1979 by L.L. No.
11-1979; 5-19-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981; 6-17-1986 by L.L. No.
3-1986; 6-2-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987; 5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991;
9-11-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 8-16-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005;
8-11-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
The following public servants of the Town of Islip are hereby authorized to
issue an appearance ticket for a violation of a local law or ordinance of the
Code of the Town of Islip as well as any applicable state law or county law
as noted below, as respectively listed herein:
A. Department of Public Safety Enforcement staff:
(1) Division of Code Enforcement staff:
(a) Town Investigators: all chapters of the Code of the Town of
Islip and state and county laws as may be applicable.
(b) Fire Marshals: all chapters of the Code of the Town of Islip and
state and county laws as may be applicable. [Amended
5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010; 6-19-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012; 8-14-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
(c) Town Ordinance Inspectors: all chapters of the Code of the
Town of Islip and state and county laws as may be applicable.
[Added 8-14-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
(2) Division of Public Safety staff:
(a) All staff of the division as authorized in writing by the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety
Enforcement.
(3) Division of Marine Law Enforcement:
(a) Harbor Master and Bay Constables: all chapters of the Code of
the Town of Islip, state law and county law as may be
applicable to their duties.
B. Dog Control Officers: Chapter 12 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
§ 1B-3 ISLIP CODE § 2-2
1:8
§ 2-3. Service of tickets. [Amended 7-15-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
An appearance ticket, other than for a parking violation, shall be served in
accordance with the provisions of New York State Criminal Procedure Law
Article 150.
Chapter 3
ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 3-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Office of the Assessor of the Town of
Islip."
§ 3-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 3-3. Department established. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13,
1980]
C. Department of Environmental Control staff as authorized by the
Commissioner of Environmental Control: Chapters 21 and 32 of the
Code of the Town of Islip.
D. Airport security guards: Chapters 3B, 3C, 3D, 3F, 23A, 32, 46, 49, 59, 60
and § 58-5 of the Code of the Town of Islip, New York State and Suffolk
County laws, rules and regulations, where applicable, and regulations
of the Federal Aviation Administration and Transportation Security
Administration, as may be applicable; solely on the grounds of Long
Island MacArthur Airport.
E. Sanitation Inspectors: Chapter 32 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
F. Plumbing Inspectors: Chapter 40 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
G. Hazardous Materials Coordinator: Chapter 66 of the Code of the Town
of Islip, state law and county law as may be applicable to their duties.
[Added 9-11-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSESSOR — The head of the Department of the Assessor.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of the Assessor, which
shall perform a major function of Town government.
DEPUTY ASSESSOR — The Deputy Assessor of the Department, who
shall act generally for and in place of the Assessor.
§ 2-2 ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF § 3-3
3:9
§ 3-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13,
1980]
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Assessor. The
principal executive officer and administrative head of such Department
shall be the Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Town Board for the
term fixed by law at such salary as may from time to time be fixed by
said Town Board. The Assessor shall be appointed on the basis of his
administrative experience and qualifications for the duties of such
office and such additional standards as may be required by the Town
Board. The Assessor shall be the head of the Department with power
and authority to appoint and remove officers and employees under his
jurisdiction in accordance with the Civil Service Law and other
applicable laws.
B. The Assessor is empowered herein to appoint a Deputy who shall
generally act for and in his behalf, and who shall perform such duties as
are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this local
law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Assessor shall execute
and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same is
required by the Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town
Board and in such form as approved by the Town Attorney.
D. The Assessor shall have such powers as prescribed by law and as shall
be necessary for the proper administration of the Department
consistent with applicable provisions of law.
A. Assessment. The Assessor administers, manages and supervises the
assessing of all properties for tax purposes; maintains property cards,
permits, surveys and all other necessary records; reviews assessments
on which formal protests have been made; and makes searches to
establish date of construction prior to zoning.
B. Assessment roll. The Assessor administers, manages and supervises the
maintenance and update of the assessment roll by transfers of
properties by deed and state reports pertaining thereto; processes new
districts, court orders, changes of zone, etc.; maintains microfilmed
records; makes entry of all changes on the roll and compiles valuations
for the certification of the roll; prepares summary reports for all
appropriate municipalities and public officials; and notifies taxpayers of
any change in assessment.
C. Apportionment. The Assessor administers, manages, supervises and
processes apportionment of parcels of real property for tax purposes;
makes and records all required Tax Map changes; and processes all
abandonments, condemnations and new subdivisions.
D. Exemption. The Assessor administers, manages, supervises and
processes all applications for tax exemption, i.e., senior citizen,
§ 3-3 ISLIP CODE § 3-4
3:10
§ 3-5. Special districts. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13, 1980]
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 3-6. Powers of Town Supervisor. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13,
1980]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 3-7. Fees. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13, 1980]
The Assessor may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him for
any service rendered in connection with the work of his Department and for
which he deems it necessary to charge and to collect a fee therefor.
§ 3-8. Severability. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13, 1980]
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 3-9. When effective. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 13, 1980]
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 3A
AVIATION AND TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT
veterans, clergymen and all other organizations who qualify for exempt
status.
E. Information. The Assessor administers, manages, supervises and
processes all inquiries (personal, telephone and written) concerning
property status with regard to ownership, locations, etc.
F. The Assessor performs such other duties and functions that are
prescribed to be performed by him in any law, ordinance or resolution
of the Town Board or lawful directive of the Supervisor. However, the
Assessor may delegate any of his powers to or direct any of his duties to
be performed to a Deputy Assessor or other duly appointed assistant.
§ 3-4 ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF § 3A-1
3:11
§ 3A-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Aviation and
Transportation Law."
§ 3A-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 3A-3. Department established.
§ 3A-4. Organization.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Aviation and Transportation,
who shall be the chief executive officer of the Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Aviation and
Transportation, which shall perform a major function of Town
government.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER — The Deputy Commissioner of the Town of
Islip Department of Aviation and Transportation, who shall act for and
in place of the Commissioner.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Aviation and
Transportation. The principal executive officer and administrative head
of such Department shall be the Commissioner, who shall be appointed
by the Town Board for the term fixed by law at such salary as may from
time to time be fixed by said Town Board. The Commissioner shall be
appointed on the basis of his administrative experience and
qualifications for the duties of such office and such additional standards
as may be required by the Town Board. The Commissioner shall be the
head of the Department, with power and authority to appoint and
remove officers and employees under his jurisdiction in accordance
with the Civil Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint two Deputies who
shall generally act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such
duties as are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of
this local law, by statute or by other lawful authority. [Amended
4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same
is required by the Town Board, and in such form as approved by the
Town Attorney.
§ 3A-1 ISLIP CODE § 3A-4
3:12
§ 3A-5. General powers and duties.
§ 3A-6. Special districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against each district or project and paid for from
the funds duly apportioned for the purpose of such district or project.
A. The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall be divided into the following divisions: [Amended
5-20-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
(1) Division of Aviation.
(2) (Reserved)3
(3) (Reserved)4
A. The powers and duties of such Divisions therein shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Commissioner, and each of
said Divisions shall be supervised by a division head who shall be
designated Director. The Commissioner may, with the approval of the
Town Board, establish, consolidate or abolish any divisions or
subdivisions not existing or hereafter created in the Department.
B. Powers and duties of individual divisions. [Amended 5-20-1986 by
L.L. No. 2-1986]
(1) Division of Aviation. Its powers and duties are to administer,
supervise, manage, implement, initiate and direct all matters
related to the operation, development and use of Long Island
MacArthur Airport and Bayport Aerodrome and to develop and
coordinate all matters pertaining to Long Island MacArthur Airport
and Bayport Aerodrome. The Town Board may issue and amend
rules and regulations for activity, operations and maintenance on
airport property. The Commissioner of Aviation acting as Airport
Manager, or his designee shall hold hearings and impose penalties
for violations of such rules and regulations by all persons except
the general public.5 [Amended 4-21-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Division of Public Safety, was repealed 9-12-2000
by L.L. No. 2-2000.
4. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Division of Emergency Management, was repealed
2-8-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011.
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Division of Public Safety, was repealed 9-12-2000
by L.L. No. 2-2000. Former Subsection B(3), Division of Emergency Management, and
former Subsection C, which provided for assisting the Town Attorney, added 4-8-1997;
were repealed 9-11-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 3A-4 ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF § 3A-7
3:13
§ 3A-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 3A-8. Fees.
The Commissioner may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him
for any service rendered in connection with the work of his Department and
for which he deems it necessary to charge and collect a fee therefor.
§ 3A-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provisions or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 3A-10. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 3B
(RESERVED)
Chapter 3C
OFF-AIRPORT RENTAL CAR BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 59.
§ 3C-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip declares its intent to fix reasonable
fees, rules, regulations and procedures for off-airport rental car businesses
desiring access to airport property for business purposes. The Town Board
deems it necessary to enact this chapter in order to raise funds to help
support the operation of airport facilities, to help pay for airport equipment,
to protect the public, to preserve order, to provide for the public health,
safety and welfare, to enhance and govern the airport and provide for its
good order and peace and to regulate entrances to property and buildings
at the airport and the egress and ingress to such property and buildings.
§ 3A-7 ISLIP CODE § 3C-1
3:14
The Town Board finds that off-airport rental care companies desiring access
to the airport for business purposes constitute a specific class of business
operations on airport property and further finds that the fees and
regulations contained in this chapter are reasonable and uniform for the
same class of privilege. In adopting this chapter, the Town Board has given
due regard to the property and improvements used and the expenses of
operation of the airport and has found that the obligations imposed by this
chapter are reasonable compensation from users to the Town of Islip for use
of airport facilities and are required to help defray the cost of such facilities.
§ 3C-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS AUTOMOBILE RENTAL RECEIPTS — Time charges, mileage
charges and other sums received by a car rental company from its
customers by reason of the customers' acceptance of personal accident
insurance pursuant to the rental contract.
NONTENANT RENTAL CAR BUSINESS — A rental car business not having
a rental car concession agreement or ground lease with the Town of Islip
for the privilege of conducting rental car business at the airport but
nevertheless desiring the privilege of picking up customers and supplying
car rental services at the airport.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation or
any and all combinations of the foregoing operating in concert.
§ 3C-3. Permit requirements.
A. A person, persons or corporation desiring access to the Long Island
MacArthur Airport for the purpose of conducting rental car business
operations, either directly or indirectly, shall obtain from the Town of
Islip a nontenant rental car business permit prior to conducting any
such business on airport property.
B. Nontenant rental car business permits will be issued annually for a
twelve-month period within thirty (30) days after the application and
agreement described in Subsection C of this section have been
submitted to the airport manager, provided that the application is
approved.
C. The airport manager may issue a nontenant rental car business permit
only upon receipt of a signed and verified application and agreement
from the rental car business owner on a form provided by the Town of
Islip which shall include the following items and any others deemed
necessary by the airport manager:
(1) For corporations not traded publicly, the names and addresses of
officers and directors having an interest in the business.
§ 3C-1 ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF § 3C-3
3:15
(2) Proof of automobile general liability insurance in the amount of at
least one million dollars ($1,000,000.) for bodily injury and
property damage, combined single limit with a minimum of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.) per occurrence for all vehicles to be
operated on airport property.
(3) The make, model, color, identification number and motor vehicle
registration number of all vehicles to be operated on airport
property.
(4) A covenant to pay, for the duration of the permit, to the Town of
Islip, five percent (5%) of all gross automobile rental receipts per
month as defined herein, payable by the 10th day of each month for
the preceding month's receipts.
(5) The names and job titles of local management personnel, as well as
all business employees engaged in the operation of vehicles to be
operated on airport property.
(6) A covenant to obey and follow all standards and regulations
published by the Long Island MacArthur Airport and all applicable
federal and state regulations.
(7) Proof of all business and motor vehicle permits required by local,
state and federal authorities.
(8) A covenant to submit written proof to the Town of Islip of all gross
receipts at the time payment is due, accompanied by a statement
certified by an officer of the company attesting to the accuracy of
payments due the airport.
(9) Authorization for the Town of Islip to audit all business records and
accounts at any time upon demand and to make said records and
accounts available.
(10) A covenant that vehicles will stop only while in the process of
loading and unloading customers with bona fide reservations. Upon
request by an authorized representative of the Town of Islip, the
driver of a vehicle or company personnel that may accompany him
shall provide said representative the name of such prereserved
customer and other information applicable to the reservation.
Drivers of vehicles or company personnel that may accompany
them shall be prohibited from solicitation of business in any
manner whatsoever upon the airport. The operation of vehicles will
be specifically limited to the picking up and delivery of prereserved
customers.
(11) A covenant to park only in the parking and pickup area designated
for nontenant rental cars.
(12) A covenant to indemnify and hold harmless the Long Island
MacArthur Airport from any and all claims whatsoever arising out
§ 3C-3 ISLIP CODE § 3C-3
3:16
§ 3C-4. Regulations; revocation of permit; fees.
of the permittee's business operations and proof of insurance for
such contractual liability.
(13) A covenant to abide by such additional requirements as the Town of
Islip may adopt from time to time.
(14) A security deposit in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the
applicant's gross automobile rental receipts as herein defined from
the last two (2) months immediately preceding the date of the
application.
A. A nontenant rental car business permit will permit the business to pick
up customers at the terminal in a designated and signed van or other
motor vehicle, provided that no nontenant rental car business shall
operate more than one (1) designated motor vehicle on airport property
at the same time.
B. A nontenant rental car business permit shall not permit a business to
have an office or station on airport property, to park rental cars on
airport property or to operate rental cars on airport property, except as
provided herein, and all of these actions and activities are expressly
prohibited.
C. A nontenant rental car business permit is required in order to advertise
a nontenant rental car business on airport property and in order to
place a nontenant rental car business telephone on airport property.
However, fees for such advertising and telephones are not included in
the permit fees and charges. Advertising and telephone fees, charges
and locations must be negotiated separately with the airport's
advertising contractor and such fees and charges shall be in addition to
the fees set forth herein. A nontenant rental car business not having a
nontenant rental car business permit shall not advertise on airport
property and shall not place a telephone on airport property.
D. A nontenant rental car business permit may be revoked by the airport
manager for cause at a hearing before the airport manager or his
designee upon five (5) days' notice. Cause includes but is not limited to
a breach of any of the agreements herein; a failure to perform any of the
agreements herein, including a failure to make timely payments;
violation of Town of Islip standards or regulations; violation of the laws
of the federal government or of the laws of any state; and any other act
or omission of the permittee adversely affecting airport business
operations or posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
Cause also includes financial insolvency or instability, moral turpitude
and the lack of good character. In the event that a permit is revoked, all
sums owed the Town of Islip shall immediately become due and
payable, and no fees or charges shall be refundable by the Town of Islip.
A nontenant rental car business permit may, likewise, be denied for
similar cause, as it could be revoked. In addition, a nontenant rental car
§ 3C-3 ASSESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF § 3C-4
3:17
§ 3C-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person operating a nontenant rental car business as defined in this
chapter without first obtaining a permit pursuant to § 3C-3 or without
complying with the regulations contained in § 3C-4 shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.) for the first
offense, a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.) for the second offense,
two hundred dollars ($200.) for the third offense and four hundred dollars
($400.) for each offense thereafter, or by imprisonment for a term not
exceding fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 3C-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section or part thereof directly involved in the litigation in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 3C-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect ten (10) days after posting and publication as
provided by law.
business permit may be denied or revoked when, in the opinion of the
Town of Islip, such action is necessary to protect the public health,
safety or welfare or to preserve the financial welfare of the airport. In
the event that a permit is denied, the applicant shall be given written
notice of the reasons and shall have the right to a hearing before the
Town of Islip.
E. There shall be a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.) payable in
advance to defray administrative costs of a permit request for each
permit. This cost is not refundable in the event that the permit
application is rejected or in the event that the permit is revoked.
§ 3C-4 ISLIP CODE § 3C-7
3:18
Chapter 3D
(RESERVED)
Chapter 3E
(RESERVED)
Chapter 3F
(RESERVED)
Chapter 4
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 53.
§ 4-1. Interpretation.
This ordinance, applicable to bicycles, shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated on any street or upon any highway or upon any sidewalk or any
place where pedestrians walk.
§ 4-2. Riding on bicycles on roadways.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a highway or road dedicated or
otherwise shall operate the same in strict observance of all laws applicable
to such vehicles and the use thereof and in compliance with all rules of the
road applicable to the operation of such vehicles and in compliance with
all traffic ordinances except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances
which by their nature can have no application.
§ 4-3. Emerging from alley or a driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk.
§ 4-4. Standing or parking of bicycles.
No person shall stand, park or otherwise place in a position or temporary
storage a bicycle upon the highway or street or upon the sidewalk or against
any building at the sidewalk in such manner which shall obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
§ 3C-7 BICYCLES § 4-5
4:19
§ 4-5. Riding on bicycles.
§ 4-6. Lights and other equipment.
§ 4-7. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
The parent of the child or the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance.
§ 4-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
guilty of an offense and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed fifteen
dollars ($15.) for each and every offense.
§ 4-9. Effective date.
This ordinance is to take effect and be in force on and after August 31, 1964.
Chapter 4A
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 4.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 47A.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 59.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business
district.
B. Whenever any person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
A. No person shall operate a bicycle at nighttime unless it shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
at least five hundred (500) feet to the front, with a red reflector on the
rear which shall be visible from all distances fifty (50) to three hundred
(300) feet from the rear when directly in front of lawful beams of
headlights on a motor vehicle. A red light or lamp visible to the rear
may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other sound-making device capable of giving a signal audible for a
distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. No bicycle shall be
equipped with any siren or whistle.
§ 4-5 ISLIP CODE § 4A-1
4:20
§ 4A-1. Applicability.
This ordinance, applicable to skateboards, shall apply whenever a
skateboard is operated on any street or upon any highway or upon any
sidewalk or any place where pedestrians walk.
§ 4A-2. Skateboards on roads and highways.
Every person operating a skateboard upon a highway or road dedicated or
otherwise, shall operate the same in strict observance of all laws applicable
to a vehicle and the use thereof and in compliance with all rules of the road
applicable to the operation of a vehicle and in compliance with all traffic
ordinances, except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by
their nature can have no application.
§ 4A-3. Skateboards emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings.
The operator of a skateboard emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk.
§ 4A-4. Standing, storage or parking of skateboards.
No person shall stand, park or otherwise place in a position of temporary
storage a skateboard upon a highway, street, sidewalk or against any
building abutting a sidewalk in such a manner which shall obstruct or
render injury to a pedestrian or interfere with vehicular traffic.
§ 4A-5. Operation on sidewalks.
§ 4A-6. Reflective clothing and other equipment.
A. No person shall ride a skateboard upon a sidewalk within any business
district.
B. Whenever any person shall operate a skateboard upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
A. No person shall operate a skateboard at nighttime unless he or she is
wearing reflective clothing, which shall be visible from a distance of not
less than fifty (50) feet and a maximum of three hundred (300) feet from
the front, side and rear of the skateboard when directly in front of the
lawful beams of a headlight on a motor vehicle.
B. "Reflective clothing" shall be defined, for the purposes of this
ordinance, as any shirt, vest, jacket or any other readily visible piece of
apparel equipped with a reflective surface, such as phosphorescent
tape or an equivalent reflective surface.
§ 4A-1 BICYCLES § 4A-7
4:21
§ 4A-7. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
The parent of the minor child or the guardian of any minor child shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions
of this ordinance.
§ 4A-8. Penalties for offenses; fees.
§ 4A-9. Effective date.
This ordinance is to take effect and be in force on and after May 10, 1987.
Chapter 5
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Parades, assemblies and carnivals — See Ch.
36.
Racetracks — See Ch. 42.
§ 5-1. Purpose; restrictions.
The purpose of this local ordinance is to amend a local ordinance adopted
by the Town Board of Islip, Suffolk County, New York, dated November
13, 1958, authorizing the conduct of bingo in such Town, to change the
reference in such local ordinance from Article 14-G of the General
Municipal Law to Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, as so
renumbered by Chapter 438 of the Laws of 1962, and to set forth therein
the following additional amended and renumbered restrictions concerning
the conduct of the game of bingo by an authorized organization in such
Town, as required by Section 479 of the General Municipal Law of the State
of New York, as amended by Chapter 438 of the Laws of 1962:
A. Any person or persons violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
guilty of an offense and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed twentyfive
dollars ($25.) for each and every offense.
B. Any skateboard operated in violation of this ordinance may be
immediately impounded. The Town of Islip shall store such impounded
skateboards in a suitable, secure location. No impounded skateboards
may be released until all storage costs and fees have been paid. The
violator shall be responsible for the payment of all such costs and fees.
The per diem storage fee shall be two dollars ($2.). The impound fee
shall be five dollars ($5.).
C. Any skateboard not redeemed within thirty (30) days shall become the
property of the Town of Islip.
§ 4A-7 ISLIP CODE § 5-1
5:22
§ 5-2. When effective.
This local ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after enactment hereof
as provided by Section 497 of the General Municipal Law (after due
publication and posting as provided by Section 133 of the Town Law).
Chapter 6
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) in any single game of bingo.
F. No series of prizes on any one (1) bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization shall conduct
such game on Sunday night unless he or it has received prior written
consent by the Town Board of the Town of Islip to do so. Such consent
shall be noted in the license issued to any applicant wishing to conduct
such game on said evening. [Added 1-25-72, effective 2-19-726]
J. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this local ordinance shall constitute and be punishable
as a misdemeanor.
6. Editor's Note: Ordinance adopted 1-25-72 provides for the insertion of this matter as
Subsection I and the renumbering of former Subsection I to J.
§ 5-1 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 5-2
6:23
AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF
§ 6-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
§ 6-2. Desecration; breach of peace.
It shall be unlawful to destroy or mutilate an American Flag under
circumstances knowingly calculated to lead to a breach of the peace.
§ 6-3. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this local law is a misdemeanor punishable by one (1) year in
jail and/or a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
§ 6-4. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 6A
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of graffiti — See Ch. 23A.
Department of Town Attorney — See Ch. 50.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
A. The American Flag, throughout more than two hundred (200) years of
history has come to be the visible symbol embodying our nation. The
flag is a unique symbol of our commitment to freedom, liberty and
justice for all, of equal opportunity, of religious tolerance and of
goodwill for other people who share our aspirations. No other American
symbol has been as universally honored as the American Flag.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this local law is to protect the physical
integrity of the flag of the United States under terms that are consistent
with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
§ 5-2 ISLIP CODE § 6-4
6:24
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Terms
§ 6A-1. Applicability.
Definitions and terms defined within this chapter apply to all articles of this
chapter.
§ 6A-1 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-1
6:25

ARTICLE II
Placarding of Unsafe Residential Structures
§ 6A-2. Procedure.
§ 6A-3. Position of Code Compliance Coordination Officer created;
duties and responsibilities.
There shall be created in the Office of the Town Attorney the position of
Code Compliance Coordination Officer. Appointment to such position shall
be made by the Town Attorney. The Code Compliance Coordination Officer
shall be contacted immediately by either the authorized official who places
the placard or his/her superior when he/she believes that conditions exist
which may result in the placarding of a residential structure pursuant to the
provisions of the New York State Property Maintenance Code.
§ 6A-4. Procedures after placarding.
At all times while the placarding of a residential structure pursuant to the
provisions of the New York State Property Maintenance Code is in effect,
there shall be biweekly inspections by either the Chief Fire Marshal, Chief
Town Investigator or the Commissioner of Planning and Development or one
A. Authority to placard.
(1) The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety Enforcement
shall delegate the authority to placard an unsafe residential
structure. Any such designee must be a properly certified New York
State Code Enforcement Official.
(2) The placarding of residential structures shall occur as authorized
by the New York State Property Maintenance Code, New York State
Fire Code or subsequent superseding regulation.
B. Notification. Prior to, or at the time of the placarding of a residential
structure, in accordance with the provisions of the New York State
Property Maintenance Code and New York State Fire Code, an
authorized designee shall notify the following agencies, either
telephonically or in writing via facsimile:
(1) The Suffolk County Department of Social Services, to ensure the
relocation of all residents, if needed; and
(2) The fire district in which the structure is located;
(3) The Suffolk County Police Department, to whom the Town's police
function has been transferred pursuant to referendum, to ensure
that the dangerous structure remains unoccupied.
C. The authorized official, after making the above notifications, shall keep
a record of the date, time and manner of such notifications.
§ 6A-2 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-4
6:27
of their designees until such time as all conditions are met for the removal
of the placard on the subject structure.
§ 6A-5. Prohibited occupancy.
No person shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded
equipment. No person shall enter a placarded premises or structure, other
than a qualified technician making authorized repairs.
§ 6A-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found to be in violation of § 6A-5, Prohibited occupancy, shall
be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500 and no more than $10,000, or up to one year's
imprisonment, or a term of probation permitted by law, or a combination of
the aforementioned as permitted by law.
§ 6A-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy and in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 6A-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 6A-4 ISLIP CODE § 6A-8
6:28
ARTICLE III
Community Preservation and Anti-Blight Enforcement
§ 6A-9. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Community Preservation and Anti-Blight
Enforcement Local Law."
§ 6A-10. Legislative intent.
It is hereby found and declared that there may exist within the Town of
Islip a number of real properties which are vacant and/or in a blighted
condition, and that the continued existence of such properties negatively
affects the economic well-being of the Town of Islip; adds to the decline
of neighborhoods; and affects the overall health, safety and welfare of
its residents. It is further found that many of these properties can be
rehabilitated, reconstructed, and reused so as to provide decent, safe,
sanitary housing or commercial facilities, and that such rehabilitation,
reconstruction and reuse would eliminate, remedy and/or prevent the
adverse conditions that are outlined above. It is further found that the
abatement of the blight of poorly maintained properties and/or vacant
parcels is a benefit to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Town of Islip.
§ 6A-11. Scope; applicability.
§ 6A-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all properties in the
Town of Islip, residential and otherwise, and constitute the
requirements and standards for the maintenance of such premises.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall be deemed to
supplement applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes and
regulations. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish, impair,
supersede or replace existing remedies of the Town, county or state or
existing requirements of any other provision of local laws or ordinances
of the Town or county or state laws and regulations. In case of conflict
between any provisions of this article and any applicable state or local
law, ordinance, code or regulation, the more restrictive or stringent
provision or requirement shall prevail.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this article, words in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any improved or vacant property that is
located within the Town of Islip that is maintained with any of the
prohibited conditions defined herein.
§ 6A-9 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-12
6:29
§ 6A-13. Creation or maintenance of blighted premises prohibited.
No owner, agent, tenant, firm, business entity, voluntary association,
nonprofit organization, or person in control of real property located within
the Town of Islip shall allow, create, maintain or cause to be created or
maintained, any blighted premises.
§ 6A-14. Prohibited conditions.
Prohibited conditions:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with
the administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly
authorized representative of such person.
DEFACEMENT — Any mark on the face or surface of, disfigurement,
injury or alteration to the appearance of property without the consent
and express permission of the owner or proprietor thereof, or in the
case of public property, of the person having charge, custody or control
thereof.
DERELICT VEHICLE/VESSEL — A motor vehicle or vessel not suitable
for operation.
DILAPIDATED — Any building or structure or part thereof that would
not qualify for a certificate of use and occupancy, or which is deemed
an unsafe structure, and any dwelling or unit which is designated as
unfit for habitation as defined in the state basic building code and the
revised ordinances of the Town of Islip.
GRAFFITI — Any inscription, mark or design which is written, etched,
scratched, painted, drawn or applied to property.
LEGAL OCCUPANCY — Occupancy that is legal by virtue of fee
ownership, a bona fide lease agreement, a rent receipt or, if necessary,
a utility statement, and which occupancy is in compliance with federal
laws, state building codes, state firesafety codes, local zoning, local
housing, and all other pertinent rules, regulations and codes.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the Town of Islip defined by its
residents and its distinctive characteristics.
VACANT PARCEL — A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
VACANT STRUCTURE — A building or structure or part thereof or land
that is not legally occupied for a period of 30 days.
UNIT — Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a
single person or entity for his/her/its sole use, and is intended to be a
single and distinct space.
A. Broken or unsecured windows.
B. Broken or unsecured doors, exits or entryways.
C. Excessive liter and debris.
§ 6A-12 ISLIP CODE § 6A-14
6:30
D. Overgrown grass or vegetation of at least 10 inches in length or
otherwise excessively grown noncultivated vegetation.
E. Storage of derelict motor vehicles/vessel.
F. Broken or unsecured:
(1) Roof.
(2) Gutters.
(3) Siding/shingles.
(4) Chimney.
(5) Shutters.
(6) Fencing.
(7) Outdoor lighting fixtures.
(8) Pools or spas.
G. Broken or unsecured accessory structures, including, but not limited to,
decks, sheds, porches, pools, pool houses, garages, carports, storage
units, front porches, outside statuary, fish ponds.
H. Damaged, unsightly, unsecured or unpermitted signage or awnings.
I. Presence of graffiti.
J. Broken or exposed electrical wires, electrical equipment or extension
cords.
K. Unfinished abandoned construction which is not issued a current valid
Building Division permit.
L. Broken or fallen trees.
M. Evidence of unresolved fire damage.
N. Peeling or deteriorated paint.
O. Presence of stagnant water.
P. Unsecured or open wells, cesspools or cisterns.
Q. Presence of vermin, rodent harborage and infestation.
R. Presence in any outdoor area of any refrigerator, washing machine,
sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank or any other household equipment,
machinery, furniture, or item, appliance or appliances, boxes, lumber,
dirt or debris, trash, garbage or refuse cans, or any items other than
those commonly stored outdoors, or any parts of such items, for a
period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours. This subsection does
not prohibit machinery installed in the rear setback areas for household
§ 6A-14 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-14
6:31
§ 6A-15. Vacant property registration.
§ 6A-16. Failure to register vacant property.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to register any vacant property
as defined by this article.
§ 6A-17. Vacant properties with pools or spas.
Any pool or spa contained on a vacant property must be secured to the
Town of Islip Code Article XXVIII standards or abated as required by Article
XXVIII.7
§ 6A-18. Failure to abate prohibited condition.
In the event that a prohibited condition is identified, such condition shall
be reported to the owner of record or his designee, as identified within the
vacant property registration application. If the condition is not corrected
within 10 days the Town of Islip shall take the necessary action to abate the
prohibited condition.
or recreational use, furniture designed and used for outdoor activities,
trash cans in the front yard during the twenty-four-hour period allowed
for garbage pickup and garbage or recycle bins or debris boxes allowed
by the Town.
A. Once a property has been determined to be vacant, notification letters
shall be delivered to a property owner. Such notice shall be served by
personal service upon the owner or person in charge of the affected
building or structure; or if no such person can be reasonably found, by
mailing said owner such notice by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address as shown by the records of
the Town Assessor; and by securely affixing a copy of such notice upon
the door of the affected building or structure.
B. The notice shall contain a statement of the date or dates upon which an
inspection was conducted on the property to determine the vacant
status, the address of the vacant property, the specific nature of the
prohibited conditions, a copy of this article and a vacant property
registration application.
C. Vacant property registration fees are to be established by the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety Enforcement.
D. Vacant property registration applications shall include but not be
limited to the property owner's contact telephone number, residence or
place of business, and designated property maintenance contractor.
A. Failure to comply with this article. Whenever the owners of a property
shall fail to comply with the minimum standards of property
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Zoning, Art. XXVIII.
§ 6A-14 ISLIP CODE § 6A-18
6:32
§ 6A-19. Registry exempt from disclosure.
Under New York State Public Officers Law § 87, the vacant property registry
and all vacant property registration forms shall be exempt from disclosure
under the Freedom of Information Law on the grounds that such disclosure
would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. The
Commissioner of Public Safety Enforcement shall institute strict policies to
ensure that such information is available only to Town personnel engaged
in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and, in emergency
situations, to members of law enforcement; the fire service; emergency
medical services; and public utility companies. The information contained in
the vacant property registry and all vacant property registration forms shall
not be disclosed to any party for sale.
maintenance, the Town Board may authorize the work to be done and
shall provide for the cost thereof to be paid from general Town funds
as directed by resolution of the Town Board, pursuant to the authority
provided under §§ 64 and 130 of the Town Law.
B. Assessment of costs and expenses, liens. All costs and expenses
incurred by the Town in connection with the abatement of a violation of
this article shall be assessed against the subject premises or lot. An
itemization of such costs shall be provided to the Town Board by the
Department of Planning and Development. The total costs and expenses
shall then be determined by the Town Board and shall be reported to
the Assessor of the Town as the amount to be assessed against the
premises, and the expense so assessed shall constitute a lien and
charge on the premises on which it is levied until paid or otherwise
satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at
the same time as other Town charges.
§ 6A-18 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-19
6:33

ARTICLE IV
Maintenance Standards; Penalties8
§ 6A-20. Minimum maintenance standards for residential
properties.
A. Exterior property areas.
(1) Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. All exterior property and
premises shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or
garbage. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property
which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with
this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(2) Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with
this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(3) Weeds. All premises and immediate exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches
(254 mm). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens. The failure to maintain an
improved property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(4) Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be
kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents
are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes which will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate
rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. The failure to maintain
a property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(5) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and in good repair. The failure to maintain a property in compliance
with this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set
forth within § 6A-21.
8. Editor's Note: This provisions of this article were originally added as Art. III on
10-14-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014 in its amendment of this Ch. 6A, but were redesignated as
Art. IV in order to fit the organizational structure of the chapter.
§ 6A-20 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-20
6:35
(6) Motor vehicles. No vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved spray booth. The failure to maintain a property
in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
B. Exterior structure.
(1) General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety or welfare. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(2) Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition.
Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by painting or other
protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(3) Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials: and maintained weatherproof and
properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(4) Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate
to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall
be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof
water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(5) Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper
anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. The
failure to maintain a property in compliance with this subsection
shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(6) Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks,
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe
and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or
§ 6A-20 ISLIP CODE § 6A-20
6:36
wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such
as paint or similar surface treatment. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(7) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and
shall be maintained in good condition. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(8) Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door
and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and
weathertight. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with
this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(a) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes. The failure to maintain a property in
compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(9) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with
this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(10) Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling
units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
C. Interior structure.
(1) Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed
loads. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(2) Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and
doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition.
Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired,
removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and
other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
§ 6A-20 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-20
6:37
(3) Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound
condition and good repair. The failure to maintain a property in
compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(4) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and
shall be maintained in good condition. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(5) Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as
intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. The
failure to maintain a property in compliance with this subsection
shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(6) Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. The interior of every structure
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. The
failure to maintain a property in compliance with this subsection
shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(7) Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found
shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not
be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
D. Plumbing systems and fixtures.
(1) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the
function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All
plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
functional condition. The failure to maintain a property in
compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(2) Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(3) Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system
in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting,
cross-connection, backsiphonage, improper installation,
§ 6A-20 ISLIP CODE § 6A-20
6:38
deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the defects shall
be corrected to eliminate the hazard. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
E. Water system.
(1) Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained
to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from
defects and leaks. The failure to maintain a property in compliance
with this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set
forth within § 6A-21.
(2) Water-heating facilities. Water-heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount
of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub,
shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°
F. (43° C.) where hot water is required. A fuel-burning water heater
shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other
occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion
air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be
properly installed and maintained on water heaters. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(3) Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line
shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with
this subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
F. Heating facilities.
(1) Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures
as required by this section.
(2) Residential occupancies. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of
any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit,
rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either expressed
or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from September 15 to May 31 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms. The failure to maintain a property in
compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
G. Mechanical equipment.
§ 6A-20 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-20
6:39
(1) Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water-heating
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended
function. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
H. Electrical facilities.
(1) Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing,
insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or
installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
defects shall be corrected to eliminate the hazard. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(2) Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved
manner. The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
I. Fire-protection systems.
(1) General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination
thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times.
The failure to maintain a property in compliance with this
subsection shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth
within § 6A-21.
(2) Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, and R-4 and in
dwellings regulated by the Residential Code of New York State,
regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
(a) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(b) In each room used for sleeping purposes. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(c) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but
not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm
§ 6A-20 ISLIP CODE § 6A-20
6:40
§ 6A-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association, firm or corporation found to have violated any
provision of Articles III or IV of this chapter or assists in the violation of any
provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by:
§ 6A-22. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, chapter or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, chapter or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy and in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level, provided that the lower level is less than one full story
below the upper level. The failure to maintain a property in
compliance with this subsection shall constitute a violation
punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
J. Carbon monoxide alarms.
(1) A carbon monoxide alarm shall be provided on each story
containing a sleeping area, within 15 feet of the sleeping area.
More than one carbon monoxide alarm shall be provided where
necessary to assure that no sleeping area on such story is more
than 15 feet away from a carbon monoxide alarm. The failure to
maintain a property in compliance with this subsection shall
constitute a violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
(2) A carbon monoxide alarm shall be provided on each story that
contains a carbon monoxide source. The failure to maintain a
property in compliance with this subsection shall constitute a
violation punishable as set forth within § 6A-21.
A. A fine of not less than $250 and not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or both, for
conviction of a first offense.
B. For any second conviction, committed within a period of five years of
the first conviction, such violation will be subject to a fine of not less
than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both.
C. For any third or subsequent offense, after having been convicted two or
more times within a period of five years, such violation shall be
prosecuted as an unclassified misdemeanor, with a minimum fine of
$2,000 and a maximum fine of $5,000 and/or up to one year
incarceration, or a period of probation as permitted by law.
§ 6A-20 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-23
6:41
§ 6A-23. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 6A-23 ISLIP CODE § 6A-23
6:42
Chapter 7
PESTICIDES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 6A.
Environmental Council — See Ch. 13A.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs
Department — See Ch. 36A.
Water quality — See Ch. 67.
§ 6A-23 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 6A-23
6:43

ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Town-Owned Properties
[Adopted 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010]
§ 7-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PESTICIDE —
PLANT REGULATOR — Any substance or mixture of substances, intended
through physiological action, for accelerating or retarding the rate of
growth or rate of maturation or for otherwise altering the behavior of
ornamental or crop plants or their produce, but shall not include substances
which are intended as plant nutrients, trace elements, nutritional
chemicals, plant inoculants and soil amendments.
§ 7-2. Use of synthetic pesticides and plant regulators prohibited.
Unless the use is classified as an exception under § 7-3, the application of
pesticides or plant regulators to any Town-owned parcel of land is hereby
prohibited.
§ 7-3. Exceptions.
Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any pests; and
A.
Any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant
regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
B.
A. An emergency application of a pesticide or plant regulator may be made
as determined by the Commissioner of the Town of Islip Department of
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs.
B. The following shall not be considered an application of pesticides as
defined under § 7-2:
(1) The application of antimicrobial pesticides and antimicrobial
products as defined by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and
Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. §§ 136(mm) and 136q(h)(2));
(2) The use of an aerosol product with a directed spray, in containers of
18 fluid ounces or less, when used to protect individuals from
stinging and biting insects, including venomous spiders, bees,
wasps and hornets;
(3) The use of nonvolatile insect or rodent bait in a tamper-resistant
container;
§ 7-1 AMERICAN FLAG, DESECRATION OF § 7-3
6:45
§ 7-4. Organic lawn care required.
§ 7-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, section, paragraph or provision of this article or
any rule or regulation hereunder shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its operation to the
clause, sentence, section, paragraph or provision or rule or regulation
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 7-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the filing thereof in the office
of the New York Secretary of State.
(4) The application of a pesticide classified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency as an exempt material under 40
CFR 152.25;
(5) The use of boric acid and disodium octaborate tetrahydrate;
(6) The use of horticultural soap and oils that do not contain synthetic
pesticides or synergists.
A. The Town shall only use organic lawn care materials in the maintenance
of Town-owned parcels of land, with the exception of Town of Islip golf
courses.
B. Any outside vendors, contractors or other entities that enter into an
agreement with the Town of Islip for the maintenance or use of Townowned
parcels of land shall only use organic lawn care materials in the
maintenance of said parcels of land, with the exception of Town of Islip
golf courses.
§ 7-3 ISLIP CODE § 7-6
6:46
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
COLLATERAL LOAN BROKERS
§ 9-1. Legislative intent.
General Business Law § 40 authorizes the licensing authority of the local
governing body to issue licenses to carry on the business of a collateral
loan broker. Therefore, this chapter is being enacted, pursuant to the
requirements and standards set forth in Article 5 of the General Business
Law, to establish a procedure by which the Office of the Town Clerk may
issue said licenses.
§ 9-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLATERAL LOAN BROKER — Any person, partnership or corporation:
§ 9-3. Registration statement.
As required by General Business Law § 53, a copy of the collateral loan
broker's registration statement shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Islip prior to the establishment of any premises as a collateral loan
broker business.
§ 9-4. License required; fee; application; issuance; restrictions.
A. Loaning money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than
securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or
B. Dealing in the purchasing of personal property on condition of selling it
back at a stipulated price; or
C. Designated or doing business as a furniture storage warehouseman and
loaning and advancing money upon goods, wares or merchandise
pledged or deposited as collateral security.
A. Pursuant to Article 5 of the New York State General Business Law, and
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, a license shall be
obtained from the Town Clerk prior to the establishment of any
collateral loan broker business in the Town of Islip. The fee for such
license shall be the maximum amount authorized under §§ 40 and 41 of
Article 5 of the General Business Law, or such successor sections of that
law as may be authorized by the New York State Legislature.
§ 7-6 (RESERVED) § 9-4
8:47
B. No person, corporation, partnership, firm or association shall carry on
the business of a collateral loan broker within the Town of Islip without
first obtaining a collateral loan broker license.
C. Bonds; fees; conditions. Each collateral loan broker shall furnish a bond
to the Town of Islip, with fees and conditions as set forth in § 41 of
Article 5 of the New York State General Business Law. Any action on
said bonds shall be in accordance with § 42 of Article 5 of that law.
D. All licenses shall be placed and, at all times, displayed in a conspicuous
place at the licensee's place of activity or business for which it is issued.
E. Sign requirements.
(1) A collateral loan broker purchasing articles from the general public
shall display, in a conspicuous place in his or her shop, a sign
stating:
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 5 OF THE NEW YORK STATE GENERAL
BUSINESS LAW, A COLLATERAL LOAN BROKER IS
AUTHORIZED TO PROVIDE LOANS ON ITEMS PLEDGED OR
PURCHASE ITEMS OFFERED FOR SALE. YOU HAVE THE RIGHT
TO USE AN ITEM AS COLLATERAL FOR A LOAN OR SELL THE
ITEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL LAW. ALL
SALES MAY BE CANCELED WITHIN FIVE BUSINESS DAYS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SAID ARTICLE 5. A SALE OF JEWELRY,
WATCHES, PRECIOUS STONES, PRECIOUS METALS OR COINS
CAN BE CONVERTED TO A LOAN WITHIN 14 DAYS FROM THE
DATE OF THE SALE.
(2) Such sign shall be made of a durable material, with letters being at
least one inch high and having a stroke of at least 1/4 inch. The
letters and background shall be of contrasting colors.
F. Each license is personal to the licensee. It does not go with title to the
land, nor may it be sold, assigned, transferred or disposed of.
G. Application for license. Applicants for a license under this chapter must
file an application with the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip, supplied by
the Town Clerk, containing the following information:
(1) The name and description of the applicant. Individuals operating
under a trade name must present a certified copy of the trade name
certificate filed in the Suffolk County Clerk's office. A partnership
conducting business, whether or not under a trade name, must
submit a certified copy of the partnership certificate filed in the
Suffolk County Clerk's office when the partnership was formed. A
corporation must furnish a copy of the filing receipt for the
certificate of incorporation from the New York State Secretary of
State. A corporation from outside New York State must furnish a
copy of its application for authority to do business in New York
State from the New York State Secretary of State.
§ 9-4 ISLIP CODE § 9-4
8:48
(2) The address of the applicant (local and legal).
(3) That the applicant is of legal age.
(4) That the applicant is a citizen of the United States, whether by
birth or naturalization, or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
residence in the United States; if by naturalization, the date and
place where obtained. The naturalization certificate or permanent
Board of Elections personal registration card may be used as proof
of citizenship.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of or is now under charge of any crime, misdemeanor or
violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and
the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, and such other facts
or evidence as is deemed necessary to establish that the applicant
is a person fit and capable of properly conducting the activity or
business for which the license is sought.
(6) A description of the exact type of business the applicant intends to
conduct.
(7) The name and address of the owner or owners of the land and the
nature of the right of occupancy of the applicant to the use of such
land.
(8) Two photographs of the applicant taken not more than 60 days
prior to the filing of the application. Said photographs shall be two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. Two photographs
and fingerprints are required of each individual applicant: two
photographs and fingerprints are required of each partner; no
photographs are required of corporate applicants, but all officers
must be fingerprinted, as well as any stockholder of 10% or more of
the stock.
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address upon whom
process or other legal notice may be served.
(10) A copy of the applicant's fingerprints shall be mailed to the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, Albany, New York,
requesting a fingerprint search. The Town Clerk shall secure from
the applicant the required fee in the form of a postal money order
made payable to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services.
H. Issuance of license.
(1) Upon receipt of the license application and upon the approval by
the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip and the payment of the
prescribed fees and bonds required of the applicant, the Town
Clerk shall prepare and deliver said license to the applicant.
§ 9-4 (RESERVED) § 9-4
8:49
§ 9-5. Secondhand business.
Any collateral loan broker engaged in the purchase or sale of secondhand
articles shall comply with § 47 of Article 5 of the New York State General
Business Law.
§ 9-6. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the rule of
interpretation applicable to remedial legislation shall be used so that the
spirit and intent of this chapter shall be observed. All provisions shall be:
§ 9-7. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the Town of Islip,
its officers, agents or employees, or the Suffolk County Police Department,
its officers, agents or employees, for any act or damage caused as a result
of reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(2) Every license issued hereunder shall be signed at the direction and
in the name of the Town Clerk and sealed with the Seal of the Town
of Islip.
(3) The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued, as well as
any other matters herein described.
(4) No license shall be granted under this chapter to any collateral
loan broker:
(a) Who has been convicted of any offense which, under the laws
of the State of New York, constitutes a crime involving moral
turpitude.
(b) Who has been found by any court of the state to have practiced
any fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in the conduct of the
collateral loan broker business unless the Town Clerk, after
Town Board approval, shall decide in any particular case upon
the facts there presented that it is proper to issue the license
applied for.
(c) Whose license under this chapter has been revoked at any time
during the year prior to the time of the application for the
license.
A. Considered as minimum requirements; and
B. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the
Town of Islip under New York State statutes.
§ 9-4 ISLIP CODE § 9-8
8:50
§ 9-8. Continued compliance required.
Any collateral loan broker business shall be permitted to operate in the
Town of Islip only so long as it shall be and continues to be in compliance
with all requirements of Article 5 of the General Business Law as well as all
other applicable requirements of law.
§ 9-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 9-10. Conflict with other provisions.
Where the requirements of this chapter impose a different restriction or
requirement than imposed by other sections of the Code of the Town of
Islip, the Town Law of the State of New York or other applicable rules or
regulations, the requirements of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 9-11. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, section, clause, paragraph, sentence, part or
provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this
chapter, which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Chapter 9A
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
§ 9A-1. Legislative intent.
It is the desire of the Town Board to give every citizen of the Town of Islip
the opportunity, if he or she so desires, of having cable television.
§ 9A-2. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPANY — A cable company franchised by the Town of Islip.
A. Except as otherwise expressly proved, and in addition to any other
remedy for an offense against this chapter, any person committing an
offense against this chapter or any section or provision thereof or
failing to comply therewith shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $250.
B. Pursuant to § 51 of Article 5 of the General Business Law of the State of
New York, the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip, after a hearing, shall
have full power and authority to take appropriate action, including,
without limitation, the suspension or revocation of any license
previously issued and the imposition of the maximum fines and
penalties upon any person violating any provisions of that article and/or
of this chapter.
§ 9-8 (RESERVED) § 9A-2
8:51
SUBDIVIDER — Any corporation, individual or partnership which is
constructing residences within the Town of Islip.
SUBDIVISION — The division of one (1) or more lots or parcels of land into
two (2) or more lots or parcels of land.
§ 9A-3. Installation of cable in subdivisions.
Chapter 10
CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM
§ 10-1. Legislative intent.
A. Whenever any subdivider constructs any subdivision within the Town,
the subdivider shall not interfere with the installation of cable television
facilities upon the property or premises of the subdivider except that a
subdivider may require that:
(1) The installation of the cable television facilities conform to such
reasonable conditions as are necessary to protect the safety,
functioning and appearance of the subdivision and the convenience
and well-being of the homeowners.
(2) The company or the homeowner, or a combination thereof, bears
the entire cost of the installation, operation or removal of such
facilities.
(3) The company or the homeowner, or a combination thereof, agrees
to indemnify the landlord for any damage caused by the
installation, operation or removal of such facilities.
B. The subdivider may not demand or accept payment, in any form, in
exchange for permitting cable television service to be installed on or
within his property.
C. No subdivider may discriminate, by price or otherwise, between buyers
who receive cable television service and those who do not.
D. Agreements made between companies and subdividers executed prior
to the effective date of this local law may be enforced notwithstanding
this local law.
A. It is the intention of this Town Board to establish a permanent annual
budgeting system for the approval and authorization of capital projects
within the Town. The capital budget shall be prepared and submitted
annually by the Town Supervisor to the Town Board and shall contain all
recommended capital projects for the next succeeding fiscal year and
the three (3) fiscal years following.
§ 9A-2 ISLIP CODE § 10-1
10:52
§ 10-2. Preparation of proposals and estimates.
The Town Supervisor shall annually establish a date by which Town
department heads shall prepare and submit capital proposals and
estimates. He shall prepare and provide to all Town departments the
necessary forms and instructions for the preparation of such proposals.
Town department and agency heads shall be required to submit capital
proposals in accordance with such instructions and by such date. They may
also be required to submit such other supporting data or information as the
Town Supervisor may require in connection therewith. Upon the receipt of
such capital proposals, the Town Supervisor shall forward one (1) copy of
each proposal to the Town Planning Board and the Town Board.
§ 10-3. Hearings.
The Town Supervisor shall hold one (1) or more hearings in public upon
such capital proposals to which all members of the Town Planning Board
and all Town Board members shall be invited. Such hearings shall be held to
permit Town department heads to defend and explain their capital proposals
and to assist the Town Supervisor and Town Board in their consideration of
such proposals.
§ 10-4. Planning Board.
The Town Planning Board may submit capital proposals to the Town
Supervisor on any matter which it deems to be of interest and concern to
the Board. The Planning Board shall review all capital proposals otherwise
submitted and advise the Town Supervisor as to whether such proposals
are in conformity with the Town Master Plan and whether they are in
harmony with overall plans for the Town as developed by the Planning
Board. The Town Supervisor shall consult the Planning Board concerning
his recommendations to the Town Board as may require the assistance of
the Planning Board in developing such recommendations.
§ 10-5. Preliminary capital budget.
Not later than October 5 in each year (or the date fixed for submission of
the preliminary operating budget), the Town Supervisor shall prepare and
submit to the Town Board his recommendations concerning capital projects
to be authorized for the next succeeding fiscal year and the three (3) fiscal
years succeeding.
B. Such capital budget shall include a report by the Supervisor to the
Town Board on all previously authorized capital projects showing the
current status, total estimated cost and estimated completion date.
C. No capital project may proceed nor may any funds be expended on such
project unless the same is included in the capital budget.
D. The Town Board shall annually adopt a capital budget in accordance
with this local law.
§ 10-1 CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM § 10-5
10:53
§ 10-6. Adoption of capital budget.
Not later than the Thursday after the general election in each year, the
Town Board shall hold a public hearing on the Town capital budget as
submitted by the Town Supervisor. Within five (5) days following such public
hearing, the Town Board shall adopt such capital budget with or without
modifications. After adoption, such capital budget shall be the official Town
capital budget and no project may proceed, nor may any funds be spent on
any project, unless it is included therein.
§ 10-7. Modifications.
The capital budget may be modified from time to time following its adoption
as the needs of the Town may require. Upon the recommendations of the
A. Budget message. Each such preliminary capital budget shall be
accompanied by the Supervisor's budget message. Such budget
message shall include information and justification for each project
recommended to be authorized. It shall also contain comments on the
status or progress of previously authorized projects as may be
appropriate. For each new project recommended, such message shall
include a preliminary environmental impact statement.
B. Contents. The preliminary capital budget shall contain the following:
(1) A list of all previously authorized projects which are still
incomplete. For each such project, information shall be provided
concerning the status of the project, its estimated completion date,
the total estimated cost and such other information as the Town
Supervisor may deem appropriate.
(2) A list of all recommended new capital projects showing the
following:
(a) The name or description of the project.
(b) The total estimated cost.
(c) The estimated completion date.
(d) The method of funding.
(e) The first year operating cost of the facility, if any.
(f) The anticipated revenue to be derived from such facility, if any.
(g) The proposed tax and benefit basis, i.e. whether a special
district is proposed or whether such project is to be a general
Town charge.
(3) A Town map showing the location of proposed new projects,
including the tentative boundaries of any special improvement
districts proposed to be created, extended or amended.
§ 10-5 ISLIP CODE § 10-7
10:54
Town Supervisor, the Town may, by resolution, authorize the inclusion of
a project not previously authorized, may amend a project already included
therein or may delete a project previously authorized. Nothing contained
herein, however, shall be deemed to authorize the Town Board to cancel
or eliminate lawfully executed contracts or agreements or to negate
obligations of the Town previously undertaken.
§ 10-8. Execution.
§ 10-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part or provision of
this law shall not affect the validity of any other part of this local law which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 10-10. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of the State of New
York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
A. Upon the inclusion of a project in the approved capital budget, the Town
department head in charge of such project shall, upon the authorization
of the Town Supervisor, proceed to prepare preliminary plans for such
project; provided, however, that no funds shall be spent nor obligations
incurred without the approval of the Town Board.
B. Following the preparation of such preliminary plans, a preliminary
estimate of the cost of such project shall be prepared and presented to
the Town Supervisor for his approval. Upon his approval, such Town
department head shall proceed to prepare final plans and estimates for
such project, including maps, if any, to be required. Upon the
completion of final plans and estimates, these shall be presented to the
Town Supervisor for his approval. If such estimates are within the
amount authorized in the capital budget, he may authorize the taking of
bids. If such estimate exceeds the amount in the capital budget, he
shall, if he approves, submit to the Town Board a proposal to amend the
capital budget so as to reflect accurate estimates of cost. Upon the
approval of the Town Board of such amendment, he may authorize the
taking of bids.
C. Following the receipt of bids, if the low bid is found acceptable, the
Town Supervisor shall present information on such bids to the Town
Board along with a proposal for the funding of such project. Upon the
authorization of such funds, the Town Supervisor may award and
execute such contracts on behalf of the Town.
§ 10-7 CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM § 10-10
10:55
Chapter 10A
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nature preserve trust — See Ch. 13.
Environmental Council — See Ch. 13A.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 67.
§ 10A-1. Department created.
There is hereby created as a separate department in the Town government
of the Town of Islip, the Department of Environmental Control.
§ 10A-2. Office of Commissioner established.
There is hereby established the office of Commissioner of Environmental
Control.
§ 10A-3. Duties of Commissioner.
The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be vested with the
authority, direction, jurisdiction and control over the Department of
Environmental Control.
§ 10A-4. Appointment of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner.
The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be appointed by the Town
Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. A first Deputy
Commissioner may be appointed by the Commissioner and he may, but
need not, be the head of one of the divisions of the Department. He shall
assist the Commissioner in the performance of his duties and shall have the
authority to act for and in place of the Commissioner.
§ 10A-5. Powers of Commissioner.
The Commissioner may appoint executive assistants to the Commissioner,
within the appropriation therefor, as may be deemed necessary.
A. The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be in charge of and
at the head of the Department of Environmental Control, and shall be
vested with the authority, direction and control of such Department,
and shall have the power and authority to appoint and remove officers
and employees of the Department.
B. The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall have jurisdiction and
control over, and be charged with, the protection of the people, both
present and future, of the Town of Islip against such activities as would
§ 10-10 ISLIP CODE § 10A-5
10:56
§ 10A-6. Jurisdiction and charge of Department. [Amended 6-17-80
by L.L. No. 6, 1980]
The Department of Environmental Control shall have cognizance,
jurisdiction and control over, and the Commissioner of Environmental
Control shall be charged with, the protection of the people of the Town of
Islip against such activities as would tend to impair, damage, destroy or
otherwise infringe upon the natural resources and environment of the Town
of Islip or on their enjoyment by the present or future people of the Town
of Islip. These powers include, but are not limited to, those contained in
the sections of the Code of the Town of Islip dealing with the environment
and natural resources of the Town of Islip, and any other environmental
ordinances which may be passed by the Town Board of the Town of Islip.
These powers shall be exercised through the following divisions:
§ 10A-7. Environmental Facilities Division.
tend to destroy, damage or infringe upon the natural resources and
environment of the Town of Islip.
C. The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be empowered to
make such rules and regulations subject to Town Board approval, which
may be necessary to ensure the conservation and protection of the
natural resources and environment of the Town of Islip.
D. The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be empowered to
intervene in proceedings before the Planning Board and the Board of
Appeals of the Town of Islip in any matter, petition, application or
proceeding which affects the environment and natural resources of the
Town of Islip.
E. The Commissioner of Environmental Control shall be consulted on all
matters affecting the environment and natural resources of the Town of
Islip which may come under the jurisdiction of any department, board,
committee or other governmental agency in the Town of Islip.
F. The Commissioner of Environmental Control may advise and make
recommendations to any department, board, committee or other
governmental agency in the Town of Islip requesting such advice or
recommendation, or, if no such request has been made, he may do so on
his own initiative.
G. The Commissioner of Environmental Control may hold hearings on
matters relating to the conservation and protection of the environment
and natural resources of the Town of Islip. The Commissioner of
Environmental Control may conduct such hearings in person, or he may
delegate the conduct of such hearings to a Deputy Commissioner or to
an Assistant Deputy Commissioner of Environmental Control.
A. Environmental Facilities Division.
B. Environmental Services Division.
§ 10A-5 CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM § 10A-7
10:57
§ 10A-8. Environmental Services Division. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L.
No. 6, 1980]
A. The Environmental Facilities Division shall have jurisdiction,
supervision and control over the operation of all Town incinerators,
Town landfill operations, Town scavenger waste treatment plants,
animal shelters and the operation, maintenance and repair of same.
B. It shall be charged with the removal and disposal of garbage and
rubbish and enforce all regulations concerning refuse collection and
disposal work done by private contractors under license granted by the
Town of Islip. It shall provide other services required as an adjunct to
the general services provided by the Department of Environmental
Control. A Director and a Deputy Director of the Environmental
Facilities Division of the Department of Environmental Control may be
appointed by the Commissioner. The Director may be a Deputy
Commissioner of Environmental Control and the Deputy Director may
be an Assistant Deputy Commissioner of Environmental Control. The
Director of the Environmental Facilities Division shall report directly to
the Commissioner of Environmental Control.
C. The Director shall have the responsibility to direct and administer the
functions of the Division and in his absence the Deputy Director shall be
empowered to act in his behalf.
A. The Environmental Services Division shall be charged with the
inspection, supervision, control and enforcement of any activity
regulated by the Code of the Town of Islip pertaining to environmental
matters, including but not limited to waterways and litter. [Amended
5-17-83 by L.L. No. 2, 1983]
B. A Director and a Deputy Director of the Environmental Services
Division of the Department of Environmental Control may be a Deputy
Commissioner of Environmental Control, and the Deputy Director may
be an Assistant Deputy Commissioner of Environmental Control. The
Director of the Environmental Services Division shall report directly to
the Commissioner of Environmental Control.
C. The Environmental Services Division shall make inspections and
enforce the regulations of the Department of Environmental Control
and Divisions of that Department and other sections of the Code of the
Town of Islip as may be designated by the Town Board.
D. The Commissioner of Environmental Control, Deputy Commissioners of
Environmental Control and the Director of the Environmental Services
Division of the Department of Environmental Control may be
designated as peace officers for the purpose of enforcing the Code of
the Town of Islip.
E. The Environmental Services Division shall conduct educational
programs and distribute literature which pertains to the environment
§ 10A-7 ISLIP CODE § 10A-8
10:58
§ 10A-9. Hearings. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 6, 1980]
§ 10A-10. Departments of Waste Disposal and Marine Affairs
abolished. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 6, 1980]
The Department of Waste Disposal and the Department of Marine Affairs
are hereby abolished.
§ 10A-11. Severability. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 6, 1980]
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this local law is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed to be a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
§ 10A-12. When effective. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 6, 1980]
This local law is enacted under the provisions of Article 9 of the New
York State Constitution, of the Town Law and the Municipal Home Rule
Law of the State of New York. This local law shall take effect when the
appropriate certified copies hereof are filed with the Secretary of State and
the Comptroller of the State of New York pursuant to the Municipal Home
Rule Law.
Chapter 10B
and conservation for schools and civic and other interested groups and
shall take charge of and have supervision of those recycling programs,
comprehensive shellfish and bay management programs and any other
special projects which may be conducted by the Department of
Environmental Control in the Town of Islip.
A. The Commissioner, in his discretion, may hold a formal hearing on any
application, complaint or alleged violation of the laws and regulations
under his jurisdiction to assist him in any determination relative to the
activities of the Department. The Commissioner may delegate the
holding of such hearings to a Deputy Commissioner or an Assistant
Deputy Commissioner.
B. The Commissioner, or his authorized representative, shall thereafter
prepare findings of facts and conclusions, upon which the
Commissioner shall make a determination and decision, which shall be
set forth in a formal order, setting forth the determination, conditions, if
any, to be complied with and penalties, if any.
C. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Department from taking
any action other than the formal hearing herein provided for, as may be
prescribed by law; nor shall the Department be precluded from taking
such other action by virtue of the order made pursuant to this section.
§ 10A-8 CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM § 10A-12
10:59
COMPTROLLER, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 10B-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Department of the Office
of the Comptroller."
§ 10B-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 10B-3. Department established. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 12,
1980]
A. Word usage. Whenever used in the context of this local law, words used
in the singular include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMPTROLLER — The head of the Department of the Town of Islip
Office of the Comptroller.
DEPUTY COMPTROLLER — Deputy Comptroller of the Town of Islip,
who shall act generally for and in place of the Comptroller.
OFFICE — The Town of Islip Office of the Comptroller, a department of
the Town of Islip.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department designated as the
Office of the Comptroller in compliance with § 20, Subdivision 3(b), of
the Town Law of the State of New York. The principal executive officer
and administrative head of such Department shall be the Comptroller,
who shall be the accounting officer of the Town and who shall be
appointed by the Town Board for the term fixed by law at such salary as
may from time to time be determined by the said Town Board. The
Comptroller shall be appointed upon the basis of his administrative
experience and qualifications for the duties of such office and such
additional standards as may be required by the Town Board. The
Comptroller shall be the head of the Department with power and
authority to appoint and remove officers and employees under his
jurisdiction in accordance with the Civil Service Law and other
applicable laws.
B. The Comptroller is empowered herein to appoint a Deputy who shall
generally act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such duties as
are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this local
law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Comptroller shall
execute and file an official undertaking, if the same is required by the
Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town Board and in such
form as approved by the Town Attorney.
§ 10A-12 ISLIP CODE § 10B-3
10:60
§ 10B-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No.
12, 1980]
§ 10B-5. Special districts. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 12, 1980]
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
D. The Comptroller shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
administration of the Department consistent with applicable provisions
of law.
A. Accounting. The Comptroller administers, manages, assembles and
maintains all financial accounts, records, books and documents
necessary to reflect and record all transactions of the Town of Islip
affecting its assets and financial interests and periodically prepares
financial reports and submits same to state, County and Town agencies.
B. Accounts payable. The Comptroller administers, manages, prepares
and maintains accounts, records and documents of all disbursements of
the Town of Islip and, upon proper approval, makes payment of all
claims and indebtedness of the Town of Islip.
C. Accounts receivable. The Comptroller administers, manages, prepares
and maintains accounts, records and documents of all receipts,
accounts receivable, investments and borrowings of the Town of Islip.
D. Audit and control. The Comptroller administers, manages, supervises
and implements all necessary and related procedures for the auditing
and verification of all charges, claims, demands and accounts against
the Town; audits the operations, accounts and fiscal affairs of every
department of the Town pursuant to prevailing law, rules or regulations;
and audits all income financial transactions of the Town to assure
sufficiency and accuracy of same.
E. Budget. When so appointed by the Supervisor, the Comptroller
administers, manages, prepares and supervises procedures and
programs for evaluation of departmental estimates of operating
budgets of all departments and prepares and submits a tentative
budget to the Town Board; administers all budget funds and
appropriation accounts; and prepares and coordinates projected
budgetary forecasts for operating and capital improvement needs.
F. The Comptroller shall be empowered to perform such other duties and
functions that are prescribed to be performed by him in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful directive of the
Supervisor. However, the Comptroller may delegate any of his powers
to or direct any of his duties to be performed to a Deputy Comptroller or
other duly appointed assistant.
§ 10B-3 CAPITAL BUDGETING SYSTEM § 10B-6
10:61
§ 10B-6. Powers of Town Supervisor. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No.
12, 1980]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 10B-7. Severability. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 12, 1980]
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 10B-8. When effective. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 12, 1980]
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 11
CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
§ 11-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Conservation of
Energy Ordinance of the Town of Islip."
§ 11-2. Intent.
It is both in the national and the local interest to conserve electrical and
other energy to the maximum extent possible, consistent with public
convenience and private needs.
§ 11-3. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, unless the content indicates otherwise, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLOSE OF BUSINESS — The time when the establishment is no longer
open to the general public.
ESTABLISHMENT — All buildings occupied for the transaction of business;
for the rendering of professional services; for the display, sale or storage
of goods, wares or merchandise; for the supplying of food, drink or other
bodily needs or comforts; or for the performance of work or labor, including
office buildings, stores, shopping centers or malls, markets, restaurants,
factories, workshops and laboratories.
§ 10B-6 ISLIP CODE § 11-3
11:62
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SIGN — Includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign,
illuminated sign, projecting sign, moving sign, temporary sign, marquee,
awning and canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote
the interests of any establishment or product when the same is placed outof-
doors in such a location where it can be viewed by the general public. It
shall not mean outdoor clocks or outdoor temperature indicators.
§ 11-4. Prohibited acts.
§ 11-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and upon conviction therefor shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) for the first violation
and five hundred dollars ($500.) for each succeeding violation. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 11-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 11-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after publication or
immediately upon personal service as provided by § 133 of the Town Law.
Chapter 12
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the
illumination or lighting of any sign after the close of business or 10:00
p.m., whichever is later.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the
movement of signs controlled by electricity after the close of business of
an establishment or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the
illumination or lighting of walkways, parking lots or outdoor storage
areas after the close of business or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later,
except to the extent necessary for the safety of the general public or for
the safeguarding of property located in legally permitted outdoor
storage areas.
§ 11-3 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 11-7
11:63
ANIMALS
§ 11-7 ISLIP CODE § 11-7
11:64
ARTICLE I
General Regulation of Dogs
[Adopted 5-6-1958; amended in its entirety 8-25-1970]
§ 12-1. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALLOW — For the purposes of § 12-2 of this Article, shall be construed
as meaning to either willfully permit or fail to take such advanced
precautions as will prevent such dog from running at large in any place
prohibited in said § 12-2.[Added 8-7-1973]
APPLICATION — A written statement in a form prescribed by the
Animal Control Officer, stating the name and residence of such person
and containing a description of such dog and the number of its license,
if any. Such "application" shall contain a statement that the applicant is
the sole and absolute owner of the dog or cat described, and request
that the Animal Control Officer destroy such dog or cat or hold for
adoption such dog. In the case of a stray cat, the inquiry to ascertain
ownership made by the person surrendering shall state that he verily
believes the cat to be a stray.[Amended 7-1-1975; 11-30-2010 by
L.L. No. 12-2010]
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of the owner or a member of his family, whether by leash, cord or chain.
DOG — Any live or dead dog (Canis familiaris). The word "dog" as used
herein shall include the singular and the plural and shall include both
the male and female.[Amended 7-1-1975]
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the Town Clerk which sets
forth the identification number together with the name of the Town and
State, the telephone number of the Town of Islip Animal Shelter, and
any other information deemed necessary by the Town Clerk.[Added
1-15-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980; amended 11-30-2010 by L.L. No.
12-2010]
IDENTIFIED DOG — Any dog carrying an identification tag.[Added
1-15-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980; amended 11-30-2010 by L.L. No.
12-2010]
OWNER — Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.[Amended
7-1-1975; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation. association, or
other legal entity.[Added 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
PROOF OF OWNERSHIP — As used herein, proof of ownership shall
include any of the following: a bill of sale, an adoption agreement
and/or evidence of payment by the alleged owner of all veterinary
expenses.[Added 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
§ 12-1 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-1
11:65
§ 12-2. Leash for dogs at large required. [Amended 7-1-1975;
1-4-1977]
§ 12-3. Seizure of dogs; redemption or disposition. [Amended
7-1-1975; 1-15-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No.
12-2010]
RESIDENT — A person who maintains a residence within the Town of
Islip.
SHELTER — The Town of Islip Animal Shelter.[Added 1-15-1980 by
L.L. No. 1-1980]
SIDEWALK — The area between the curbline and abutting the property
owner's line.9[Added 7-1-1975]
SURRENDER — A voluntary forfeiture of ownership and possession.
B. Word usage. The term "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
[Added 7-1-1975]
A. It shall be unlawful and an infraction hereunder for any owner of any
dog to allow such dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to be at large
within the Town.
B. This section, however, shall not apply to any dog owned by the Suffolk
County Police Department, Canine Section, when such dog is allowed to
be at large within the Town in pursuit of a suspected criminal.
A. an Animal Control Officer, police officer or peace officer shall seize, and
remove to the Town of Islip Animal Shelter, any dog within the Town of
Islip which:
(1) Is unidentified and not under the immediate and full control of the
owner, or person in charge, of the dog.
(2) Is not licensed, whether the dog is located on or off the property of
the owner or person in charge.
(3) Is not in the control of the dog's owner or custodian, or not on the
property of the dog's owner or custodian, if there is probable cause
to believe that the dog is dangerous.
(4) In the opinion of the Animal Control Officer, police officer or peace
officer poses an immediate threat to the public safety.
B. Unidentified dogs. Each dog which is not identified, whether or not
licensed, shall be held for a period of five days from the day seized,
during which period the dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided
that such owner produces proof of ownership, proof that the dog has
9. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “stray cat,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-1-1975.
§ 12-1 ISLIP CODE § 12-3
11:66
§ 12-4. Nuisances. [Amended 7-1-1975; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No.
12-2010]
No person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on, or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or on any public
property whatsoever, or on any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to
that portion of a street lying between the curblines.
been licensed and has been identified pursuant to this chapter, and
further provided that the owner pays the following fees:
(1) Twenty-five dollars for the first seizure plus an additional $10 for
each twenty-four-hour period, or part thereof.
(2) Thirty-five dollars for the second seizure, plus an additional $10 for
each twenty-four-hour period, or part thereof.
(3) Forty-five dollars for the third seizure, plus an additional $10 for
each twenty-four-hour period, or part thereof.
(4) Fifty-five dollars for the fourth seizure plus an additional $10 for
each twenty-four-hour period, or part thereof.
(5) Seventy dollars for the fifth seizure plus an additional $10 for each
twenty-four-hour period, or part thereof.
C. Identified dogs. Promptly upon the seizure of any identified dog, the
owner of record of such dog shall be notified personally or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the facts of the seizure and the
procedure for redemption. If notification is personally given, such dog
shall be held for a period of seven days after the day of notice, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. If such
notification is made by mail, such dog shall be held for a period of nine
days from the date of mailing, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner. In either case, the owner may redeem such dog
upon payment of the fees prescribed by Subsection B(1) through (5) of
this section by producing proof that the dog has been licensed and by
producing proof of ownership.
D. Disposition.
(1) An owner shall forfeit title to any dog unredeemed at the expiration
of the appropriate redemption period, and the dog shall then be
made available for adoption or euthanization.
(2) No such dog shall be delivered for adoption unless it has been
licensed pursuant to this chapter prior to its release from the
custody of the shelter. The fee for adopting a dog shall be $50; $30
for cats.
§ 12-3 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-5
11:67
§ 12-5. Additional authority of Animal Control Officer. [Amended
4-4-1972; 7-1-1975; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
In addition to the powers granted to the Animal Control Officer of the Town
of Islip by law, upon the application of a resident of the Town and surrender
of the animal at the animal shelter, the Animal Control Officer may accept
any dog or cat owned by such resident for immediate euthanization or
adoption. A dog may be surrendered for adoption or euthanization; and if,
in the opinion of the Animal Control Officer, said dog is not suitable for
adoption, the dog may be humanely euthanized.
§ 12-6. Licensing and fees. [Amended 8-1-1978; 1-15-1980 by L.L.
No. 1-1980; 4-15-1980 by L.L. No. 4-1980; 5-4-2004; 1-27-2009 by
L.L. No. 1-2009; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
A. Licensing.
(1) No person shall own, possess, or harbor a dog, four months of age
or over, within the Town of Islip unless it is licensed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The owner of each dog shall obtain, complete and return to the Islip
Town Clerk or Town of Islip Animal Shelter a dog license
application together with the applicable fee. The application shall
provide for the following minimal information:
(a) The name, residence address and telephone number of each
owner; and
(b) The name, sex, approximate age, breed, color, markings and
other identifying details of the dog: and
(c) State whether the dog has been spayed or neutered; and
(d) Such other information or documentation deemed necessary
by the Town Clerk to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
(3) Each license application shall be accompanied by proof that the
dog has been vaccinated against rabies or a statement from a
licensed veterinarian that such vaccination would endanger the
dog's life in which case vaccination shall not be required. There
shall be a charge of $15 imposed to have a dog vaccinated by the
animal shelter and control division.
(4) In the case of an altered dog, every application shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or a
sworn affidavit signed by the owner in the form acceptable to the
Town Clerk showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered,
except that such certificate or affidavit is not required if same is
already on file with the Town Clerk. In lieu of the spay or neuter
certificate an owner may present a statement certified by a
licensed veterinarian stating that he or she has examined the dog
§ 12-5 ISLIP CODE § 12-6
11:68
and found that because of old age or other reason, the life of the
dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering. In such case,
the license fee for the dog shall be the same as an altered dog.
B. Fees.
(1) Any application for a dog license shall be accompanied by the
following fees:
(a) For each spayed or neutered dog licensed for one year: a fee of
$5, plus an additional fee of $1 which will be paid over to the
agency designated pursuant to Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law to be used for animal population control efforts;
(b) For each unspayed or unneutered dog less than four months
old licensed for one year: a fee of $10;
(c) For each unspayed or unneutered dog four months of age or
older licensed for one year: a fee of $10, plus an additional fee
of $3 which will be paid over to the agency designated
pursuant to Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law to be
used for animal population control efforts.
(2) The Commissioner may establish a schedule of fees to be collected
by him for any service rendered in connection with the work of the
animal shelter and for which he deems it necessary to charge and
collect a fee therefor.
(3) Exemptions. The following types of dogs are exempt from the
licensing fees under this section:
(a) Guide dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law, or successor law. The person owning,
possessing or harboring such a dog bears the burden of
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a guide dog.
(b) A dog confined to a public or private hospital devoted solely to
the treatment of sick animals, or confined for the purpose of
research by any college or other educational or research
institution.
(c) Police K-9 dogs and/or armed forces K-9 dogs as per § 12-12 of
this Code.
(d) War dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law, or successor law. The person owning,
possessing or harboring such a dog bears the burden of
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a war dog.
(e) Hearing dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, or successor law. The person
§ 12-6 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-6
11:69
owning, possessing or harboring such a dog bears the burden
of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a hearing dog.
(f) Service dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, or successor law. The person
owning, possessing or harboring such a dog bears the burden
of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a service dog.
(g) Therapy dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, or successor law. The person
owning, possessing or harboring such a dog bears the burden
of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a therapy dog.
C. Issuance of license; identification tag.
(1) Upon validation by the Town Clerk or authorized dog control
officer, a dog license shall be issued and a record of its issuance
retained in the office of the Town Clerk. Such record shall be made
available upon request to the State Commissioner of Agriculture
and Markets, or successor thereof.
(2) No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of
any dog, the new owner shall immediately apply for a new license
for the dog. A license cannot be transferred to another dog.
(3) Identification tag.
(a) The Town Clerk shall assign an identification number to a dog
when it is first licensed. Such identification number shall be
carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be
affixed to the collar of the dog at all times, except that the tag
is not required to be worn while the dog is participating in a
dog show.
(b) No tag carrying an identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which the number has
been assigned.
(c) Any person wishing to replace a tag previously issued shall pay
the sum of $3 to the Town Clerk for a replacement tag.
D. Term of license and renewals. All licenses issued pursuant to this
article, and any renewal thereof, shall be valid for one year and shall
expire on the last day of the last month of the period for which they are
issued, except that no license or renewal shall be issued for a period
expiring after the day of the 11th month following the expiration date of
the current rabies certificate for the dog being licensed. In the event an
applicant for a license or renewal presents a statement certified by a
§ 12-6 ISLIP CODE § 12-6
11:70
§ 12-7. Nonliability of Town and employees. [Amended 11-30-2010
by L.L. No. 12-2010]
No liability shall be imposed upon the Animal Control Officer of the Town
of Islip nor the Town of Islip or any employee of the Town of Islip for
destruction of any animal or animals pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 12-8. Powers of Animal Control Officer and peace officers.
[Amended 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010]
Animal Control Officers and peace officers duly authorized to act as such
within the Town of Islip are hereby authorized to issue summonses and to
present information for the appearance of violators of this article before
courts of competent jurisdiction.10
§ 12-9. Restraining dogs outdoors. [Added 4-15-2011 by L.L. No.
4-201111]
licensed veterinarian, in lieu of a rabies certificate, then the license or
renewal shall be issued for one year from the date of the statement.
E. Changed owner or address; lost or stolen dog; death of dog.
(1) Change in owner or address. In the event of a change in ownership
of any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this chapter or
change of address of the owner of record of any dog, the owner of
record shall, within 10 days of the change, file with the Town Clerk
a written notification of such change. Such owner of record shall be
liable for any violation of this chapter until such filing is made or
until the dog is licensed in the name of the new owner.
(2) Lost or stolen dog. If any dog which has been licensed is lost or
stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of discovery of
such loss or theft, file with the Town Clerk a written notification of
such event. In the case of loss or theft, the owner of record shall not
be liable for any violation of this chapter committed after such
notification has been made.
(3) Death of dog. In case of the death of a licensed dog, the owner of
record shall notify the Town Clerk of the dog's death either before
or upon receipt of a renewal notice from the Town Clerk.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
tether, leash, fasten, secure, restrain, chain or tie a dog to any
stationary object outdoors, or cause such dog to be restrained, in a
manner that:
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 2, Appearance Tickets.
11.Editor’s Note: Former § 12-9, Rabies vaccination required, added 4-5-1994, was repealed
11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010. See now § 12-6.
§ 12-6 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-9
11:71
(1) Endangers such dog's health, safety or well-being;
(2) Restricts such dog's access to suitable and sufficient food and
water;
(3) Does not provide such dog with shelter appropriate to its breed,
physical condition, and the climate as defined by § 353-b of the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law; or
(4) Unreasonably limits the movement of such dog because it is too
short for the dog to move around or for the dog to urinate or
defecate in a separate area from the area where it must eat, drink,
or lie down.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, no
person shall tether, leash, fasten, secure, restrain, chain or tie a dog for
any amount of time with a device that:
(1) Is a choke collar or pinch collar, or otherwise causes such dog to
choke;
(2) Has weights attached or contains links that are more than onequarter-
inch thick;
(3) Because of its design or placement, is likely to become entangled;
(4) Is long enough to allow such dog to move outside of its owner's
property; or
(5) Would allow the restrained dog to move over an object or edge that
could result in the strangulation of or injury to such dog.
C. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
Town of Islip, any accredited Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals or any law enforcement agency from enforcing any other law,
rule or regulation regarding the humane treatment of animals.
D. This section shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 12-9 ISLIP CODE § 12-9
11:72
ARTICLE II
Leasing of Guard Dogs
[Adopted 4-16-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974]
§ 12-10. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARD DOG — Any dog trained to patrol private property, attack intruders
on private property, on command or otherwise, or to respond to commands
in general for the purpose of patrolling enclosed private lands and for
protecting property.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, corporations and unincorporated
associations.
POLICE K-9 DOGS — Such animals as are regularly harbored by police
departments and armed forces which, if they were in the employ of private
citizens, would be deemed guard dogs.
§ 12-11. License required for lessors of guard dogs.
No person who is in the business of leasing guard dogs to protect private
property in the Town of Islip shall do so without first obtaining a license
therefor from the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip.
§ 12-12. Exemption from licensing requirements.
Police K-9 dogs and/or armed forces K-9 dogs shall be exempt from the
licensing requirement of this article.
§ 12-13. Notification of Police and Fire Departments as to rental
and return of guard dogs.
After a person shall have obtained a license as a lessor or renter of a guard
dog, said person, as a condition of said license, shall immediately notify the
Suffolk County Police Department and the district Fire Department involved
of the address and location of every guard dog so rented out, the name
of the person renting the guard dog and for how long the rental contract
shall be in existence. At the conclusion of a guard dog rental he shall
again immediately notify both the Suffolk County Police Department and the
appropriate Fire Department that the guard dog has been removed from the
person's property who rented the same.
§ 12-14. Notification of Police and Fire Departments as to number
and location of guard dogs.
Persons in the business of leasing guard dogs shall advise the Police
Department and/or the Fire Department servicing their kennel area as to
the number of guard dogs on their premises, the location of the kennel
§ 12-10 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-14
11:73
on the premises and the location, if any, where guard dogs are loose and
unmuzzled.
§ 12-15. Posting of warning signs.
Any person who rents a guard dog for any purpose whatsoever shall post a
sign not less than one foot square advising the public that a guard dog is
employed on the premises. Each renter of a guard dog shall post one such
sign on any area of his property fronting on a public highway or street, and,
in the event that the property has more than 75 feet of frontage thereon,
he shall be required to post an additional sign for every additional frontage
over 75 feet to be determined and to do so at seventy-five-foot intervals.
§ 12-16. License fee.
Persons in the business of leasing guard dogs shall pay a fee for the license
in the sum of $100.
§ 12-17. (Reserved)12
§ 12-18. Liability.
This Article shall not be construed to relieve from nor lessen responsibility
of any person for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by
any acts of guard dogs owned, leased, harbored or used by said person, nor
shall the Town of Islip be deemed to have assumed such liability by reason
of any license issued.
§ 12-19. Abatement of violations.
The imposition of the penalties heretofore provided shall not preclude the
Town of Islip from instituting any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent an unlawful use or maintenance or to prevent any further illegal
acts or uses with regard to guard dogs.
§ 12-20. When effective.
This Article shall take effect when the appropriate certified copies hereof
are filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of the State of New
York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 12-17, Penalties for offenses, was repealed 11-16-1982.
§ 12-14 ISLIP CODE § 12-20
11:74
ARTICLE III
Wild Animals
[Adopted 3-3-1981]
§ 12-21. Intent.
The Town Board recognizes the suburban nature of the Town and that no
part thereof is suitable for the maintenance of wild animals. The Board is
mindful of both the safety and welfare of the residents of the Town and the
interest of preventing cruelty to such animals or the creation of a hazard by
their presence.
§ 12-22. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WILD ANIMAL — An animal of any species which in its natural habitat
is wild, dangerous or ferocious, including any such animal which may
have been trained and domesticated. "Wild animals" include but are not
limited to the following: all members of the dog family (canidae), except
domestic dogs; all members of the cat family (felidae), except the common
domestic cat; all predator birds, such as eagles, hawks, falcons and owls;
all venomous snakes or constricting snakes; all venomous insects, such as
tarantulas, black widow spiders and scorpions; and all venomous lizards,
snapping turtles, alligators and iguanas.
§ 12-23. Possession restricted; sale prohibited.
A. Possession restricted.
(1) No person shall keep, harbor or possess a wild animal in any place
within the Town of Islip other than the following:
(a) A zoological park.
(b) A laboratory operated pursuant to § 504 of the Public Health
Law.
(c) A carnival, circus or public outdoor show for which a special
permit from the Town Board has been obtained.
(d) An educational or scientific institution chartered or licensed by
the State of New York.
(2) A person licensed by the State of New York for such purpose may
keep raptors. [Added 5-19-1981]
B. All wild animals possessed pursuant to Subsection A shall be kept in
protective devices which are adequate to prevent such animals from
escaping or from injuring the public.
§ 12-21 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-23
11:75
§ 12-24. Responsibility.
The failure to comply with any section of this Article shall be a violation; the
owner of the wild animal or any person having immediate control over such
animal shall be liable for the said violation and the penalty provided in this
Article.
§ 12-25. (Reserved)13
§ 12-26. When effective.
This Article is effective immediately. Any person harboring or possessing a
wild animal as defined herein shall have six months from the effective date
of this Article to remove such wild animal from the confines of the Town of
Islip.
C. No wild animals shall be offered for sale, sold or given to any person or
institution in the Town of Islip.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 12-25, Penalties for offenses, was repealed 11-16-1982.
§ 12-23 ISLIP CODE § 12-26
11:76
ARTICLE IV
Equine Livestock, Pigeons and Poultry
[Adopted 11-16-1982]
§ 12-27. Keeping, possessing and maintaining of equine livestock.
A. It shall not constitute a violation of this article for any person to keep,
maintain, house or possess a horse, pony or other equine livestock,
provided that:
(1) Not more than two horses, ponies or equine livestock are kept,
maintained, housed or possessed for each 20,000 square feet of
land. [Amended 4-7-2015]
(2) A stable with a minimum of 50 square feet of stall space for each
animal is maintained, in conformity with all provisions of this Code
pertaining to the erection and occupancy of structures. Stall
dividers must be at least four feet in height with no more than twoinch
openings between the stall base (lower 1/4 of stall divider) and
the floor.
(3) Any such stable is located not less than 50 feet from any dwelling,
other than a dwelling house located on the same plot of land as the
stable.
(4) Any such stable or corral is located behind the rear line of any
dwelling house located on the same plot of land as the stable and is
set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
(5) One or more enclosed corrals with a minimum of 400 square feet
per animal are maintained for the use of any such animal and are
enclosed by a suitable fence not less than five feet in height.
(6) Adequate plastic, wooden or metal covered containers are
maintained for the storage of manure in such a manner as not to
cause discomfort or inconvenience for residents of adjoining
property and not to endanger the public health or safety.
(a) All such storage of manure is located at least 30 feet from any
property line.
(b) All stockpiles of manure, the corral and the stall area are
adequately limed at least once every week.
(7) All grain-type feed is kept or stored in a rodentproof container.
(8) No equine livestock is permitted to remain unattended in any front
or side yard.
(9) No horse, pony or equine livestock is ridden, lead or permitted on
any sidewalk.
§ 12-27 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-27
11:77
§ 12-28. Exceptions.
The Board of Appeals may, after due notice and a public hearing, grant a
special exception as to the requirements of § 12-27A(1), (3) and (4). Such
special exception shall not be for a period of time greater than two years
and shall be renewable upon application and after a public hearing for
additional two-year periods. Any such special exception shall automatically
terminate upon the conveyance of the real property for which such special
exception is granted.
§ 12-29. Keeping, possessing and maintaining of pigeons.
(10) Dead equine livestock are not disposed of on private property, but
shall be disposed of as directed by the Department of
Environmental Control.
(11) The owner of equine livestock is able to produce, upon demand,
proof of compliance with all applicable County, state and federal
laws and regulations as to the testing, innoculation and vaccination
of equine livestock.
(12) The owner of equine livestock is able to produce, upon demand, a
valid permit for each head of equine livestock. A permit for each
head of equine livestock must be obtained from the Building
Director of the Department of Planning and Development of the
Town of Islip for a fee to be determined by the Commissioner and
shall be valid for a two-year period running from the date of
issuance. [Amended 9-12-2000]
B. Any person keeping, maintaining, housing or possessing equine
livestock, in compliance with the requirements of this article as set
forth on February 1, 1972, and in compliance with all other relevant
ordinances and local laws of the Town of Islip, as of the effective date of
this amendment, shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in
§ 12-27A(1), (3) and (4).
C. No person shall permit any equine livestock to run loose without a rider
upon the streets or public ways of the Town.
A. It shall not constitute a violation of this Article for any person to keep,
maintain, house, possess or allow to fly for exercise pigeons, provided
that such pigeons are so kept as not to constitute a nuisance or to
create a hazard to public health.
B. Such pigeons shall be deemed to be so kept as not to constitute a
nuisance or to create a hazard to public health, provided that there is
compliance with the following conditions:
(1) Pigeons are allowed out of the lofts or houses in which they are
kept for exercise for not longer than two hours in the forenoon of
any day and for not longer than two hours in the afternoon of any
day, except when returning home from a training toss or a race.
§ 12-27 ISLIP CODE § 12-29
11:78
§ 12-30. Effective date.
This Article shall take effect and shall be in force on and after February 1,
1972.
§ 12-31. Keeping of poultry.
Any person may keep, maintain or house poultry, provided that such poultry
does not constitute a nuisance or create a hazard to public health.
§ 12-32. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POULTRY — Includes chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pheasant or other
domestically maintained fowl.
§ 12-33. Nuisance or health hazard.
Poultry shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance or to create a hazard to
public health, in the absence of compliance with the following conditions:
(2) The lofts or houses in which such pigeons are kept must be cleaned
regularly and at least once each day, or at least shall always be
maintained in a sanitary condition.
(3) Pigeon refuse and pigeon feed must be stored in metal containers
with metal covers or in a rodentproof container.
(4) There shall be at least one square foot of floor space in any loft or
house in which such pigeons are kept for each such pigeon kept
therein.
A. Poultry shall be kept or maintained only in rear yards and shall, at all
times, be securely enclosed within an accessory structure, yard or
enclosure in such manner as to prevent the running at large or flying
out of such fowl. [Amended 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
B. No more than 15 birds herein defined as poultry may be kept or
maintained for every 500 square feet of rear yard space being used for
the keeping of poultry.
C. Poultry shall be confined at all times to the property on which they are
kept, possessed or maintained.
D. Poultry refuse and feed must be stored in metal containers with metal
covers, or in a rodentproof container.
E. No person who keeps, possesses, maintains or houses poultry shall
permit the poultry to make noises of such a nature as to be heard
beyond the property on which such poultry are harbored between 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 12-29 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-33
11:79
F. The area in which poultry are kept shall be cleaned regularly (at least
once each day) and shall always be maintained in a sanitary condition.
G. All structures in which poultry are kept are accessory buildings
requiring building permits and must maintain ten-foot setbacks from
side and rear yards. [Amended 1-15-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
§ 12-33 ISLIP CODE § 12-33
11:80
ARTICLE V
Penalties
[Adopted 4-3-1984]
§ 12-34. Penalties for offenses.
A person violating any provision of Chapter 12 shall be guilty of an offense
and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for
up to 30 days, or both by such fine and imprisonment.
§ 12-34 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY § 12-34
11:81
Chapter 13
NATURE PRESERVE TRUST
§ 13-1. Legislative intent.
In order to manage, protect and preserve unique areas within the Town of
Islip, the Town shall establish Nature Preserve Trust areas, whereby land
once dedicated may not be taken or otherwise disposed of nor used for any
purpose not specified in the dedicating resolution.
§ 13-2. Dedication of properties.
A. By resolution adopted by the Town Board, the Town shall dedicate
wetlands properties it owns, in addition to any other Town-owned lands
it sees fit. to the Town Nature Preserve Trust to be established by the
implementation of this local law.
B. Only properties found to possess natural beauty, estuarine values,
including wetlands and shorelines, or of ecological significance, or
which have the potential of being restored to their original states, may
be dedicated to the Town Nature Preserve Trust. All properties created
as a result of dredging spoil management and wetlands rehabilitation
programs shall be eligible for dedication.
C. The resolution dedicating Town-owned land to the Town Nature
Preserve Trust shall provide that all or a specified portion of the
property being dedicated shall be kept forever wild or in its natural
state, or that it may be used only for the purpose or purposes specified
in the resolution.
D. The Islip Town Planning Department, after counseling with the various
Town departments, agencies and councils, is charged with the duty to
recommend to the Town Board which Town-owned properties,
consistent with the overall planning of the Town, should be dedicated to
the Town Nature Preserve Trust and which properties not owned by the
Town should be acquired for purposes of dedication.
E. Property owned by the Town and dedicated under this section to the
Town Nature Preserve Trust shall not be taken, leased, sold, exchanged
or otherwise disposed of, nor shall they be used for any purpose not
specified in the resolution under which the property was dedicated to
the Town Nature Preserve Trust. If after dedication the Town shall
decide to unclassify property from the forever wild classification, it
must give public notice and hold a public hearing; provided, however,
that such action may not take place for a period of ten (10) years from
the property's original dedication.
F. The Islip Town Environmental Control Department is hereby charged
with the management of all properties dedicated under this section to
the Town Nature Preserve Trust.
§ 12-34 ISLIP CODE § 13-3
13:82
§ 13-3. Violation of provisions.
A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 13 may be restrained by
a suit brought by any citizen of the Town of Islip by making application to
any Justice of the New York State Supreme Court.
§ 13-4. Legislative authority; when effective.
This local law is enacted under the provisions of Article 9 of the New York
State Constitution, the Town Law and the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York. This local law shall take effect when the appropriate
certified copies hereof are filed with the Secretary of State and the
Comptroller of the State of New York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
Chapter 13A
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Control Department — See Ch.
10A.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Streams and watercourses, filling or
diversion — See Ch. 47.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 87.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 13A-1. Legislative intent.
The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and manmade
environment within the Town of Islip, in the face of population growth,
urbanization and technologic change with their accompanying demands on
natural resources, are found to be of increasing and vital importance to the
health, welfare and economic well-being of present and future inhabitants
and require forthright action by the governing body of the Town of Islip.
It is recognized that the biologic integrity of the natural environment on
which man is dependent for survival and the natural and functional beauty
of our surroundings which condition the quality of our life experience
cannot be protected without the full cooperation and participation of all
the people of the Town working in partnership with local and state officials
and with various public and private institutions, agencies and organizations.
Establishment of a council for conservation of the environment is a
necessary step in fostering unified action on environmental problems.
§ 13-3 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 13A-2
13:83
§ 13A-2. Council established.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby creates a council which shall
be known as the "Islip Town Environmental Council," hereinafter called the
"Council."
§ 13A-3. Membership. [Amended 1-3-78 by L.L. No. 1, 1978]
The Council shall consist of not less than five (5) members nor more than
nine (9) members, appointed by the Town Board, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Board. Not more than one (1) member shall be under
twenty-one (21) years of age and none shall be under sixteen (16) years
of age. Vacancies on the Council shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment, except that a vacancy occurring other than by the
expiration of term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the
unexpired term. Members shall be appointed for a two-year term, except
that of the first five (5) members appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for
one (1) year and three (3) for two (2) years.
§ 13A-4. Organization.
The Supervisor shall designate a member of the Council to act as Chairman
thereof. The Council shall adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It
shall keep accurate records of its meetings and activities and shall file an
annual report, as provided in § 13A-6 of this local law. Secretarial service
shall be supplied by the Town.
§ 13A-5. Reports.
The powers and duties of the Council shall be to:
A. Advise the Town Board on all matters affecting the preservation,
development and use of the natural and man-made features and
conditions of the Town of Islip insofar as beauty, quality, biologic
integrity and other environmental factors are concerned and, in the
case of man's activities and developments, with regard to any major
threats posed to environmental quality, so as to enhance the long-range
value of the environment to the people of the Town of Islip.
B. Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the Town
Board, conduct a program of public information in the community
which shall be designed to foster increased understanding of the nature
of environmental problems and issues and support for their solutions.
C. Conduct such studies and surveys as may be necessary to carry out the
general purposes of this local law.
D. Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in public or
private ownership within the municipality including, but not limited to,
natural landmarks, glacial and other geomorphic or physiographic
features; streams and their floodplains, swamps, marshlands and other
wetlands; unique biotic communities; scenic and other open areas of
§ 13A-2 ISLIP CODE § 13A-5
13:84
§ 13A-6. Reports.
The Council shall submit an annual report to the Town Board, not later
than the first day of April of each year, concerning the activities and
work of the Council, and from time to time shall submit such reports and
recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the purposes of this local
law.
§ 13A-7. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Council, including ex officio members, may at the
discretion of the Town Board receive compensation for their services as
members thereof and shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties within the
natural or ecological value; and of the ownership, present use and
proposed use of such open areas so as to provide a base of information
for recommendations by the Council for their preservation and/or use.
E. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups,
institutions and individuals within the Town of Islip in accord with the
purposes of this local law.
F. Maintain liaison and communications with public and private agencies
and organizations of local, state and national scope whose programs
and activities have an impact on the quality of the environment or who
can be of assistance to the Council.
G. Working in cooperation with the Planning Board, recommend from time
to time to the Town Board features, plans and programs relating to
environmental improvement for inclusion in the Master Plan of the
Town of Islip, and suggest changes in laws and ordinances.
H. Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in
accord with the purposes of this local law.
I. Obtain and maintain in orderly fashion maps, reports, books and other
publications to support the necessary researches of the Council into
local environmental conditions.
J. When authorized by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Islip,
the Council may accept, by gift, grant, devise, bequest or otherwise,
property, both real and personal, in the name of the Town of Islip, as
may be necessary to conserve and otherwise properly utilize open
spaces and other land and water resources within the boundaries of the
Town of Islip. Such real property may be accepted in fee for land and
water rights, or as any lesser interest, development right, easement,
including conservation easement, convenant or other contractual right,
including conveyance with limitations or reversions.
K. Carry out such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the
Town Board.
§ 13A-5 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 13A-7
13:85
appropriations made available therefor. The Town Board will appropriate
funds for all the expenses incurred by the Council, including expenses for
professional staff, consultants and clerical assistance. The Council shall
prepare and submit an annual budget request. The Town Board, upon
request by the Council, will assign or detail public employees to perform
work for the Council.
§ 13A-8. Construction.
This local law shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Town of
Islip to preserve and improve the quality of the natural and man-made
environment on behalf of the present and future inhabitants thereof. This
local law is not intended and shall not be deemed to impair the powers of
any other public corporation.
§ 13A-9. When effective.
This local law shall take effect ten (10) days after posting and publication as
provided by law.
Chapter 13B
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Control Department — See Ch.
10A.
Nature preserve trust — See Ch. 13.
Environmental Council — See Ch. 13A.
§ 13B-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this local law is to implement for the Town of Islip the
State Environmental Quality Review Act and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder. Therefore, the rules and regulations set forth
in Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes Rules and Regulations, as
amended, will govern the environmental review of all actions, as that term
is defined in Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR, that are undertaken, funded or
approved by the Town of Islip.
§ 13B-2. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon its adoption and the filing of three (3)
certified copies in the office of the Secretary of State.
§ 13A-7 ISLIP CODE § 13B-2
13:86
Chapter 14
CODE OF ETHICS AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE LAW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair employment practices — See Ch. 17. Defense of officers and employees — See Ch.
24.
§ 13B-2 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 13B-2
13:87

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 14-1. Title.
This local law may be cited as the "Town of Islip Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law."
§ 14-1 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-1
13:89

ARTICLE II
Purpose and Scope
§ 14-2. Statutory authorization; intent.
This Code of Ethics and Financial Disclosure Law is enacted pursuant to
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law in recognition of the policy of
the Town of Islip to maintain the highest standards of integrity and public
service. It is intended to afford Town officers and employees guidance in
conforming to ethical standards, to provide a formula of conduct which is
not only clear but reasonable, to promote public confidence in the integrity
of Town government, to require public disclosure of financial interests that
may influence or be perceived as influencing actions of Town officers and
employees and to provide for the fair and effective administration of this
code. The enactment of this Code of Ethics and Financial Disclosure Law
and the promulgation of a form of annual statement of financial disclosure
is expressly intended to constitute an election to opt out of the provisions of
General Municipal Law § 812, in accordance with the provisions of General
Municipal Law § 811.
§ 14-2 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-2
13:91

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 14-3. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any Town authority, agency, board, bureau, commission,
committee or council created by law or appointed by the Town Board or
Town Supervisor, including but not limited to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
Planning Board, Plumbing Board, Ethics Board, Youth Board, Board of
Assessment and Review, Industrial Development Agency (IDA), Community
Development Agency (CDA), Resource Recovery Agency and Town of Islip
Housing Authority.
BUSINESS DEALING OR ACTIVITIES —
COMPENSATION — Any money, thing of value, financial benefit conferred
or favor granted, given or awarded for services rendered or to be rendered.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information or data which is not subject
to public disclosure or is otherwise privileged under law.
DISCRETIONARY ACT — Any action involving the exercise of judgment or
discretion by a municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a
member of any agency, and includes but is not limited to the negotiation,
approval, advice, recommendation, authorization or audit of:
EMPLOYEE — Any person directly employed on a full- or part-time basis
by the Town or any agency thereof as herein defined and compensated
therefor, except it shall not include part-time services rendered by
independent contractors under special agreements of retention.
A. Having or providing any contract, service or work with a municipality;
Buying, selling, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring from or
dispensing to a municipality any goods, services or property; or
B.
Applying for, petitioning, requesting or obtaining any approval, grant,
loan, license, permit or other privilege from the municipality.
C.
Contracts, leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions,
variances, special permits or licenses as defined in § 73 of the Public
Officers Law;
A.
The purchase, sale, rental or lease of real property, goods or services or
a contract therefor;
B.
C. The obtaining of grants of money or loans; or
The adoption or repeal of any rule or regulation having the force and
effect of law.
D.
§ 14-3 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-3
13:93
FAMILY MEMBER — A spouse from whom the officer or employee is not
legally separated, a child, stepchild, brother, sister, grandparent, parent or
dependent.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purpose of
this local law, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an
interest in the contract of:
MINISTERIAL ACT — Action performed in a prescribed manner without the
exercise of judgment or discretion as to the propriety of the act.
OFFICER — Every elected official of the Town, every appointed official
of the Town as defined in the Town Law, General Municipal Law, Public
Officers Law or any other law referring to officers acting on behalf of the
Town, or any agency thereof as herein defined, and shall also include those
persons employed by the Town or agency thereof as herein defined on a fulltime
basis:
QUORUM — Four members present at any meeting of the Board of
Ethics.[Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 14-4. Word usage.
The masculine gender, as used herein, shall include the feminine, where
appropriate.
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee.
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee.
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. As department heads or deputy department heads; or
Whose job categories require them to perform acts of a discretionary
rather than ministerial nature.
B.
§ 14-3 ISLIP CODE § 14-4
13:94
ARTICLE IV
Conflicts of Interest and Disclosure
§ 14-5. Conflicts prohibited; exceptions.
A. Prohibited conflicts. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section,
no officer or employee shall have an interest, financial or otherwise, or
engage or invest in any business or transaction or professional activity
or incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his duties in the public interest. To this end:
(1) No officer or employee shall be or become interested directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever in any business or
professional dealings with the Town of Islip or any agency thereof.
(2) No officer or employee shall act as attorney, agent, broker,
employee or representative in business or professional dealings
with the Town of Islip or any agency thereof for himself or any
person, firm or corporation, directly or indirectly.
(3) No officer or employee shall accept other employment or engage in
any business transaction which will impair his independence of
judgment in the exercise of his official duties or create a conflict of
interest with his official duties.
(4) No chief fiscal officer, treasurer or his deputy or employee shall
have an interest in a bank or trust company designated as a
depository, paying agent, registration agent or for investment of
funds of the Town of Islip or an agency thereof of which he is an
officer or employee; provided, however, that where the designation
of a bank or trust company outside the Town of Islip would be
required because of the foregoing restriction, a bank or trust
company within the Town of Islip may nevertheless be designated.
(5) No municipal officer or employee shall receive or enter into any
agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be
rendered in relation to any matter before any Town of Islip agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to
appoint any member, officer or employee.
(6) No officer or employee shall receive or enter into any agreement,
express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in
relation to any case, proceeding, application or any other matter
before any Town agency, whereby his compensation is to be
dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to any license, contract, certificate, ruling, decision,
opinion, franchise or other benefit.
(7) No person having supervisory control or who is superior in title to
any official or employee of the Town shall engage in any of the
following actions with subordinates at any time on or off Town
premises: [Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 14-5 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-5
13:95
(a) Discussion of or solicitation of ticket purchases or sales.
(b) Solicitation to join a political party or political activity.
(c) Use of political considerations in discussing duties, positions,
compensation, changes in titles or work.
(d) Use of political considerations as the reason for promotions,
assignment changes, demotions or termination.
(8) In the event an officer of the Town of Islip files a grievance
application with the Town of Islip Board of Assessment Review and,
thereafter, files an assessment review petition pursuant to the New
York State Real Property Tax Law, independent legal counsel shall
be retained to represent the interests of the Town of Islip, and such
application shall be heard by an impartial judicial hearing officer
outside the Town of Islip. [Added 3-8-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
(9) No person shall serve, either by appointment or election, in any
position other than a committeeperson of a town, county, state or
national major political party committee if he or she is an elected
official of the Town of Islip. Any person who is currently an elected
official of the Town of Islip and also in a position other than a
committeeperson, shall deliver the Town Clerk such documentation
establishing compliance with this subsection within 10 business
days of the date of enactment of this subsection. [Added
9-20-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
B. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not
apply to:
(1) The payment of lawful compensation and necessary expenses of
any municipal officer or employee in one (1) or more positions of
public employment, the holding of which is not prohibited by law.
(2) A contract with a person, firm, corporation or association in which
an officer or employee has an interest which is prohibited solely by
reason of employment as an officer or employee thereof, if the
remuneration of such employment will not be directly affected as a
result of such contract and the duties of such employment do not
directly involve the procurement, preparation or performance of
any part of such contract.
(3) The designation of a newspaper, including but not limited to an
official newspaper, for the publication of any notice, resolution,
ordinance or other proceeding where such publication is required
or authorized by law.
(4) The purchase by the Town of Islip or any agency thereof of real
property or an interest therein, provided that the purchase and the
consideration therefor is approved by order of the Supreme Court
upon petition of the governing board.
§ 14-5 ISLIP CODE § 14-5
13:96
§ 14-6. Disclosure of interest in contracts.
(5) The acquisition of real property or an interest therein through
condemnation proceedings according to law.
(6) A contract with a membership corporation or other voluntary
nonprofit corporation or association.
(7) The sale of bonds and notes pursuant to § 60.10 of the Local
Finance Law.
(8) A contract in which an officer or employee has an interest if such
contract was entered into prior to the time he was elected or
appointed as such officer or employee, but this subsection shall in
no event authorize a renewal of any such contract.
(9) No conflict shall be deemed to arise under this resolution by virtue
of stock ownership, direct or indirect, where such ownership
constitutes less than five per centum (5%) of the outstanding stock
of the corporation involved.
(10) A contract for the furnishing of public utility services when the
rates or charges therefor are fixed or regulated by the Public
Service Commission.
(11) A contract for the payment of a portion of the compensation of a
private employee of an officer when such employee performs parttime
service in the official duties of the office.
(12) A contract in which a municipal officer or employee has an interest
if the total consideration payable thereunder, when added to the
aggregate amount of all consideration payable under the contracts
in which such person had an interest during the fiscal year, does
not exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.).
(13) A contract with a member of a private industry council established
in accordance with the Federal Job Training Partnership (JTPA) or
any firm, corporation or association in which such member holds an
interest, provided that the member discloses such interest to the
council and the member does not vote on the contract.
(14) Any person serving the Town or any agency thereof without
compensation shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Article
unless such interest is in conflict with the proper discharge of his
official duties.
A. Any officer or employee who has, will have or later acquires an interest
in any actual or proposed contract with the Town of Islip or agency
thereof of which he is an officer or employee shall publicly disclose the
nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the governing body
thereof as soon as he has knowledge of such actual or prospective
interest. Such written disclosure shall be made a part of and set forth in
§ 14-5 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-6
13:97
§ 14-7. Disclosure of interest in applications.
the official record of the proceedings of such body. Once disclosure
has been made by an officer or employee with respect to an interest
in a contract with a particular person, firm, corporation or association,
no further disclosures need be made by such officer or employee with
respect to additional contracts with the same party during the
remainder of the fiscal year.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section,
disclosure shall not be required in the case of an interest in a contract
described in § 14-5B(9) through (14) of this Article.
A. Every application, petition or request submitted for a variance,
amendment, change of zoning, approval of a plat, exemption from a plat
or official map, assessment review, license or permit pursuant to the
provisions of the Town Code or building or engineering or planning
regulations shall state the name, residence and the nature and extent of
the interest of any officer or employee of the Town of Islip in the person,
partnership or association making such application, petition or request
(hereinafter called the "applicant") to the extent known to such
applicant. [Amended 3-8-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
B. For the purpose of this section, an officer or employee shall be deemed
to have an interest in the application when he, his spouse or their
brothers, sisters, parents, children, grandchildren or the spouse of any
of them:
(1) Is the applicant;
(2) Is an officer, director, partner or employee of the applicant;
(3) Legally or beneficially owns or controls stock of a corporate
applicant or is a member of the partnership or association
applicant; or
(4) Is a party to an agreement with such an applicant, express or
implied, whereby he may receive any payment or other benefit
whether or not for services rendered, dependent or contigent upon
the favorable approval of such application, petition or request.
C. Ownership of less than five percent (5%) of the stock of a corporation
whose stock is listed on any public exchange shall not constitute an
interest for the purposes of this section.
D. To the extent that an official receives from an applicant a substantial
contribution to his or her political campaign, specifically a contribution
amount in excess of 10% of the total amount of contributions received
by such campaign in the campaign finance disclosure filing period
immediately preceding a vote on an application before such official,
disclosure of such contribution shall be made by such official prior to a
vote being taken. [Added 9-20-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 14-6 ISLIP CODE § 14-8
13:98
§ 14-8. Voided contracts; penalties for offenses.
A. Any contract willfully entered into by or with the Town of Islip or an
agency thereof in which there is an interest prohibited by this Article
shall be null, void and wholly unenforceable.
B. Any person, including but not limited to an officer or employee, who
willfully and knowingly violates the provisions of §§ 14-5, 14-6 or 14-7 of
this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 14-8 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-8
13:99

ARTICLE V
Standards of Conduct
§ 14-9. Gifts.
§ 14-10. Conduct giving impression that improper influence may be
exercised. [Amended 9-20-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 14-11. Improper use of official position.
No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
§ 14-12. Use of Town-owned equipment or property.
No officer or employee shall request or permit the use of Town-owned
vehicles, equipment, material or property for personal convenience or
profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are
provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer or employee in the
conduct of official business.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall directly or indirectly solicit any
gift or accept or receive any gift having a value of seventy-five dollars
($75.) or more, whether in the form of service, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or in any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him or could reasonably be expected to influence
him in the performance of his official duties or was intended as a
reward for any official action on his part.
B. No municipal officer shall directly or indirectly solicit or accept or
receive any money in any amount under any circumstances in which it
could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him
or could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.
A. No officer or employee shall by his or her conduct give a reasonable
basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him
or her or unduly enjoy his or her favor in the performance of his or her
official duties or that he or she is affected by the kinship, rank, position
or influence of any party or person. or that he or she is likely to engage
in an action that violates the public trust.
B. Except as otherwise required by law:
(1) No Town officer or employee, either individually or as a member of
a Town Board or commission, shall participate in any decision to
appoint, hire, promote, discipline or discharge a family member.
(2) No Town officer or employee shall supervise a family member in the
performance of such person's official duties.
§ 14-9 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-13
13:101
§ 14-13. Preferential treatment.
No person or organization shall attempt to secure preferential treatment
in its dealings with the Town by offering any valuable gifts, whether in the
form of a service, loan, thing or promise, in any form to any Town official or
employee.
§ 14-14. Disclosure of confidential information.
No officer or employee of the Town of Islip, whether paid or unpaid, shall
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the Town or any other confidential information of an official
character except when required by law, nor shall be use such information to
advance the financial or other private interests of himself or others.
§ 14-15. Future employment.
No officer or employee shall, within a period of two (2) years after the
termination of such service or employment, appear before the Town Board
or any agency of the Town or receive compensation for any services
rendered on behalf of any person, firm, corporation, interest or association
other than the Town, its agencies, districts, boards, authorities,
commissions or instrumentalities in relation to any case, proceeding or
application with respect to which such person was directly concerned or
in which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration. Nor shall any
person who has served as a member of the legislative body of the Town,
within a period of two (2) years after the termination of such service,
receive compensation for any service on behalf of any person, firm,
corporation or association to promote or oppose, directly or indirectly, the
passage of bills or resolutions by such legislative body of the Town.
§ 14-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate this Article may be
fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner
provided by law.
B. Any individual, corporation, firm or association who is found by the
Town Board to have knowingly violated the provisions of § 14-13 of this
Article shall be deemed an "irresponsible bidder," subject to automatic
cancellation of existing contracts and disqualification from bidding on
contracts awarded by the Town or its agencies pursuant to the
provisions of General Municipal Law § 103.
§ 14-13 ISLIP CODE § 14-16
13:102
ARTICLE VI
Financial Disclosure
§ 14-17. Filing disclosure form required.
§ 14-18. Required forms. [Amended 3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010;
3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
All individuals required to file an annual disclosure statement pursuant to
the provisions of § 14-17 of this chapter shall file their disclosure on the
Disclosure Form, incorporated herein by reference.14
§ 14-19. Filing procedures.
A. All elected and appointed Town officials and officers, as defined in
Article III of this local law, including but not limited to all attorneys in
the Town Attorney's office, all members of the Town Planning Board,
Plumbing Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Youth Board, Board of
Assessment and Review, Industrial Development Agency, Town of Islip
Housing Authority, Resource Recovery Agency and Community
Development Agency, whether or not they receive a salary or other
payment for their services, shall file an annual financial disclosure
statement as hereinafter provided and shall answer each and every
question therein in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
B. A list of the title and individuals who are required to report shall be
compiled annually by the Director of Personnel and approved by
resolution of the Town Board and shall be filed with the Board of Ethics
no later than the first day of February of each year.
A. In accordance with § 14-17 of this Article, the Board of Ethics shall
obtain a list of all individuals required to report annually from the Town
of Islip Director of Personnel and any other required sources no later
than the first day of February of each year. Said list shall specify
whether each such individual is compensated or not for his services.
[Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
B. No later than March 30 of each year, the Board shall mail the
appropriate form to all individuals required to file a financial disclosure
statement under this article. [Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No.
5-2013]
C. Statements should be filed as follows:
(1) On May 1 of each year, each individual covered by § 14-17 of this
Article shall file with the Town of Islip Board of Ethics the required
Annual Disclosure Form unless written application of extension is
granted by the Board of Ethics on the grounds of undue hardship or
14.Editor's Note: Said Disclosure Form is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 14-17 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-19
13:103
§ 14-20. Review procedures; penalties for offenses.
for justifiable cause. In no event shall any extensions be granted
beyond the next annual filing date.
(2) Any individual who is subject to the financial disclosure reporting
requirements under § 14-17 of this Article and who has timely filed
with the Internal Revenue Service an application for automatic
extension of time in which to file his individual income tax return
for the immediately preceding calendar or fiscal year shall be
required to file such disclosure statement on or before May 1,
unless extended pursuant to Subsection C(1) above, but may,
without any civil penalty on account of a deficient statement,
indicate with respect to any item on the disclosure statement that
such information with respect thereto is lacking but will be
supplied in a supplementary statement of financial disclosure,
which shall be filed no later than seven (7) days after the expiration
date of the period of automatic extension of time within which to
file said tax return. Failure to file said supplementary financial
disclosure statement within the time provided shall subject the
reporting individual to the penalties applicable to the failure to file
or the filing of a deficient statement as if such supplementary
statement were an annual statement.
(3) Any changes in personnel that would add to the list an individual
required to file occurring after February of each year shall be
reported to the Board by the Director of Personnel and the
appropriate Town agency. The Board shall then mail the
appropriate form to such individual in the manner herein described
and shall allow the individual thirty (30) days to respond.
A. The Board shall receive, date, review and file all financial disclosure
statements.
(1) If any individual required to report refuses or fails, unknowingly or
intentionally, to timely file a statement as required by this Article,
the Board shall notify the individual of such failure and
simultaneously notify the Town Comptroller that said individual has
not filed, and, upon such notification, the Comptroller shall
withhold the paycheck of that employee. Once a statement is filed,
the Board shall promptly notify the Comptroller and all moneys
withheld because of nonfiling shall be promptly released.
(2) If an individual fails to file a statement within forty-five (45) days
after receipt of the notice of nonfiling from the Board or if the
individual files a statement which the Board determines was filed
with the intent to deceive, to intentionally misrepresent or
otherwise fraudulently answer any question set forth in the
statement or to intentionally withhold any information asked or
demanded in the statement, such action shall be grounds for
§ 14-19 ISLIP CODE § 14-20
13:104
dismissal or removal pursuant to Civil Service Law § 75, the Public
Officers Law, Article 3, and other applicable laws.
B. If the Board determines that further information is required with
respect to any aspect of the disclosure statement, the reporting
individual shall provide the same within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a
written request made by the Board.
C. If the Board determines that a reporting individual filed a statement
with the intent to deceive, to intentionally misrepresent or otherwise to
fraudulently answer any question set forth in the statement or to
intentionally withhold any information asked or demanded in the
statement and if such deception or misrepresentation is found by the
Board to be both intentional and material as to a conflict of interest,
then such employee shall be charged with a violation of this Article,
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or
imprisonment of not more than three (3) months, or both. In all criminal
proceedings under this Article, the Board, through a designated
representative, shall act as a complaining witness.
D. If, after review of the statement, the Board determines that a conflict of
interest exists or that there appears to be an impropriety that could
reflect upon the integrity of Town government, the following
procedures shall apply:
(1) The Board shall specify, by written opinion, stating its findings and
the basis for its opinion, that a conflict or impropriety exists and
shall mail such opinion by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the reporting individual.
(2) The individual shall have twenty-one (21) days from the date he
receives the opinion to respond, rebut or refute the Board's
findings by making a written submission to the Board.
(3) The Board may then modify its opinion or recommend to the
reporting individual a manner in which the conflict of interest or
appearance of impropriety may be rectified.
(4) In the event that the Board determines that the conflict or
impropriety has not been rectified, the Board shall refer the matter
to the Town Board for its consideration.
E. When conditions in Subsections A(2) and B of this section exist or if any
reporting individual fails to respond to the Board within twenty-one (21)
days of receipt of the Board's opinion or fails to satisfactorily cure a
conflict or impropriety as addressed in Subsection C of this section, the
Board shall publicly disclose the individual's statement or relevant
portions of such statement, along with the Board's opinion, by filing
them with:
(1) The Town Clerk.
§ 14-20 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-20
13:105
§ 14-21. Confidentiality and public access.
(2) The Town Supervisor.
(3) The Town Board.
F. At any time during the review process, the Board, acting through its
Chairman and the Town Attorney, shall promptly refer any matter to the
District Attorney when there is reason to believe that criminal
investigation may be warranted.
A. All statements filed with the Board of Ethics upon completion of their
review by said Board shall become a public record, except that a
reporting individual may request confidentiality in regard to parts of his
financial statement that have no relationship to his official duties.
Confidentiality may be granted by the Board in regard to such parts
that, in the opinion of the Board, pose no conflict of interest and/or have
no relationship to official duties of the employee. Parts of the statement
that are granted confidential status by the Board shall be retained by
the Board and shall only be disclosed pursuant to this Article.
B. Any part of a financial disclosure statement that has been granted
confidential status by the Board pursuant to the reporting individual's
request shall be maintained by the Board as confidential information. It
shall be a violation for any Board member, Board employee or any other
individual other than the reporting individual to disclose information
that has been granted confidential status, and such violation shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.),
as determined by the Board.
C. If information granted confidential status is intermixed with parts of the
statement that will be filed as a public record, such confidential
information shall be deleted by the Board on the copy to be so filed, and
the original statement containing the confidential information shall be
retained by the Board.
D. The Board shall maintain a complete and permanent written record of
all requests made to review the public portion of an individual's
financial disclosure statement, which record shall be available to the
reporting individual.
§ 14-20 ISLIP CODE § 14-21
13:106
ARTICLE VII
Board of Ethics
§ 14-22. Establishment; membership; terms; qualifications.
§ 14-23. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Board of Ethics shall promulgate its own rules and regulations as to
its forms and procedures unless otherwise provided in this chapter and
shall maintain appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings, for
which expenses it shall be reimbursed as a Town charge, and an adequate
appropriation for its operation shall be budgeted by the Supervisor. The
members of said Board shall elect from among themselves a Chairman and
a Secretary.
A. A Board of Ethics is hereby established, and the Town Board shall
appropriate funds for maintenance and personal services in connection
therewith.
B. The Board of Ethics shall be composed of seven members appointed by
the Supervisor, subject to confirmation by the Town Board. Only one
member may be an elected or appointed municipal officer or employee.
The Town Attorney or his/her designee shall serve as counsel to the
Board of Ethics, except he/she shall be excused when he/she or the
Board of Ethics determines that he/she has, or may reasonably appear
to have, a conflict of interest. In such event, substitute counsel shall be
provided in a timely fashion. [Amended 1-31-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006; 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
C. No persons may be appointed as members of such Board who shall be:
(1) An officer or committee person of any political party or club within
the Town.
(2) Persons clearly related by family or business to any Town officer or
employee.
(3) Persons having business dealings with the Town or any Town
agency directly or indirectly, either personally or through some
firm, association or corporation in which such person has an official
capacity.
D. The members of such Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Board and shall receive no salary or compensation for their services as
members, except that any member who is a Town officer or employee
shall be entitled to his usual compensation when attending upon the
business of the Board during normal working hours.
E. Members of the Board of Ethics shall be provided with legal defense
and indemnification in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
24, Defense of Officers, Employees and Appointed Officers, of the Islip
Town Code.
§ 14-22 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-24
13:107
§ 14-24. Powers and duties.
A. The Board of Ethics shall have all the powers and duties as prescribed
by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and, with respect to
financial disclosure, shall have all the power and duties given to the
Temporary State Commission On Local Government Ethics under
General Municipal Law § 813.
B. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to Town officers and
employees with respect to this Code of Ethics. Such advisory opinions
shall be rendered pursuant to the written request of any Town officer or
employee or former officer or former employee under such rules and
regulations as the Board of Ethics may deem advisable. In addition, the
Board of Ethics may make recommendations with respect to
amendments to the Code of Ethics upon the request of the Town Board.
[Amended 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
C. The Board of Ethics shall receive and investigate all complaints alleging
violation of this Code of Ethics upon the written request of any
individual. This request must be signed by the individual complainant
and must include his address. The Board may also investigate on its
own initiative any possible violation of this Code of Ethics. The Board
shall complete its investigation within six months after receiving a
complaint, except in the case of complex matters or extenuating
circumstances. [Amended 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
D. The Board of Ethics shall have the power and authority, in its discretion,
to render reports and recommendations to the Town Board for
appropriate action respecting unethical practices in violation of the
Code of Ethics and Financial Disclosure Law or any statute, rule or
regulation relating to conflicts of interest, ethical conduct and the
interest of municipal officers and employees in contracts. The Town
Board, in its discretion and consistent with statutory provisions relating
to the discipline or removal of officers, employees and agency
members, may publicly disclose the reports and recommendations of
the Board of Ethics filed with it.
E. The Board of Ethics shall act as a repository for completed financial
disclosure forms filed pursuant to Article VI herein, shall review the
same for possible conflicts of interest and shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations which are necessary to carry out its
duties and legal mandate under Article VI herein, including the
authority to promulgate rules and regulations of the same impact as
those which the Temporary State Commission on Local Government
Ethics enjoys under General Municipal Law § 813.
F. All agencies of the Town shall furnish to such Board, in connection with
its investigations, such data, information and statements as may, in the
opinion of the Board, be necessary for the proper exercise of its
functions, powers and duties.
§ 14-24 ISLIP CODE § 14-24
13:108
§ 14-25. Public hearings. [Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-200715]
§ 14-26. Training and education. [Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
The Board of Ethics shall develop educational materials, an educational
program on the provisions of this chapter and may, in its discretion, provide
training to all Town employees when deemed necessary or warranted by the
Board. The Board of Ethics shall file a copy of all such materials with the
Town Clerk and make information concerning this chapter and the Code of
Ethics and Financial Disclosure Law available to the officers and employees
of the Town, to the public and to persons interested in doing business with
the Town of Islip.
§ 14-27. Investigations. [Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007;
amended 9-20-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
Complainants shall be afforded such whistleblower protections as may be
provided by law, including but not limited to the protections set forth in New
York Civil Service Law § 75-b and New York Labor Law § 740, to the extent
applicable.
G. All requests for advisory opinions or interpretations and all complaints,
investigations and proceedings shall be deemed confidential unless
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
A. The Board may, at its discretion, schedule a public hearing once in
March of every year, wherein the general public of the Town of Islip is
invited to bring forward any improvements to this Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law. [Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
B. Notice of these public hearings may be given by the placing of a
quarter-page advertisement in the official newspaper of the Town on
two separate occasions, once approximately 30 days prior to said
hearings and once approximately 15 days prior to said hearings.
[Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
C. Transcribed stenographic records of the minutes of said hearings shall
be filed with the Town Clerk.
D. After the holding of said hearings, the Board of Ethics shall forward to
the Town Board its recommendations for proper actions to be taken
subsequent thereto, including changes to the Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law, or any other action it deems appropriate.
15.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 14-25 through 14-30 as §§ 14-28
through 14-33, respectively.
§ 14-24 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-27
13:109

ARTICLE VIII
Compliance, Distribution and Posting
§ 14-28. Compliance.
Compliance with this Code of Ethics shall be deemed a continuing condition
of employment for all officers and employees. There shall also be a
continuing duty to report to the Board of Ethics any action which may
reasonably be interpreted as an improper attempt to influence an officer or
employee in the conduct of his office.
§ 14-29. Distribution.
Every officer and employee shall, subsequent to the date of enactment of
this Town of Islip Code of Ethics and Financial Disclosure Law, be given a
copy of this code, together with all amendments thereto, and a receipt for
the same shall be signed by such employee or officer. Such receipt shall
be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall supply the necessary forms. Failure
to distribute, obtain the required signature or file the same with the Town
Clerk shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with this Code of Ethics
and Financial Disclosure Law or with the enforcement of the provisions
thereof.
§ 14-30. Posting.
In accordance with § 807 of the General Municipal Law, the Town
Supervisor shall cause a copy of Article 18 of said law to be kept posted
in each public building under the jurisdiction of the Town in a place
conspicuous to its officers and employees. Failure to post any such copy
shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with said law nor with the
enforcement of the provisions thereof.
§ 14-28 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-30
13:111

ARTICLE IX
Other Applicable Laws and Ordinances
§ 14-31. Applicability.
Nothing contained in this local law shall limit any other applicable laws or
ordinances which are now or may hereafter be provided.
§ 14-31 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-31
13:113

ARTICLE X
Amendments
§ 14-32. Amendments.
This code may be amended from time to time by the Town Board by
the adoption of further rules and standards designed to improve the
administration of the Town and protect the public or by supplementing the
coverage of this code to the extent permitted by law.
§ 14-32 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-32
13:115

ARTICLE XI
Severability and Supersession
§ 14-33. Severability.
If any portion of this code shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such portion thereof shall be
deemed inoperative and the balance of said code shall be deemed to be in
full force and effect.
§ 14-34. Supersession of state law. [Added 4-24-2007 by L.L. No.
2-200716]
This local law17 is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10(1)(i) and shall supersede General Municipal Law
§ 808(3) and, in particular, the provision regarding the inclusion of an
elected or appointed municipal officer or employee on the Board of Ethics.
16.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former § 14-31 as § 14-35.
17.Editor's Note: “This local law” refers to L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 14-33 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-34
13:117

ARTICLE XII
Effective Date
§ 14-35. When effective. [Amended 4-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
This chapter shall be effective upon filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 14-35 NATURE PRESERVE TRUST § 14-35
13:119
Chapter 15
EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Housing standards — See Ch. 27.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 47A.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. 64.
§ 15-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town Board to provide for the
proper use of land to prevent all manner of excavations which create pits,
holes or hollows in the earth, leaving it in a hazardous or dangerous state,
or cause soil erosion which depletes the land of its natural vegetative cover
and supply of organic material and renders such land unproductive and
unsuitable for agricultural purposes and undesirable for building homes,
resulting in lower land values. By this ordinance the Town Board seeks to
remove the danger to health and life caused by deep excavations remaining
in the ground and the stripping of topsoil, thereby resulting in damage
to agricultural crops through dust storms in dry weather by exposure of
the bare earth to wind action and in wet periods by pools of water, which
ordinance will promote the safety, health and general welfare of the people
of the Town.
§ 15-2. Excavations prohibited except in conformity with provisions.
No excavation for purposes other than the construction of a wall, driveway,
sidewalk, building or part thereof, or as permitted by § 15-9, shall be
commenced except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 15-3. Application for permit.
Before any excavation is commenced for any purpose, other than those
excepted in § 15-2, and topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other substance
is removed from the ground, the owner, lessee or agent of the premises shall
obtain a written permit therefor from the Town Board. For that purpose
such applicant shall file with the Building Inspector of the Town of Islip
a verified application in duplicate for such permit, containing a detailed
statement of the proposed work, together with a plan prepared by a duly
licensed engineer or land surveyor of the State of New York, setting forth in
detail the following in formation:
A. All information as required on the application form prepared by the
Building Department, including a detailed statement of the proposed
work and three-dimensional extent of the proposed excavations and
§ 14-35 ISLIP CODE § 15-3
15:120
§ 15-3.1. Town Board conditions on permits. [Added 12-1-70]
Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter, the Town Board
shall set such conditions on permits issued pursuant to this chapter as it
may deem necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter and to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town
of Islip, consonant with the purpose of this chapter. Such permit conditions
should take cognizance of but may not be limited to the preservation of the
ecological and aesthetic values of the immediate and surrounding area of
any excavation, and the avoidance or reduction of nuisance emanating from
any excavation.
§ 15-4. Sandbank and pit excavations.
No such excavations shall be made:
exact condition of the plot or premises before the work is commenced
and proposed condition of said plot or premises after the work is
completed.
B. The plan shall be drawn to scale and give all streets adjoining the
property; the location and dimensions of the premises upon which it is
proposed to excavate; location, size and use of any existing buildings;
cross sections of the property, giving elevations thereof at intervals of
fifty-foot squares and also at each break in the grades; and the elevation
of the premises as compared to the elevation of any abutting highways.
C. A duly acknowledged consent in writing of the owner of the premises
and mortgagee, if any, including his or their address, or a verified
statement that there is no existing mortgage affecting the premises.
D. Receipted tax bills or a certificate from the Receiver of Taxes of the
Town of Islip and the County Treasurer of Suffolk County showing
payment of all taxes or assessments to date against the property
described in the application.
A. Within twenty (20) feet of any property line and must not be greater
than ten (10) feet below the established grade, unless the sidewalks
remain at an incline of at least forty-five degrees (45°) or are supported
by retaining equipment equal to that specified for building excavations:
except in the case of bank excavations, same may begin at the property
line.
B. Unless adequate barricades shall be erected and maintained, together
with adequate provisions for prevention of flying dust, acceptable to the
Building Inspector.
C. Unless excavation shall be immediately refilled with clean, nonburnable
fill containing no garbage, refuse, offal or any deleterious or
unwholesome matter, and the premises, after completion of the work,
shall be graded to the level of the nearest abutting street or road.
§ 15-3 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 15-5
15:121
§ 15-5. Topsoil stripping and removal.
No stripping or removal of topsoil shall be made within ten (10) feet of
any property line, and upon completion of the work the premises, if below
grade, shall be graded to the level of the abutting highway or the original
grade if the same were below the level of the highway. Dust-down or its
equal shall be spread to prevent dust from flying and there shall be left
upon the surface of the land from which topsoil is removed not less than six
(6) inches of topsoil. No topsoil shall be removed between the first day of
October and the first day of April in the following year. All area from which
topsoil is removed shall, during the period between August 20 and October
1 inclusive, be prepared into a loose, level seedbed, limited, fertilized and
seeded in the following steps:
§ 15-6. Bond or cash deposit.
A. Apply ground limestone at the rate of one (1) ton per acre.
B. Apply five to ten to five (5:10:5) fertilizer at the rate of six hundred
(600) pounds per acre.
C. Disk area to work limestone and fertilizer into the soil to a depth of at
least three (3) inches.
D. Smooth area with a smoothing harrow.
E. Sow the following seed mixture at the rate of one hundred (100) pounds
per acre:
Pounds Per Acre
Timothy 30
Kentucky bluegrass 25
Redtop 10
Perennial rye grass 30
Alsike clover 4
Wild white clover 1
Total 100
F. Brush in seed lightly.
G. Roll firm with ground roller.
A. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant and the owner of record
of the premises shall execute and file with the Town Clerk a bond,
approved by the Town Board of the Town of Islip, in an amount to be
fixed by said Board, but not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.),
with a surety company as surety and conditioned for the faithful
performance of the conditions contained in this ordinance, the
observance of all municipal ordinances and to indemnify the Town of
Islip and/or the Superintendent of Highways for any damage to Town
§ 15-5 ISLIP CODE § 15-6
15:122
§ 15-7. Fees.
The officer designated by the Town Board to issue such permits shall charge
and collect for each such permit:
§ 15-8. Duration and expiration date of permits.
property. In the event of a default, such bond shall be forfeited to the
Town of Islip.
B. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect until a certificate of
completion has been issued by the Building Inspector, certifying to the
fact that all provisions of this ordinance and conditions of the permit
have been fully complied with. Application for such certificate shall be
made by the applicant, owner, or his agent who shall present a verified
authorization from the owner concerning the agency, or lessee, on
forms provided by the Town of Islip, and shall be accompanied by a map
drawn to scale showing a cross section of the affected property, giving
elevations thereof as provided in § 15-3B, prepared by a duly licensed
engineer or land surveyor of the State of New York after the completion
of the operations, who shall also certify that there is not less than six (6)
inches of topsoil remaining upon the ground from which topsoil has
been removed and that such area has been seeded in compliance with
§ 15-5 hereof. In lieu of such bond, a cash deposit or deposit of the
negotiable securities may be made with the Supervisor of the Town.
A. Sandbank and pit excavations. A minimum fee of two hundred dollars
($200.) for an excavation volume not to exceed twenty thousand
(20,000) cubic yards. For excavations exceeding twenty thousand
(20,000) cubic yards, the minimum fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.) plus one cent ($0.01) for each additional cubic yard or fraction
thereof. [Amended 5-12-59]
B. Topsoil removal: a minimum fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for an area
not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet. For areas exceeding
five thousand (5,000) square feet, the minimum fee shall be twenty-five
dollars ($25.), plus ten dollars ($10.) for each additional five thousand
(5,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
A. Sandbank and pit excavation. Such permits shall expire by limitation
one (1) year from the date of issuance unless extended by the Town
Board.
B. Topsoil removal.
(1) Such permits shall expire by limitation sixty (60) days from the date
of issuance unless extended by the Town Board, and no permit or
permits shall be granted for removal of more than four (4) acres of
topsoil from any one (1) tract of land until full compliance with this
ordinance is had under any existing permit for the same tract,
§ 15-6 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 15-8
15:123
§ 15-9. Nonapplicability. [Amended 7-12-55]
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall require a person to obtain a
permit under the following circumstances:
§ 15-10. Maintenance of excavations. [Added 9-16-80]
Every excavation having a depth of any point in excess of three (3) feet shall
be properly guarded and protected by fencing, railing or a rigid cover so as
to prevent the site from becoming dangerous.
§ 15-11. Filling in by Town; collection of costs. [Added 12-18-84]18
The Town Superintendent of Highways or other appropriate officials of such
Town, upon the direction of the Town Board, shall fill in excavated lands and
property if, after a hearing, the existence of such lands and property were
deemed by the Town Board to constitute a hazard to public safety, provided
that thirty (30) days' notice shall be given by registered mail addressed to
the owner of record of such lands and property at the address shown on the
last preceding assessment roll and provided that such excavated lands and
property are not filled by or on behalf of such owner within such period,
and it is further enacted that the cost thereof shall be assessed against
such lands and property in accordance with the provisions of § 157 of the
Highway Law.
§ 15-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-16-80]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building on premises where such violation
has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of the premises
where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner,
general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of the premises in
except the preparation of the ground and seeding as provided in
§ 15-5 hereof.
(2) No permit shall be valid except between April 1 and October 1 of
any year.
A. Where topsoil is to be removed from one portion of his lands to another
portion of the same premises when such removal:
(1) Is necessary as an accessory use; or
(2) Is made for the purpose of farming or improving said property.
B. When the material to be removed from a building lot has been
excavated for the purpose of placing the foundation of a building or
other permitted use.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance and also renumberd former §§ 15-11 through 15-13 as
§§ 15-12 through 15-14, respectively.
§ 15-8 ISLIP CODE § 15-12
15:124
which part of said violation has been committed or shall exist, and the
general agent, architect, engineer, surveyor, building contractor or any
other person who knows, permits, takes part or assists in any such violation
or who maintains any premises in which any such violation shall exist,
shall be liable for a fine not exceeding seven hundred dollars ($700.) or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. Each
day's continued violation shall constitute a separate, additional offense.
§ 15-13. Severability. [Amended 9-16-80]
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this ordinance shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 15-14. When effective. [Amended 9-16-80]
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 16
EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
15.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Licensing of plumbers — See Ch. 40.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. 64.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
§ 16-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Opening
Ordinance of the Town of Islip."
§ 16-2. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of the ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 15-12 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 16-2
15:125
§ 16-3. Excavation; permit required. [Amended 8-18-1981]
No person, firm or corporation, including public service companies and
transportation corporations as defined in Article 1 of the Transportation
Corporations Law, which, for the purpose of this ordinance, are deemed
such as the New York Telephone Company, the Long Island Lighting
Company, Suffolk County Water Authority, private and municipally owned
water companies, community antenna television companies and municipal
districts, shall make any excavation in any Town street, highway or sidewalk
in the Town of Islip for any purpose without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Commissioner of the Town of Islip as hereinafter provided.
§ 16-4. Application and permit.
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the
Commissioner of Public Works for an excavation permit
hereunder.[Amended 8-18-1981]
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Town Commissioner of
Public Works of the Town of Islip and the Town Superintendent of
Highways of the Town of Islip.[Added 8-18-1981]
EXCAVATION — Any cavity, hole or hollow formed by digging, cutting,
scooping, breaking, bulleting, vibrating, tunneling or undermining or
any other method of removal or disturbance of earthen or road material
in or under any street, as defined herein.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue or other public
way or public grounds in the Town of Islip outside of any incorporated
Village.19
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
TOWN BOARD or BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Islip.
A. Application in writing shall be filed in duplicate with the Commissioner
upon application blanks which he shall prescribe, which application
shall state the nature, location, extent and purpose of the proposed
excavation. [Amended 8-18-1981]
B. Application by public service companies, excluding municipal districts,
must be accompanied by a general undertaking in such form as may be
approved by the Town Board. The said general undertaking is tendered
to assure that after completing the excavation the said applicant leaves
the street, highway or sidewalk, pavement, curb or gutter in the same
condition as it was prior to the excavation.
19.Editor's Note: The definition of “Superintendent of Highways,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 8-18-1981.
§ 16-2 ISLIP CODE § 16-4
15:126
§ 16-5. Permit fee. [Amended 8-18-1981; 11–27–2007]
The permit fee of $100 shall accompany each application submitted in
accordance with this ordinance.
§ 16-6. Liability. [Amended 8-18-1981]
The applicant shall file with the Commissioner a general liability policy or
certificate of insurance naming the Town of Islip as an additional insured at
the same time he files his application for a permit. The Town Attorney shall
approve the policy for form. The policy shall insure the Town of Islip and
the applicant and shall cover all operations relative to the excavation and
reconstruction thereto. Said policy shall have limits of liability of $250,000
for bodily injury to each person and $500,000 liability in the aggregate for
each accident and property damage liability of $5,000 for each accident and
$25,000 aggregate property damage liability.
§ 16-7. Notice to public utilities. [Amended 8-18-1981]
The Commissioner shall require any person making a highway excavation
pursuant to permit granted hereunto to give notice of such excavation to
public service companies or municipal districts having lines, mains or other
C. Applications by applicants other than public service companies or
municipal districts must be accompanied by a general undertaking in
such form as shall be approved by the Town Board; in lieu thereof, by a
cash deposit, the amount of which shall be determined by the
Commissioner and shall be based upon the estimated cost of repairing
the damage, and which sum is to be deposited with the Comptroller of
the Town of Islip to assure that after completing the excavation the said
applicant leaves the street, highway or sidewalk, pavement, curb or
gutter in the same condition as it was prior to the excavation. In the
event that the applicant fails to repair or replace such pavement,
sidewalk, curb or gutter within the time provided in the permit and the
applicant has deposited cash in lieu of an undertaking, the
Commissioner will assess the damage and report same to the Town
Board. The Town Board may thereafter order the Town Comptroller to
pay to the Commissioner, out of the moneys deposited, a sufficient sum
of money to repair or replace the said street, highway or sidewalk,
pavement, curb or gutter. In the alternative, the Commissioner may
contract with the applicant for the Department to complete the
pavement, sidewalk, curb or gutter for a mutually agreed upon sum.
Upon the completion of the said excavation, where the applicant has
deposited cash in lieu of an undertaking the moneys deposited
hereunder are to be returned to the applicant, provided that all or part
have not been expended pursuant to the subsection herein. [Amended
8-18-1981]
D. Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements, a permit shall be
issued in the name of the Commissioner. [Amended 8-18-1981]
§ 16-4 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 16-7
15:127
property in the streets, and no work shall be commenced or done under
such permit until such requirement of notice has been fully complied with
to the Commissioner and each affected utility.
§ 16-8. Guarding of excavations and protection of property.
[Amended 8-18-1981]
Any person making an excavation covered by this ordinance shall erect a
suitable barrier or guard for the protection of persons using the streets
or sidewalks and, in addition thereto, shall set up and maintain during the
hours of darkness sufficient lights or flares or retroreflective barricades
to properly illuminate or delineate the work area and shall also take all
necessary precautions for the protection of the Town and of public service
companies or municipal districts and adjoining property owners and others
which might be endangered by such excavations or the work incident
thereto, and shall comply with all directions given by the Commissioner with
respect to such barriers, lights, flares and protective measures.
§ 16-9. Regulations and specifications for street opening permits.
A. Commencement of work. Work under the permit shall be commenced
within 30 days from the date of permit and continued in an expeditious
manner, unless extension of this period is approved by the Department
of Public Works. [Amended 8-18-1981]
B. Construction.
(1) When working on any Town road, no pavement cuts or trenches are
to be left uncovered or unfilled overnight, except in emergencies,
and in such cases adequate precautions must be exercised to
protect traffic.
(2) When working on any Town road, contractors must complete final
backfilling (See Subsection E hereof.) of trench within 18 days from
the day of opening.
(3) All pipes or mains crossing highway pavements shall, wherever
possible, be driven beneath the roadway without disturbance to the
pavement. The point of driving shall not be less than five feet from
the edge of pavement. Such crossover pipes shall, whenever
possible, be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes so that repairs or
replacements may be made without further disturbance of the
roadway pavement.
(4) If the boring method in the driving of crossover pipes is found to be
impracticable, the representative of the Department of Public
Works shall be consulted to determine the manner of placing the
pipe by the open-cut method. This request is to be made in writing
to the Department of Public Works and may be granted by the
Commissioner upon such conditions as he deems necessary and
proper under the circumstances. [Amended 8-18-1981]
§ 16-7 ISLIP CODE § 16-9
15:128
C. Excavations; method and type of opening.
(1) Openings in concrete roads shall have a minimum width of five feet.
(2) No roads are to be tunneled, but pipes may be driven or trenched
across.
(3) All openings are to be made either by pinwheel trenching machine
or saw-cutting, as specified in the permit. [Amended 8-18-1981]
D. Restoration of excavation; temporary patching. Upon completion of the
final backfilling, if final pavement replacing is not to be accomplished
within 20 days from day of opening, then the trench will be brought to
within two inches of road level and then paved with two inches of
asphaltic concrete within 20 days of opening, which shall be placed as a
temporary surface in any pavement opening and shall be maintained to
the same grade as adjacent pavement.
E. Procedure for final backfilling. Clean fill will be used and then trench
will be compacted in twelve-inch lifts with either vibratory soil
compactors or by suitable hydraulic compaction by water jetting at
three-foot intervals.
F. Final pavement replacing. [Amended 8-18-1981]
(1) Concrete. Minimum-size replacements in concrete or asphalt on
concrete base shall be 10 feet by 10 feet, or as directed. In all
cases, if the ten-by-ten-foot replacement is within five feet of a
joint, the replacement must extend to the joint. Concrete openings
shall be saw cuts, and the mix shall be high early, New York State
Specification Class F, latest revision.
(2) Asphalt. The trench will be compacted to within four inches of the
road surface. The existing asphalt surface shall then be cut back at
least 12 inches on either side of the undisturbed subgrade. At the
discretion of the Commissioner, the contact surfaces, the patched
surfaces and/or adjacent pavement edges shall be painted and
sealed with approved bituminous and/or bluestone material before
or after placing the course of asphalt, which shall be four inches of
New York State Specification 6F hot plant mix. This course shall be
rolled with an eight-to-ten-ton roller and surface variations in
excess of 1/4 inch shall be eliminated or the pavement relaid.
(3) If temporary patching is not accomplished, final pavement must be
completed within 20 days of opening. If temporary patching is
accomplished as specified, then final pavement replacing must be
completed within 30 days of temporary patching or within such
additional time as may be authorized by the Commissioner at his
discretion upon application.
G. Shoulder areas. If the trenchwork is in the earthen shoulder of the
roadway, then proper compaction as outlined in Subsection E above will
§ 16-9 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 16-9
15:129
§ 16-10. Completion of work. [Amended 11-17-1981]
The applicant shall notify the Commissioner when work has been
completed, after which an inspection will be made by the Commissioner or
his duly authorized agent, and upon approval of the work, a release will be
granted to the applicant. Until the granting of such a release, the applicant
shall remain liable for proper guarding and protection as provided herein.
§ 16-11. Penalties for offenses.
apply, with the addition of a covering of sod or grass seeding as
specified by the Department of Public Works. [Amended 8-18-1981]
H. Traffic control.
(1) Maintenance and protection of traffic. Traffic is to be maintained at
all times during the progress of this work. Adequate signs,
barricades and lights, necessary to protect the public, shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of the New York State
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Flagmen to direct
traffic shall be employed continuously during periods when only
one-way traffic shall be maintained or when equipment is operated
back and forth across the pavement area. [Amended 8-18-1981]
(2) No construction materials or equipment shall be left on the
pavement after working hours, nor shall any construction
equipment or materials be placed in any manner or location that
will obstruct highway or railroad warning signs.
(3) Barricades, whether sidewalk or roadway area, shall have
prominently displayed for police convenience the address and
telephone number of twenty-four-hour availability of someone who
will reestablish same in an emergency.
(4) Access to adjacent properties shall be maintained.
I. Notification. The applicant will be responsible to notify the Department
24 hours prior to street opening and closing. [Amended 11-17-1981]
J. Expiration date. The permit shall expire one year from the date of issue
of the permit, unless a different expiration date has been specified by
the Department of Public Works. [Added 11-17-1981]
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $250 or shall be imprisoned not less than
15 days, or shall be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of the prohibited conditions.
§ 16-9 ISLIP CODE § 16-12
15:130
§ 16-12. Severability clause.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed to be a separate,
distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 16-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 17
FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Discriminatory housing practices — See Ch.
26.
Partial tax exemption for senior
citizens — See Ch. 48.
Be it enacted by the Town Board of the Town
of Islip as follows:
§ 17-1. Discrimination practices unlawful. [Amended 2-15-72]
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the construction, alteration or
repair of any building, project or any public works of any kind, or enjoying
any contract, franchise, subcontract or any other contractual awards issued
by the Town of Islip, to discriminate against any qualified employee or
qualified applicant for employment because of race, color, sex, religion,
ancestry or national origin.
§ 17-2. Antidiscrimination provision included in all public
contracts. [Amended 2-15-72]
The Town of Islip and all of its contracting agencies and departments
shall include in all public contracts hereafter negotiated or renegotiated by
them a provision obligating the contractor not to discriminate against any
qualified employee or qualified applicant for employment because of race,
color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin.
§ 17-3. Conviction of violation.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
§§ 17-1 or 17-2 hereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense and
shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
§ 16-12 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 17-4
17:131
§ 17-4. Conviction to constitute a material breach of contract.
The violation of §§ 17-1 or 17-2 hereof and a conviction therefor shall
constitute a material breach of the contract by such person with the Town,
and the Town of Islip may, in its discretion, terminate said contract.
§ 17-5. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 17A
RESIDENCY OF TOWN EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics and financial disclosure — See
Ch. 14.
Defense of officers, employees and appointed
volunteers — See Ch. 24.
§ 17A-1. Legislative authority and intent.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law
§ 10(1)(ii)(a)(1) and is intended to supersede Town Law § 23(1) and Public
Officer’s Law § 3(1) relating to the qualification of Town officers.
§ 17A-2. Eligibility requirements for Town officers.
Every officer of the Town of Islip shall, at the time of his or her appointment
and throughout his or her term of office, be an elector and resident of the
County of Suffolk or Nassau. This shall not apply to an elected official or his
or her deputies, who must be an elector and resident of the Town of Islip.
§ 17A-3. Preference in hiring Town employees.
Preference in employment opportunities shall be granted to residents of the
Town of Islip in the hiring process.
§ 17A-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when the appropriate certified copies are filed
in the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 17B
RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
§ 17-4 ISLIP CODE § 17B-1
17:132
§ 17B-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Local Law Providing a Retirement Incentive
Program (Part A and Part B) As Authorized by Chapter 105, Laws of 2010."
§ 17B-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to reduce personnel costs, promote
reinvigoration of the work force and recognize past contributions of
employees.
§ 17B-3. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of Islip hereby elects to provide all its eligible employees with a
retirement incentive program, authorized by Chapter 105, Laws of 2010.
§ 17B-4. Commencement date.
The commencement date of the retirement incentive program (Part A and
Part B) shall be October 1, 2010.
§ 17B-5. Open period.
The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive
the retirement incentive benefit shall begin on October 1, 2010, up to and
including December 29, 2010.
§ 17B-6. Funding of costs.
The actuarial present value of the retirement incentive benefit payable
pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall be funded over a five-year
period. The amount of the annual payment in each of the five years shall
be determined by the Actuary of the New York State and Local Employees'
Retirement System and shall be paid by the Town of Islip for each employee
who receives the retirement incentive benefit payable under this chapter.
§ 17B-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 17C
NONUNION FRINGE BENEFITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements for Town
employees — See Ch. 17A.
Optional retirement program for Town
employees — See Ch. 17B.
Defense of officers and employees — See Ch.
24.
§ 17B-1 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 17B-7
17:133
§ 17C-1. Purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip presently extends to its nonunion, fulltime
employees certain contractual benefits afforded to its union employees
under a collective bargaining agreement. These benefits have been
authorized by Town Board resolution. Pursuant to a recent opinion of the
New York State Comptroller, such contractual benefits, if not specifically
authorized by statute, should not continue to be conferred by resolution but
should rather be authorized by a local law. The purpose of this local law is
to ratify the prior extension of certain fringe benefits to nonunion, full-time
employees and to authorize the continued extension of such benefits.
§ 17C-2. Specific benefits conferred.
The following benefits are hereby conferred upon all nonunion, full-time
employees, including elected and appointed officials (hereinafter referred
to as "management"), in the following manner:
A. Holidays, personal and funeral days. All holidays, personal and funeral
days guaranteed to white collar employees under the collective
bargaining agreement between the Town of Islip and Local No. 237,
I.B.T., effective January 1, 1986, to December 31, 1988 (hereinafter
referred to as the "Collective Bargaining Agreement"), shall be
extended to management.
B. Accumulated sick time. Upon termination of employment, management
shall be entitled to payment in cash for the same number of
accumulated sick days as are entitled to white collar employees
pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement.
C. Maternity leave. Management shall be entitled to the same maternity
leave available to white collar employees pursuant to the collective
bargaining agreement.
D. Dental and optical plan. Management shall be entitled to coverage by
the same dental and optical insurance plans available to white collar
employees pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement.
E. Withdrawal from Town health insurance. Management, if covered by
health insurance from other policies, may elect to withdraw from Town
medical coverage. One (1) calendar year after such withdrawal,
management shall be entitled to the same bonus for withdrawal as
provided to white collar employees pursuant to the collective
bargaining agreement.
F. Life insurance, accidental death and dismemberment insurance and
disability insurance. In a manner to be determined in the discretion of
the Town Board, management shall be entitled to life insurance,
accidental death and dismemberment insurance and disability
insurance.
§ 17B-7 ISLIP CODE § 17C-2
17:134
§ 17C-3. Ratification of prior benefits.
All benefits conferred by this local law that have been previously conferred
on management by a Town Board resolution are ratified by this local law.
§ 17C-4. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon its adoption and upon the requisite
filing in the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 18
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 18-1. Intent and purpose.
G. Deferred compensation. Management shall be entitled to participate in
the deferred compensation plan in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Town plan.
H. Education. Management shall be entitled to reimbursement for tuition
for job-related courses, seminars and workshops, as approved by the
Supervisor or his nominee, provided that the cost does not exceed
budgetary limitations. Management shall also be entitled to
reimbursement for travel to and from approved educational functions
and meetings subject to the same budgetary limitations.
I. Town vehicles and mileage reimbursement. Certain management
employees, in the discretion of the Town Board, may be provided with a
Town vehicle. All management shall be entitled to mileage
reimbursement for travel in personal cars in the course of their
employment in the amount provided to white collar employees pursuant
to the collective bargaining agreement.
A. This Board finds and determines that in order to promote the safety of
the citizens and employees of the Town of Islip and the security of Town
property, the Town should investigate the character of prospective
applicants for employment with the Town of Islip by reviewing such
applicants' criminal history report.
B. The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services is capable of
conducting fingerprint-based searches of the criminal history reports it
maintains, but it requires either statute or local law to grant it authority
to conduct fingerprint and criminal history checks. Subdivision 8-a of
§ 837 of the New York State Executive Law authorizes the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services to charge a fee when,
pursuant to statute, it conducts a search of its criminal history records
and returns a report thereon in connection with an application for
employment.
§ 17C-2 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 18-1
17:135
§ 18-2. Prospective employees subject to fingerprinting and
criminal background checks.
All applicants for employment with the Town shall be subject to
fingerprinting and criminal background checks, excluding individuals who
are prospective elected officials.
§ 18-3. Administration; agreement with Division of Criminal Justice
Services; fee; procedure.
C. The Town's Director of Personnel and Labor Relations is capable of
conducting criminal background checks of all individuals being
considered for employment by the Town of Islip, including the request
of a criminal history record from the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services.
D. The Town Clerk or his/her deputies or designees possess the equipment
necessary to prepare and process fingerprints, in order to assist the
Town's Director of Personnel and Labor Relations in conducting such
criminal background checks.
E. Accordingly, the purpose of this chapter is to provide authority for
fingerprinting and criminal history record checks of prospective
employees of the Town of Islip.
A. The Town of Islip's Director of Personnel and Labor Relations shall be
responsible for the administration of this chapter and shall adopt
policies and procedures for the purpose of performing fingerprinting
and criminal history review of prospective employees of the Town who
are subject to background checks and fingerprinting. The criminal
background checks by the Director of Personnel and Labor Relations
shall be made in compliance with Article 23-A of the New York State
Correction Law, the Civil Service Law and other applicable statutes and
laws.
B. The Town Clerk and any other departments of the Town of Islip shall
amend any existing agreement(s) with the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services to include the criminal history reports of
prospective applicants for employment in all positions with the Town,
excluding individuals in an elected office. Subsequent to the effective
date of the agreement referred to above, all prospective applicants for
employment with the Town of Islip as set forth in this chapter shall be
fingerprinted for the purpose of obtaining a criminal history report from
the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
C. Fingerprint cards for all prospective employees shall be prepared by
the Town Clerk, together with any applicable fee, which fee shall be
paid by the prospective employee. The appointing authority for the
prospective employee may waive the applicable fee for any prospective
employee; and, in that event, the fee shall be paid by the Town and be
chargeable against the respective department's budget. The fingerprint
§ 18-1 ISLIP CODE § 18-3
17:136
Chapter 19
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety
Enforcement — See Ch. 40B.
card and applicable fee will be delivered to the Town's Director of
Personnel and Labor Relations, who shall forward same to the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services for processing.
D. The criminal history record processed by the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services concerning prospective employees shall be
submitted to the Town's Director of Personnel and Labor Relations, or
his/her designee, and the appointing authority of the prospective
employee for review and consideration of the contents of those records
and a decision regarding the candidate's fitness for the position applied
for.
E. If a candidate has been convicted of a felony and/or misdemeanor, any
decision regarding such candidate's fitness for a position must be made
on a case-by-case review of the factors contained in Article 23-A of the
New York State Correction Law.
§ 18-3 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 18-3
17:137

ARTICLE I
General Regulations and Provisions
§ 19-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with
nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable
degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises.
§ 19-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Local
Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 19-3. Applicability.
§ 19-4. Definitions. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Accepted by the Chief Fire Marshal as a result of his
investigation and experience or by reason of test, listing or approval by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Incorporated, the National Bureau of
Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories or other nationally
recognized testing agencies.
ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE MARSHAL — The Assistant Chief Fire Marshal of
the Town of Islip.
CHIEF FIRE MARSHAL — The Chief Fire Marshal of the Town of Islip.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with
the terms of this chapter shall be permitted to continue where the
exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property in the
opinion of the Chief Fire Marshal.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped under the jurisdiction of
and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate
Commerce Commission, unless specifically stated, nor as applying to
the military forces of the United States.
C. Whenever a provision of this chapter imposes or prescribes any greater
requirement or higher standard on premises, buildings or structures, or
on the use thereof, than is imposed or prescribed by any other law,
ordinance, rule or regulation, the provision of this chapter shall govern.
§ 19-1 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-4
17:139
DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION — The Division of Fire Prevention of the
Town of Islip.
FIRE MARSHAL II — The Fire Marshal II of the Town of Islip.
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Approved devices, equipment and systems
or combinations of systems used to detect a fire, activate an alarm,
extinguish or control a fire, control or manage smoke products of a fire or
any combination thereof.
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY — The occupancy or use of a building or
structure or any portion thereof by persons harbored or detained to receive
medical, charitable or other care or treatment or by persons involuntarily
detained.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association, its standards and its
codes.
OWNER — Includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a mortgagee or
vendee in possession, assignee of rents, purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and
any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in
question.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Islip.
§ 19-5. Establishment of Division of Fire Prevention. [Amended
5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A Division of Fire Prevention is hereby established within the Department of
Public Safety Enforcement, which shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief Fire Marshal and, ultimately, the Commissioner of Public Safety
Enforcement. The head of the Division shall be known as the "Chief Fire
Marshal." The Chief Fire Marshal shall devote their full time to the duties of
the Division of Fire Prevention. In the absence of the Chief Fire Marshal, the
Assistant Chief Fire Marshal or the Fire Marshal II shall have the full power,
authority and responsibility to undertake and perform all acts and duties
performed by the Chief Fire Marshal. There shall be appointed as many Fire
Marshals as may be necessary to assist the Chief Fire Marshal, Assistant
Chief Fire Marshal or Fire Marshal II in their duties. Any Fire Marshal, Fire
Marshal II or Assistant Chief Fire Marshal acting within the scope of their
job duties is acting as a designee of the Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-6. Authority to enter premises.
The Chief Fire Marshal and any marshal of the Division of Fire Prevention
may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises, with the
consent of the owner or occupant, or with a search warrant, for the purpose
of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this
chapter, he or they may deem necessary to be made.
§ 19-7. Duties of Division of Fire Prevention.
§ 19-4 ISLIP CODE § 19-7
17:140
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief Fire Marshal to inspect or cause to be
inspected by the Division of Fire Prevention all buildings and premises,
except the interiors of one- and two-family dwellings, as often as may be
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected
any condition liable to cause fire or endanger life from fire or any
violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter and of any other
local law affecting the fire hazard. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
B. The Chief Fire Marshal and the Division of Fire Prevention shall
cooperate with the Board of Fire Commissioners and other fire district
officers in making inspections within a fire district and inspect any
buildings and premises within a fire district or protected area at the
request of the Board of Fire Commissioners or of the Chief of the Fire
Department that protects the area in which the buildings or premises
are situated.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as in any way
limiting or restricting the power of any Board of Fire Commissioners or
of any Fire District officer to make inspections or investigations
pursuant to law.
D. It shall be the duty of the Chief Fire Marshal to inspect or cause to be
inspected by the Division of Fire Prevention all exterior areas adjacent
to or adjoining any structure or building, except one- and two-family
dwellings, for the purpose of designating said areas or portions thereof
as fire zones. Any areas so designated shall be plainly defined and
marked as such in a manner prescribed by the Chief Fire Marshal.
[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
E. It shall be the duty of the Division of Fire Prevention to investigate the
origin, cause and circumstances of the following when said condition or
occurrence is within the Town of Islip:
(1) Every fire involving injury or loss of life.
(2) Every suspicious fire.
(3) Every fire which the Chief Fire Marshal determines worthy due to
its size, speed or unusual conditions.
(4) Every hazardous condition or occurrence which might present a
clear and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
general public.
(5) Every fire or related condition or occurrence when requested by
the local Fire Department, Fire District or other duly authorized
agency.
F. It shall be the duty of the Chief Fire Marshal and the Division of Fire
Prevention, upon request, to assist the local Fire Department, the local
Fire District or any other duly authorized agency in the mitigation of
§ 19-7 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-7
17:141
any hazardous condition or occurrence which might present a clear and
present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the general public
when such event shall occur in the Town; provided, however, that any
member of the Division of Fire Prevention may take appropriate action
to protect the health, safety and welfare of any person, or to minimize
damage to property in the event of an emergency. For purposes of
this section, an emergency is defined as an unforeseen occurrence or
condition that calls for immediate action.
(1) The person or entity responsible for the spill, discharge or other
release of any material that creates any hazardous condition or
occurrence as described in § 19-7F above shall reimburse the Town
for all expenses incurred by the Town for the mitigation and
investigation of the hazardous condition or occurrence. This
section shall not apply to accidental spills or releases of home
heating oil, swimming pool treatments or similar materials within
or on the premises of single-family dwellings, unless such spill or
release was due to a negligent or intentional act.
G. It shall be the duty of the Division of Fire Prevention to assist any Fire
Department, Fire District, municipality or any other duly authorized
agency within or part of the Town of Islip, when assistance is requested
by such Fire Department, Fire District, municipality or duly authorized
agency, in the mitigation or investigation of the origin, cause and
circumstances of any fire or hazardous condition or occurrence which
might present a clear and present danger to the health, safety and
welfare of the general public, regardless of the place of occurrence,
provided that the Commissioner of Public Safety Enforcement or his
designee shall first approve the renderings of such assistance.
(1) The person or entity responsible for the spill, discharge or other
release of any material that creates any hazardous condition or
occurrence as described in § 19-7G above shall be responsible to
reimburse the Town for all expenses incurred by the Town for the
mitigation and investigation of the hazardous condition or
occurrence. This section shall not apply to accidental spills or
releases of home heating oil, swimming pool treatments or similar
materials within or on the premises of single-family dwellings,
unless such spill or release was due to a negligent or intentional
act.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Fire Department, Fire District,
municipality or other duly authorized agency within or part of the
Town of Islip, to provide all necessary assistance in identifying the
person or entity responsible for any spill, discharge or other
release as described in § 19-7G(1) above and all reasonable
assistance in obtaining reimbursement for the Town of Islip
therefrom.
H. It shall be the duty of the Division of Fire Prevention to enforce the
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
§ 19-7 ISLIP CODE § 19-7
17:142
§ 19-8. Orders to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions.
[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
It shall be unlawful, unless otherwise permitted by this Code, to allow or
maintain in any building, vehicle or vessel or upon any premises dangerous
or hazardous conditions or materials as follows. It shall order such
dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such
manner as may be specified by the Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-9. (Reserved)20
§ 19-10. Permits.
and Building Code (commonly referred to as the "NYS Uniform Code")
in addition to any other laws, rules, codes or regulations duly adopted
by the Code of the Town of Islip.
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials.
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
C. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly flammable materials.
D. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
E. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or egress of occupants in case of fire.
F. Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of
adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fireextinguishing
equipment or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or
from any other cause, creates a hazardous condition.
G. No parking in fire zones and/or within 15 feet of fire hydrants. No
persons shall park or leave standing any vehicle in any area designated
or marked as a fire zone and/or within 15 feet of fire hydrants, nor shall
any area so designated be used for the storage of any material or used
in any way that will obstruct the same or render the same inaccessible
by fire apparatus.
H. Any violation of this Chapter 19 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
A. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, maintain, store, handle or keep
explosives, chemicals, flammable liquids and gases or other hazardous
20.Editor's Note: Former § 19-9, Service of orders, was repealed 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019.
§ 19-7 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-10
17:143
materials or to use, install or conduct processes or carry on operations
involving or creating conditions which are or may be hazardous to
life or property or to install equipment used in connection with such
activities, in accordance with this Chapter 19 of the Code of the Town
of Islip, without a permit issued by the Chief Fire Marshal, which shall
constitute permission in writing. Such permit shall not take the place
of any other license required by law and shall not be transferable nor
assignable. Each permit shall be limited to the purposes and materials
set forth in the face thereof, and any change in use or occupancy of
premises shall require a new permit. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-2019]
B. Before any permit, other than a household or commercial burning
permit, may be issued, the Division of Fire Prevention, with the consent
of the owner or occupant, or with a search warrant, shall inspect and
approve the receptacles, equipment, vehicles, buildings, premises or
storage place to be used. In cases where the approval of any other
governmental agency is required, no permit shall be issued until
satisfactory evidence of such approval has been submitted by the
applicant.
C. All applications for a permit required by this chapter, other than an
application for the household or commercial burning permit, shall be
made to the Chief Fire Marshal in such form and detail as he shall
prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans
as required by the Chief Fire Marshal. An application for a household or
commercial burning permit may be made to the Chief of the Fire
Department in whose district the burning is to be conducted. A permit
shall not be issued for a period longer than one year unless specifically
stated by some other section of this code. A permit shall not be effective
until such time as the applicant has corrected all violations which were
observed at the time of inspection. The permit fee shall cover a period
of one year from the date of initial inspection, unless specifically stated
by some other section of this code.
D. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein
and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Division of Fire
Prevention and any officer of the Fire or Police Department.
E. One permit only shall be required by establishments dealing in or using
two or more flammable, combustible or explosive materials to be kept in
the establishment at any one time, but each of the materials shall be
listed in the permit.
F. A copy of each permit, together with the application and plans upon
which it is based, shall be delivered by the Chief Fire Marshal forthwith
to the Chief of the Fire Department which protects the area in which
the premises are situated.
G. The Chief Fire Marshal may revoke any permit or approval issued, and
the Chief of the Fire Department may revoke a household or
§ 19-10 ISLIP CODE § 19-10
17:144
§ 19-11. Fees.
Fee schedules can be set and adopted by the Chief Fire Marshal upon the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 19-12. Exemption from liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to subject the Town of Islip, any Fire
District or Fire Department therein or any officers or employees thereof to
any civil or other liability for any damage to persons or property by reason
of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect
or reinspect or the permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
§ 19-13. Modifications.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall have the power to modify any of the provisions
of this chapter upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee or his
duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the chapter, provided that the spirit of the
chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and
the decision of the Chief Fire Marshal thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the Division of Fire Prevention, and a copy shall be furnished to
the applicant.
§ 19-14. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse
to grant a permit applied for or revoke a permit, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of this chapter do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of this chapter has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal, in writing, from the decision of the Chief Fire Marshal
to the Town Board within 10 days from the date of the decision appealed.
The Town Board, after receipt of such notice of appeal, may, in its discretion,
stay the effect of any order pending its decision. The decision of the Town
commercial burning permit issued by him, if any violation of this
chapter is found upon inspection or in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
H. It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, remove or demolish or to allow,
commence or maintain the alteration, removal or demolition of a
building or structure, or any part thereof, except one- and two-family
dwellings, without first filing with the Building Division an application
in writing and obtaining a formal written permit that has been approved
by the Chief Fire Marshal. Such written approval shall not be given
where said construction or alteration would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-10 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-14
17:145
Board shall be entered upon the records of the Division of Fire Prevention,
and a copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 19-15. Penalties for offenses.
§ 19-16. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, phrase,
clause, word or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 19-17. Occupancy of buildings. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
It shall be unlawful to occupy for use or to allow occupancy for use any
building or structure or part thereof after initial construction or subsequent
alteration prior to an inspection of same by the Division of Fire Prevention
and the issuance of an appropriate certificate of occupancy or compliance.
This section shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
including the failure, refusal or neglect to comply with an order issued
by the Chief Fire Marshal, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable for a first offense by a fine not
less than $2,000 and not to exceed $4,000 or a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days; for a second offense by a fine not less than
$3,000 and not to exceed $5,000 or a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days; and for a third or subsequent offense within a five-year
period, by a fine of not less than $5,000 and not to exceed $10,000 or a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days.
B. Each week such violation continues, following notification by the Town,
shall constitute a separate offense punishable in like manner.
C. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, or any
person in possession thereof where any violation of this chapter has
been committed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, person or corporation who knowingly commits, takes part or
assists in any such violation, or who maintains any building, structure
or premises in which any such violation exists, shall each be guilty of a
separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined and/or
imprisoned as herein provided.
D. In addition to the above penalty, any appropriate action or proceeding
may be instituted or taken to prevent any unlawful construction,
erection, alteration, repair, maintenance or use or to restrain, correct
or abate any violation or to prevent the occupancy of any such building,
structure or premises or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or
use in or about such building, structure or premises.
§ 19-14 ISLIP CODE § 19-18
17:146
§ 19-18. Fire Department Notification. [Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
§ 19-19. through § 19-20. (Reserved)
A. In the event of an unintended fire on a property, the occupant shall
immediately report such occurrence to the local Fire Department.
B. It shall be unlawful to fail to immediately report an unintended fire on a
property to the local Fire Department.
C. It shall be unlawful to cause another to delay in the reporting of an
unintended fire to the local Fire Department.
§ 19-18 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-19
17:147

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
§ 19-21. Purpose and intent.
§ 19-22. (Reserved)
§ 19-23. Applicability.
§ 19-24. Conflicts with other laws.
This article is intended to be used in conjunction with existing laws, and
nothing in this article shall be construed as rendering other applicable laws
invalid. Where no law exists or where existing laws are silent in any area
where this article sets forth specific provisions, the provisions of this article
shall apply. In any situation where a conflict exists between a provision
of this article and any existing law, the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail, unless otherwise specified.
§ 19-25. (Reserved)
A. The purpose of this article is to provide the Town of Islip with rules and
regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire
hazards; regulating the installation, use and maintenance of equipment;
regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas; providing for
the abatement of fire hazards; and setting forth standards for
compliance with and achievement of these objectives.
B. The Town of Islip previously adopted the Fire Prevention and Building
Code of New York State and reaffirms the adoption as if fully stated
herein.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings, structures,
vehicles and marine vessels within the scope of this code and to
premises which shall be constructed or erected and to conditions which
arise in the Town of Islip after the effective date hereof.
B. The provisions of this article shall also apply to existing buildings,
structures, vehicles and marine vessels within the scope of this code
and to premises or conditions in the Town of Islip when, in the opinion
of the Chief Fire Marshal, they constitute a distinct fire hazard to life or
the property of others.
§ 19-21 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-25
17:149

ARTICLE III
Fire Protection Equipment
§ 19-26. Chief Fire Marshal to survey. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-2019]
The Chief Fire Marshal shall survey or cause to be surveyed each
establishment, except the interior of one- and twofamily dwellings, and shall
specify what fire protection systems shall be provided therein. In special
hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more than one type or special
systems may be required.
§ 19-27. through § 19-28. (Reserved)
§ 19-29. Permit required. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A permit shall be obtained from the Chief Fire Marshal prior to the
installation or alteration of any fire protection system.
§ 19-30. Approval of systems and equipment. [Amended 5-14-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
No fire protection system installed pursuant to § 19-29 shall be deemed
acceptable or approved until an inspection of the same has been conducted
by the Division of Fire Prevention and an appropriate certificate of
compliance has been issued for the same.
§ 19-31. Maintenance of equipment. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-2019]
Any fire protection systems that have been installed in compliance with any
permit or order or because of any law or local law shall be maintained in
operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or
occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required, except
that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing
or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs,
alterations or additions. The Division of Fire Prevention shall be notified
before such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started unless the
work is to be continuous until completion.
§ 19-31.1. Inspection and testing of systems.
A. Every fire protection system shall be inspected, tested and maintained
in accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA, as
referenced by the Fire Prevention and Building Code of New York State.
[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
B. At least once each year, a report of testing required in Subsection A of
this section shall be submitted to the Division of Fire Prevention on a
form approved by the Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-26 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-31.2
17:151
§ 19-31.2. Notification. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-32. Tampering and obstructions. [Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, obstruct or allow to
be obstructed any component of a fire protection system, except that this
shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily obstructing,
or allowing to be obstructed, where necessary to make tests, repairs,
alterations or additions when approved by the Chief Fire Marshal.
A. Prior to repairing, modifying, testing or inspecting any fire protection
system, the person conducting such work shall notify all entities that
might receive automatic notification of the activation of the system.
Such entities shall include, but are not limited to. the Fire Prevention
Bureau. the local Fire Department, the central station monitoring
agency, and the occupants of the building.
B. Upon completion of the repairing, modifying, testing or inspection of
any fire protection system, the person conducting the work shall notify
all entities that would receive automatic notification of the activation.
Such notification shall identify that the work is complete as well as the
operational status of the system. Such entities include, but are not
limited to, the Fire Prevention Bureau. the local Fire Department. the
central station monitoring agency, and the occupants of the building.
C. Any party conducting an inspection. test, and/or maintenance of a fire
protection system as per § 19-31.1 who discovers said fire protection
system is operationally deficient and/or otherwise not in compliance
with this chapter and/or the appropriate standards of the NFPA as
referenced by the Fire Prevention and Building Codes of New York
State, shall make a dated entry on the fire protection system inspection
tag noting the deficiency and/or lack of compliance and shall notify the
Chief Fire Marshal in writing of the aforementioned within 24 hours.
§ 19-31.2 ISLIP CODE § 19-32
17:152
ARTICLE IV
General Precautions Against Fire
§ 19-33. Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires.
A. Permit required. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or
in any public street, alley or road. No person shall kindle or maintain
any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on any privately owned property or in any other public
ground without written permission from the Board of Fire
Commissioners in whose area the burning is to be conducted or from its
duly authorized representative. During construction or demolition of
buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed
of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity without
having obtained written permission from the Board of Fire
Commissioners in whose area the burning is to be conducted or from its
duly authorized representative. This shall be in no way construed as
being applicable to backyard barbecues. The requirements of this
section shall be in addition to any other permits required by a higher
governmental agency.
B. Location restricted. No person to whom a permit is issued shall kindle
or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be
kindled or maintained on any private land unless the location is not less
than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to
prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure or the fire
is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than 15
feet from any structure. This shall in no way be construed as applicable
to backyard barbecues.
C. Chief may prohibit. The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee,
which protects the area may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor
rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fire hazardous.
D. The Chief Fire Marshal may prohibit all bonfires and rubbish fires
regardless of any permissions in all or any part of the Town of Islip
when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous. Notice of such prohibition and its subsequent termination
shall be made to each Fire District and Fire Department as soon as
practicable.
E. All permits and permissions required within the scope of this section
shall at all times be present at the location of such burning and shall be
readily available for inspection by members of the Fire Department,
Fire District, Police Department or Division of Fire Prevention.
§ 19-33 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-34
17:153
§ 19-34. Use of torches for removing paint.
The use of a torch or other flame-producing device for removing paint,
varnish or any other interior or exterior finish from any building or structure
is prohibited.
§ 19-35. Handling readily combustible materials.
No person making, using, storing or having in charge or under his control
any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or
combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day
to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in
an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable
vaults or in metal-lined, covered receptacles or bins. The Chief Fire Marshal
shall require suitable baling presses to be installed in all stores, apartment
buildings, factories and similar places where accumulations of paper and
waste materials are not removed at least every second day.
§ 19-36. Receptacles for readily combustible materials.
All receptacles or bins hereinabove referred to in § 19-35 shall be kept
closed at all times and shall be located not less than 15 feet from any
building or structure unless otherwise specified by the Chief Fire Marshal.
Any such receptacles or bins equipped with wheels shall be enclosed within
a noncombustible sill or wall no less than four inches in height.
§ 19-37. Storage of readily combustible materials.
§ 19-38. Open flames, lights or kindling of fire restricted.
A. Permit required. No person shall store in any building or upon any
premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet in gross volume of combustible
empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, rubber tires,
baled cotton, rubber or cork or other similarly combustible materials
without a permit.
B. Storage requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be
within two feet of the ceiling and shall not be so located as to endanger
exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20
feet in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as
not to constitute a hazard and shall be compact and orderly.
A. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept unless such light or flame shall be wellsecured
in a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.
B. No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable materials of the types stored or handled shall be used in the
storage areas of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other
highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area of any
§ 19-34 ISLIP CODE § 19-38
17:154
§ 19-39. Chimneys and heating appliances. [Amended 5-14-2019 by
L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-40. (Reserved)
§ 19-41. Access to concealed spaces.
§ 19-42. through § 19-43. (Reserved)
§ 19-44. Guard dogs.
Any person causing guard dogs to be harbored or kept on the premises shall
cause notice of the presence of said guard dogs to be posted conspicuously
on the premises. Said notice shall consist of reflective decals or placards
in such form as shall be approved or supplied by the Chief Fire Marshal.
Said decals or placards shall be placed in locations specified by the Division
shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovating of
mattresses or bedding; nor in the work area of any establishment used
for the upholstering of furniture.
A. All chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or
hot gases to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, restaurant-type
cooking equipment, incinerators, fire boxes or boilers to which they are
connected shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as not
to create a hazardous condition. A permit shall be obtained from the
Chief Fire Marshal for the installation of any of the above-mentioned
equipment which is connected to any chimney, smokestack or similar
device. This section shall be applicable to all construction, excluding
one- and two-family dwellings.
A. All concealed or closed-off spaces above ceilings or other similar areas
shall be provided with suitable access from either the interior or
exterior of the structure whenever said spaces contain any firedetecting
equipment or devices, fire-suppression equipment or devices
or smoke/fire-control equipment or devices. This section does not apply
to spaces that contain only wiring or piping for such equipment or
devices.
B. Access opening required by this section shall have a minimum clear
opening of not less than 24 inches by 48 inches.
C. One access opening shall be provided for each 3,000 square feet of
concealed or closed-off space.
D. Access openings shall be arranged so that the maximum travel distance
from any opening to the farthest area of such concealed or closed-off
space does not exceed 75 feet.
E. Every access opening shall have the same fire resistance rating as the
wall/ceiling/floor assembly in which it is located.
§ 19-38 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-44
17:155
of Fire Prevention and shall not be considered signs under other chapters
of the Code of the Town of Islip. In addition, said person shall notify the
Chief Fire Marshal and the local Fire Department having jurisdiction over
his premises of the fact that guard dogs are present on the premises and
shall give to said Chief Fire Marshal and local Fire Department the name
and phone number of a person to be contacted in the event of an emergency
during such times as no employees are present at the premises. When
services of guard dogs are no longer required, the Chief Fire Marshal and
the Fire Department affording protection shall be notified, and the placard
shall be removed and, if supplied by the Division of Fire Prevention, shall be
surrendered to said Division.
§ 19-44.1. (Reserved)21
§ 19-44.2. Razor wire prohibited. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
The use of razor wire, barbed wire, concertina wire or any other similar
wire or device designed to injure persons coming in contact with the same
is prohibited in or on any building or structure or portion thereof unless
specifically approved by the Chief Fire Marshal.
21.Editor's Note: Former § 19-44.1, Dumping of flammable and combustible liquids, was
repealed 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019.
§ 19-44 ISLIP CODE § 19-44.2
17:156
ARTICLE V
Automobile Wrecking Yards, Junkyards and Waste Material
Handling Plants
§ 19-45. General requirements.
Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and waste material handling plants
shall conform to all other applicable requirements of this chapter as well as
the following provisions.
§ 19-46. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Chief Fire Marshal to conduct or
maintain any automobile wrecking yard, junkyard or waste material
handling plant.
§ 19-47. Location.
No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard or waste material handling plant
shall be located as to seriously expose adjoining or adjacent properties to
dangers of fire and/or explosion.
§ 19-48. Burning operations.
Burning of wrecked or discarded automobiles or any parts thereof or junk
or any waste materials shall be prohibited.
§ 19-49. Construction and protection equipment.
A. Handling and storage of large quantities of wastepaper, rags or other
combustible materials shall not be in a building of wood frame or
ordinary construction unless the building is sprinklered. Vertical
openings shall be enclosed in an approved manner.
B. Picking rooms shall be separated from storage rooms by construction
having a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour, with each door
opening provided with an approved fire door. Picking rooms shall be
provided with exhaust systems of sufficient capacity to adequately
remove dust and lint.
§ 19-45 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-49
17:157

ARTICLE VI
Automobile Tire Rebuilding Plants
§ 19-50. General requirements.
Automobile tire rebuilding plants shall conform to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter as well as to the following provisions.
§ 19-51. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Chief Fire Marshal to conduct or
maintain any tire recapping or rebuilding plant.
§ 19-52. through § 19-55. (Reserved)
§ 19-50 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-52
17:159

ARTICLE VII
Bowling Establishments
§ 19-56. General requirements.
Bowling establishments shall conform to all other applicable requirements
of this chapter, including those of the appropriate Fire Code and Property
Maintenance Code of New York State, as well as the following provisions.
§ 19-57. Pin refinishing.
Bowling pins shall not be refinished utilizing any flammable liquids or
materials.
§ 19-58. Lane resurfacing.
Bowling lanes shall not be resurfaced utilizing any flammable liquids or
materials. Resurfacing operations shall not be carried on while the
establishment is open for business. The Division of Fire Prevention shall
be notified not less than 24 hours prior to commencing resurfacing. Proper
ventilation shall be provided.
§ 19-56 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-58
17:161

ARTICLE VIII
Storage and Handling of Combustible Fibers
§ 19-59. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS — Includes readily ignitable and free-burning
fibers, such as cotton, sisal, henequen, ixtle, jute, hemp, tow, cocoa fiber,
oakum, baled waste, baled wastepaper, kapok, hay, straw, Spanish moss,
excelsior and other like materials.
§ 19-60. Storage; permit required.
§ 19-61. Storage of agricultural products on farms.
Unlimited quantities of hay, straw and other agricultural products may be
stored in or near farm buildings located outside closely built areas. No
permit shall be required for such storage.
A. Storage and handling of combustible fibers shall be in accordance with
the appropriate standards of the Fire Code of New York State.
B. A permit shall be required for the storage and handling of combustible
fibers in quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet.
§ 19-59 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-61
17:163

ARTICLE IX
Dry-Cleaning Plants
§ 19-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRY CLEANING — The process of removing dirt, grease, paints and other
stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs, etc., by the use of
nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, and it shall
include the process of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution
of dye colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents.
RATED — As applied to solvents, classified as to fire hazard in accordance
with nationally recognized good practice.
§ 19-63. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning without a permit.
§ 19-64. Solvents.
Dry-cleaning systems shall only utilize solvents rated as nonflammable, or
as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and only moderately flammable
at higher temperatures, rated not over five, including carbon tetrachloride
and perchlorethylene.
§ 19-65. Operation and maintenance.
Dry-cleaning systems shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire Prevention and
Building Code of New York State.
§ 19-62 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-65
17:165

ARTICLE X
Maintenance of Exitways
§ 19-66. through § 19-67. (Reserved)
§ 19-66 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-66
17:167

ARTICLE XI
Explosives, Ammunition and Blasting Agents
§ 19-68. Scope.
This article shall apply to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale,
transportation and use of explosives and blasting agents, except that
nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to:
§ 19-69. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARRIER — A person who engages in the transportation of articles or
materials by air, water, rail or highway.
TERMINAL — Those facilities used by carriers for the receipt, transfer,
temporary storage or delivery of articles or materials.
§ 19-70. Permit required.
Permits shall be obtained to:
A. The Armed Forces of the United States or the state militia.
B. Explosives in forms prescribed by the Official United States
Pharmacopeia.
C. The sale or use of fireworks.
D. The possession, transportation and use of small arms ammunition or
special industrial explosive devices.
E. The possession, storage, transportation and use of not more than 15
pounds of smokeless powder and 1,000 small arms primers for hand
loading of small arms ammunition for personal use.
F. The manufacture, possession, storage and use of not more than 15
pounds of explosives or blasting agents in educational, governmental or
industrial laboratories for instructional or research purposes when
under direct supervision of experienced, competent persons.
G. The transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents by the
United States Bureau of Mines, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
United States Secret Service or Police and Fire Departments acting in
their official capacity.
A. Manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of explosives or
blasting agents.
B. Transport explosives or blasting agents.
C. Use explosives or blasting agents.
§ 19-68 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-70
17:169
§ 19-71. General requirements.
§ 19-72. Storage.
The manufacture, storage, transportation and use of all materials in this
article shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire
Code of the State of New York.
D. Operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
E. Deliver to or receive explosives or blasting agents from a carrier at a
terminal between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
A. The manufacture of explosives or blasting agents shall be prohibited
unless such manufacture is authorized by the Chief Fire Marshal. This
shall not apply to hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal
use when not for resale.
B. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the
limits established by law as the limits of the district in which such
storage is to be prohibited, except for temporary storage for use in
connection with approved blasting operations; provided, however, that
this prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small
arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges for
explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500
pounds of explosive material.
C. The Chief Fire Marshal may limit the quantity of explosives or blasting
agents to be permitted at any location.
D. No person shall sell or display explosives or blasting agents on
highways, sidewalks, public property or in places of public assembly.
E. The Chief Fire Marshal may designate the location and specify the
maximum quantity of explosives or blasting agents which may be
loaded, unloaded, reloaded or temporarily retained at each terminal
where such operations are permitted.
F. Shipments of explosives or blasting agents delivered to carriers shall
comply with Interstate Commerce Commission regulations.
G. Carriers shall immediately notify the Chief Fire Marshal when
explosives or blasting agents are received at terminals.
§ 19-70 ISLIP CODE § 19-72
17:170
ARTICLE XII
Application of Flammable Finishes
§ 19-73. Scope.
This article shall apply to locations or areas where the following activities
are regularly done:
§ 19-74. Permit required.
A permit shall be required for the application of flammable or combustible
finishes within the scope of this article.
§ 19-75. Location of spray finish or dipping operations.
Spray finishing operations shall not be conducted in buildings used for
assembly, education, institutional or residential occupancies except in a
room designed for said purpose, protected with an approved extinguishing
system and of masonry construction.
§ 19-76. General requirements.
The application of flammable and combustible finishes within the scope of
this article shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate standards
of the Fire Code of the State of New York.
A. The application of flammable or combustible paint, varnish, lacquer,
stain or other flammable or combustible liquid applied as a spray by
whatever means in continuous or intermittent processes.
B. Dip tank operations in which articles or materials are passed through
contents of tanks, vats or containers of flammable or combustible
liquids, including coating, finishing, treating and similar processes.
§ 19-73 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-76
17:171

ARTICLE XIII
Automobile Undercoating
§ 19-77. Scope.
A. Automobile undercoating spray operations conducted in areas having
adequate natural or mechanical ventilation may be exempt from the
provisions of Subsection B of this section, on approval by the Chief Fire
Marshal, when using undercoating materials which are not more
hazardous than kerosene or undercoating materials using only solvents
having a flash point in excess of 100° F.
B. Undercoating spray operations not conforming to Subsection A of this
section shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Article XII.
§ 19-77 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-77
17:173

ARTICLE XIV
Combustible and Flammable Liquids
§ 19-78. Scope. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
This article shall apply to the storage, handling, and use of combustible
and flammable liquids as defined herein. This article shall not apply to any
compressed gases or cryogenic liquids.
§ 19-79. Definitions. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
As used in this article. the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — A liquid having a closed cup flash point below 100º
F. (38° C.). Flammable liquids are further categorized into a group known
as Class I Liquids. The Class I category is subdivided as follows:
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID — A liquid having a closed cup flash point at or
above 100° F. (38° C.). Combustible liquids shall be subdivided as follows
§ 19-80. Permit required. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A permit shall be obtained for any of the following:
Class IA. Liquids having a flash point below 73° F. (23° C.) and having a
boiling point below 100° F. (38° C.).
A.
Class IB. Liquids having a flash point below 73° F. (23° C.) and having a
boiling point at or above 100° F. (38° C.).
B.
Class IC. Liquids having a flash point at or above 73° F. (23° C.) and
below 100° F. (38° C.).
C.
Class II. Liquids having a closed cup flash at or above 100° F. (38° C.)
and below 140° F. (60° C.).
A.
Class IIIA. Liquids having a closed cup flash at or above 140° F. (60° C.)
and below 200° F. (93° C.).
B.
Class IIIB. Liquids having a closed cup flash at or above 200° F. (93°
C.).
C.
A. Storage, handling or use of Class I liquids, as defined by this article, in
excess of five gallons in a building or in excess of 10 gallons outside of
any building, except that no permit shall be required for the following:
(1) For the storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor
vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating
plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the Chief Fire Marshal,
would cause an unsafe condition.
§ 19-78 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-80
17:175
§ 19-81. General requirements. [Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
The storage, handling, use and dispensing of flammable and combustible
liquids within the scope of Article XIV shall be in accordance with the
appropriate standards of the Fire Code of New York State.
§ 19-82. Dispensing into tanks and containers. [Amended 5-14-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
No transfer of any flammable or combustible liquids shall be made into
portable containers unless the contents can be poured without spilling, the
container is listed for such use and the container is being maintained in a
good condition.
§ 19-83. Transfer into tanks and containers.
Flammable and combustible liquids shall not be transferred from one tank
or container to another tank or container, either above or below ground,
fixed, buried, portable or mobile, unless all openings are securely plugged,
capped, equipped with approved devices to prevent the discharge of the
flammable or combustible liquid or connected for the actual transfer of said
liquid and/or vapors.
§ 19-84. (Reserved)
§ 19-85. Parking and garaging.
(2) For the storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar
flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance,
painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
B. Storage, handling or use of Class II or class IIIA liquids, as defined by
this article, in excess of 25 gallons in a building or in excess of 60
gallons outside of a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with
oil-burning equipment.
C. Storage, handling or use of Class III Liquids, as defined by this article,
in tanks or portable tanks for fueling motor vehicles at motor fueldispensing
facilities or where connected to fuel-burning equipment.
(1) Exception: Fuel oil and used motor oil used for space heating or
water heating.
D. To install, alter, remove, abandon or otherwise dispose of any tank or
container, above- or below-ground, for the storage of more than 60
gallons of combustible or flammable liquid. This shall not apply to fuel
oil tanks of 1,000 gallons' capacity or less which supply heating units
only.
E. To operate an automotive or fleet motor-fuel dispensing facility.
§ 19-80 ISLIP CODE § 19-85
17:176
A. No tank vehicle containing flammable, combustible, corrosive,
poisonous, toxic or hazardous liquids, gases or residues of the same
shall be left unattended on any street, highway, avenue or alley,
provided that this shall not prevent a driver from the necessary absence
from the truck in connection with the delivery of his load, except that
during actual discharge of the commodity, some responsible person
shall be present at the vehicle; nor shall it prevent stops for meals
during the day or night if the street is well lighted at point of parking.
B. Tank vehicles as described above shall not be parked out-of-doors at any
one point for longer than one hour, except off the streets and at least 25
feet from any building.
C. Tank vehicles as described above shall not be parked or garaged in any
building other than those specifically approved for such use by the
Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-85 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-85
17:177

ARTICLE XV
Repair Garages
§ 19-86. General requirements.
Repair garages shall conform to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following provisions.
§ 19-87. Permit required.
No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure as a place of business
for the purpose of servicing or repairing any motor vehicle therein without
a permit.
§ 19-88. Construction, operation and maintenance.
The construction, operation and maintenance of all vehicle repair garages
shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire and
Buildings Codes of New York State.
§ 19-86 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-88
17:179

ARTICLE XVI
Hazardous Chemicals and Materials
§ 19-89. Scope.
This article shall apply to materials not otherwise covered in this chapter
which are highly flammable or which may react to cause fires or explosions
or which, by their presence, create or augment a fire or explosion hazard or
which, because of their toxicity, flammability or liability to explosion, render
fire fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult, and also to flammable liquids
which are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive
compounds or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or with
sufficient evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals shall
include such materials as flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive
materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals, highly toxic
materials and poisonous gases, as defined in § 19-90. In addition, this article
shall include all materials listed in both Parts 112 and 261 of Title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations.
§ 19-90. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORROSIVE — A chemical that causes visible destruction of, or irreversible
alterations in, living tissue by chemical action at the point of contact. A
chemical shall be considered corrosive if, when tested on the intact skin
of albino rabbits by the methods described in DOTn 49 CFR 173.137, such
chemical destroys or changes irrepressibly the structure of the tissue at the
point of contact following an exposure period of four hours. This term does
not refer to action on inanimate objects.[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
FLAMMABLE SOLID — Includes a solid substance, other than one classified
as an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through
absorption of moisture, through spontaneous chemical change or as a result
of retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which has and
ignition temperature below 212° F. (100° C.) or which burns so vigorously
and persistently when ignited as to create a serious hazard. A chemical
shall be considered a flammable solid in accordance with the test method
of CPSC 16 CFR Part 1500.44, if it ignites and burns with a self-sustained
flame at a rate greater than 0.0866 inch (2.2 mm) per second along its major
axis.[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
HIGHLY TOXIC MATERIAL — A material which produces a lethal dose
or lethal concentration which falls within any of the following
categories:[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 50 milligrams or
less per kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino
rats weighting between 200 and 300 grams each.
A.
§ 19-89 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-90
17:181
OXIDIZER — A material that readily yields oxygen of other oxidizing gas,
or that readily reacts to promote or initiate combustion of combustible
materials and, if heated or contaminated, can result in vigorous selfsustained
decomposition.[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-201922]
POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE CHEMICAL — Includes any chemical
substance, other than one classified as an explosive or blasting agent, which
has a tendency to be unstable and which can be exploded by heat or shock
or a combination thereof.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Includes any material or combination of
materials that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
SEALED SOURCE — A quantity of radiation so enclosed as to prevent the
escape of any radioactive material but at the same time permitting radiation
to come out for use.
TOXIC — A chemical falling within any of the following categories:[Added
5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-91. Permit required.
A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 200 milligrams
or less per kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous
contact for 24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24 hours) with the
bare skin of albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.
B.
A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air of 200
parts per million by volume or less of gas or vapor, or 2 milligrams per
liter or less of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous
inhalation for one hour (or less if death occurs within one hour) to
albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.
C.
A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 50
milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 500 milligrams per
kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino rats
weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.
A.
A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 200
milligrams per kilogram but not more than 1,000 milligrams per
kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous contact for
24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of
albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.
B.
A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LD50) in air of more
than 200 parts per million, but not more than 2,000 parts per million
by volume or less of gas or vapor, or more than 2 milligrams per liter
but not more than 20 milligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when
administered by continuous inhalation for one hour (or less if death
occurs within one hour) to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300
grams each.
C.
22.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed the former definition of "poisonous gas," which
immediately followed this definition.
§ 19-90 ISLIP CODE § 19-91
17:182
A. A permit shall be required for the storage or handling of hazardous
materials as set forth in Table 19-91 or otherwise defined in the Fire
Code of New York State in excess of the amounts listed in Table 19-91.
[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
Table 19-91
Permit Amounts For Hazardous Materials
Type of Material Amount
Corrosive
Liquids 55 gallons
Solids 1,000 pounds
Flammable materials
Solids 100 pounds
Highly toxic materials
Liquids Any amount
Solids Any amount
Oxidizing materials
Liquids
Class 4 Any amount
Class 3 1 gallon
Class 2 10 gallons
Class 1 55 gallons
Solids
Class 4 Any amount
Class 3 10 pounds
Class 2 100 pounds
Class 1 500 pounds
Organic Peroxides
Liquids
Class I Any amount
Class II Any amount
Class III 1 gallon
Class IV 2 gallon
Class V No permit required
Solids
Class I Any amount
Class II Any amount
§ 19-91 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-91
17:183
Table 19-91
Permit Amounts For Hazardous Materials
Type of Material Amount
Class III 10 pounds
Class IV 20 pounds
Class V No permit required
Pyrophoric materials
Liquids Any Amount
Solids Any Amount
Toxic Materials
Liquids 10 gallons
Solids 100 pounds
Unstable (reactive) materials
Liquids
Class 4 Any amount
Class 3 Any amount
Class 2 5 gallons
Class 1 10 gallons
Solids
Class 4 Any amount
Class 3 Any amount
Class 2 50 pounds
Class 1 100 pounds
Water-reactive materials
Liquids
Class 3 Any amount
Class 2 5 gallon
Class 1 55 gallons
Solids
Class 3 Any amount
Class 2 50 pounds
Class 1 500 pounds
B. A permit shall be required for the storage or handling at any installation
of more than one microcurie of radium not contained in a sealed source
or more than one millicurie of radium or other radioactive material in a
sealed source or sources or any amount of radioactive material for
§ 19-91 ISLIP CODE § 19-91
17:184
§ 19-92. General requirements.
which a specific license from the United States Atomic Energy
Commission is required in accordance with nationally recognized good
practice.
C. Every permittee shall display on the premises storing, handling,
manufacturing or using commodities within the scope of this article
approved warning signs/symbols at all entrances to such premises, as
directed by the Chief Fire Marshal.
A. The manufacture, storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals
shall be safeguarded with such protective facilities as public safety
requires.
B. The Chief Fire Marshal may require the separation or isolation of any
chemical that, in combination with other substances, may bring about a
fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous gas. The
Chief Fire Marshal may require separation from other storage,
occupancies or buildings when the quantity stored constitutes a
material hazard.
C. The manufacture, storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals
and materials shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of
the Fire Code of New York State, except that more restrictive
requirements, as specified in this article, shall take precedence over
any Fire Code of New York State requirements.
D. The Chief Fire Marshal may require the submission of additional
documentation relating to the physical and chemical properties of
hazardous chemicals and materials.
E. The management or owner of any building or facility wherein hazardous
chemicals or materials are stored or handled shall submit an inventory
of such chemicals or materials at least annually or whenever the
quantity of the same shall change substantially.
F. Only chemicals or materials listed in the inventory required in
Subsection E above shall be stored or handled unless the Chief Fire
Marshal has first given written permission for the storage or handling
of additional chemicals or materials.
G. Dumping of hazardous materials. No person shall dump, spill or in any
other fashion place or cause to be dumped, spilled or placed any
flammable liquid, combustible liquid or hazardous material, as defined
in this chapter and chapter 66, upon the surface or into the subsurface
land, aquifer or waterway, anywhere in the Town of Islip. [Added
5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-91 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-93
17:185
§ 19-93. Oxidizing materials.
Packaged oxidizing materials shall be stored in dry locations and separated
from stored organic materials. Bulk, oxidizing materials shall not be stored
on or against wooden surfaces.
§ 19-94. Radioactive materials.
§ 19-95. Potentially explosive materials.
A. Durable, clearly visible signs warning of radiation dangers shall be
placed at all entrances to areas or rooms where radioactive materials
are used or stored. In addition, each container in which radioactive
materials are used, stored or transported shall bear a durable, clearly
visible, appropriate warning sign. Such signs shall bear the threebladed
radiation symbol in magenta or purple on a yellow background
in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.
B. When not in use, radioactive materials shall be kept in adequately
shielded fire-resistant containers of such design that the gamma
radiation will not exceed 200 milliroentgens per hour or equivalent at
any point of readily accessible surface.
A. Explosives and blasting agents shall not be stored in the same building
or in close proximity to potentially explosive chemicals.
B. Organic peroxides.
(1) A detached, well-isolated, ventilated and unheated storage building
constructed with walls having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than two hours, a noncombustible floor and lightweight insulated
roof shall be provided for the storage of 50 pounds or more of
organic peroxides. If not adequately protected by a fast-acting
deluge-type automatic sprinkler system, the storage building shall
be located the following minimum distances from flammable liquid
storage, combustible materials in the open and from any other
building or highway:
Weight of Organic Peroxide
(pounds)
Distance
(feet)
50 to 100 75
100 to 500 100
500 to 1,000 125
1,000 to 3,000 200
3,000 to 5,000 300
(2) The organic peroxides shall be stored in the original shipping
containers (Interstate Commerce Commission containers). Care
shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of these
§ 19-93 ISLIP CODE § 19-95
17:186
chemicals. Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be
prominently placed in the storage and processing areas.
C. Nitromethane.
(1) A suitable isolated outdoor storage area shall be provided for
nitromethane. Hazardous processing shall not be permitted in the
vicinity of this storage area. Nitromethane shall be stored in drums
in which it is received or in an underground tank with suitable
corrosion protection and a minimum of two feet of earth over the
tank or in barricaded tanks above ground. If the drum storage is
not adequately protected by a fast-acting deluge-type automatic
sprinkler system, the storage of 2,000 pounds or more shall be
located the following minimum distances from inhabited buildings:
Approximate Weight
(pounds)
Number of
Drums
Distance
(feet)
Beginning at 2,000 4 100
Over 2,000 to 10,000 20 200
Over 10,000 to 20,000 40 300
Over 20,000 to 40,000 80 400
Over 40,000 to 80,000 160 500
(2) Care shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of
this chemical. Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be
prominently placed in the storage and processing areas.
D. Ammonium nitrate.
(1) Each storage pile of bags or other authorized packages and
containers of such materials shall not exceed 12 feet in height, 12
feet in width and 30 feet in length. Such pile units shall be
separated by a clear space of not less than 36 inches in width from
the base to the top of the piles, serving as cross aisles. At least one
service or main aisle in the storage area shall be not less than four
feet in width. A clearance of not less than 30 inches shall be
maintained from building walls and partitions and of not less than
36 inches from ceilings or roof structural members, with a
minimum of 19 inches below sprinklers.
(2) Ammonium nitrate storage areas shall be separated by a space of
30 feet or by a tight noncombustible partition from storages of
organic chemicals, corrosive liquids, compressed gases, flammable
and combustible materials or other contaminating substances such
as sulphur, coal, flour and metallic powders such as zinc, copper
and magnesium where storage of such materials is permitted with
ammonium nitrate.
§ 19-95 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-95
17:187
§ 19-96. Highly toxic materials.
§ 19-97. Poisonous gases.
(3) Quantities of ammonium nitrate or ammonium nitrate fertilizer,
having no organic coating, in the form of crystals, flakes, grains or
prills, including fertilizer grade, dynamite grade, nitrous oxide
grade and technical grade ammonium nitrate and ammonium
nitrate phosphate (containing 60% or more ammonium nitrate by
weight) of more than 50 tons' total weight shall be stored in a wellventilated
building of fire-resistive or noncombustible construction
or in buildings of other types of construction equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system. In populated areas,
quantities of 2,500 tons or more shall be stored in well-ventilated
buildings of fire-restrictive or noncombustible construction
equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, and no
combustible materials or ammonium nitrate sensitizing
contaminants shall be stored in this building.
(4) Storage of ammonium nitrate, coated or mixed with organic
anticaking materials, except compounded blasting agents, shall not
be permitted in populated and congested areas. Outside such
areas, quantities of 500 tons or less may be stored in wellventilated
buildings of fire-resistive or noncombustible
construction equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler
system.
A. Highly toxic materials shall be segregated from other chemicals and
combustible and flammable substances by storage in a room or
compartment separated from other areas by walls and floor and ceiling
assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours.
The storage room shall be provided with adequate natural or
mechanical ventilation to the outside atmosphere. The floor of said
room shall be impermeable to the materials being stored within.
B. Legible warning signs and placards stating the nature and location of
the highly toxic material shall be posted at all entrances to areas where
such materials are stored or used.
A. Storage of poisonous gases shall be in rooms of at least one hour's fireresistant
construction and having natural or mechanical ventilation
adequate to remove leaking gas. Such ventilation shall not discharge to
a point where the gases may endanger any person.
B. Legible warning signs stating the nature of hazard shall be placed at all
entrances to locations where poisonous gases are stored or used.
§ 19-95 ISLIP CODE § 19-98
17:188
§ 19-98. Corrosive liquids.
Satisfactory provisions shall be made for containing and neutralizing or
safely flushing away leakage of corrosive liquids which may occur during
storage or handling.
§ 19-98.1. (Reserved)
§ 19-98 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-98.1
17:189

ARTICLE XVII
Liquefied Petroleum Gases
§ 19-99. General provisions.
§ 19-100. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLIANCES — Includes all gas-burning appliances for use with liquefied
petroleum gas.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS EQUIPMENT — Includes all apparatus,
appliances, piping and equipment pertinent to the use of liquefied
petroleum gas.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS SYSTEM — An assembly consisting of one or
more containers with a means for conveying liquefied petroleum gas from
the container(s) to dispensing or consuming devices, either continuously
or intermittently, and which incorporates components intended to achieve
control of quantity, flow, pressure or state, either liquid or vapor.
QUALIFIED PERSONNEL — Qualified persons holding a certificate of
fitness issued by the Chief Fire Marshal of the Town of Islip.
§ 19-101. Filing of plans and reports.
A. Application of article. The provisions of this article shall apply to all
uses of liquefied petroleum gas and installation of all apparatus, piping
and equipment pertinent to systems for such uses.
B. Deviations. Deviations from the appropriate standards of the Fire Code
of New York State or the provisions of this article as otherwise
prescribed, when it shall have been conclusively proven to the Chief
Fire Marshal that such deviations meet the performance requirements
of this article, shall constitute compliance with this article.
A. Plans.
(1) Plans for all new fixed liquefied petroleum gas installations in
excess of 100 gallons' water capacity must be submitted to the
Chief Fire Marshal's office for approval prior to installation. The
plan shall be a plot plan showing locations of buildings and
property lines and all pertinent dimensions and including the
proposed location of containers, vaporizers and equipment, with
the capacities in gallons of water capacity and descriptions thereof,
submitted in duplicate. Acceptance of plans for installation does
not relieve the applicant from meeting requirements of any other
law or local law of any other authority having jurisdiction.
§ 19-99 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-101
17:191
§ 19-102. Installation and maintenance of equipment.
(2) The installation of containers or tanks in excess of 100 gallons'
water capacity shall require the issuance of written permission by
the Chief Fire Marshal.
(3) All underground liquefied petroleum gas tanks and piping are to
remain uncovered until the installation is approved by the Chief
Fire Marshal.
(4) No liquefied petroleum gas system which requires written
permission of the Chief Fire Marshal shall be utilized until an
inspection of the same has been made by the Division of Fire
Prevention and an appropriate certificate of compliance has been
issued, except when the total aggregate capacity is 200 gallons'
water capacity or less.
(5) All containers shall be installed so that all pertinent numbers and
test dates are at all times legible and readily visible whenever
possible.
(6) Any change of liquefied petroleum gas equipment from one
company to another shall require the submission of plans for
approval by the Chief Fire Marshal prior to such change of
companies.
B. Temporary heat location reports. Every installation of liquefied
petroleum gas used for temporary heat must be reported to the Chief
Fire Marshal prior to installation.
A. All equipment shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the
rules and regulations of the Chief Fire Marshal of the Town of Islip and
the appropriate standards of the Fire Code of the State of New York. It
shall be unlawful to install, service, handle or offer for sale, in any form,
liquefied petroleum gas and related equipment that does not conform to
the rules and regulations of the Chief Fire Marshal of the Town of Islip
and the appropriate standards of the Fire Code of the State of New
York.
B. No person, firm or corporation, except the owner or those authorized by
the owner to do so, shall sell, fill, refill, deliver or permit to be delivered
or use in any manner any liquefied petroleum gas container for any gas
or compound or for any other purpose whatsoever. Only containers
designed for liquefied petroleum gas may be filled with liquefied
petroleum gas. Filling of liquefied petroleum gas containers with any
other gas or compound is prohibited.
C. Cylinders used for liquefied petroleum gas shall be painted white, silver
or other light-reflecting color as approved by the Chief Fire Marshal. It
shall be unlawful for any supplier to refill any container that has been
painted any other color.
§ 19-101 ISLIP CODE § 19-102
17:192
§ 19-103. Portable cylinders and containers.
D. The gas supplier shall have the right to refuse to fill any container that
does not fully conform to all provisions of the Town of Islip Fire
Prevention Local Law or one that has been involved in a fire or is
burned or scorched.
E. Replacement of parts on containers, regulators or related equipment
shall be made by qualified personnel only.
F. Peening of weld leaks is prohibited.
G. Tanks, cylinders or other storage vessels which previously contained
gases other than liquefied petroleum gas, such as but not limited to
freon, acetylene or hydrogen, shall not be revalved and used for
liquefied petroleum gases.
A. Portable vapor withdrawal cylinders with water capacities greater than
2 1/2 pounds which are or will be owned by the user or intended user
are not to be filled or refilled unless the cylinder has been properly
tested or requalified in accordance with United States Department of
Transportation regulations and has attached thereto a warning label
approved by the Chief Fire Marshal. Cylinder(s) shall not be released to
the owner or his representative by the seller or refiller until it has been
determined that the cylinder has not been filled beyond acceptable
limits (42% of its water weight capacity), is free of leaks and is safe for
use or continued use.
B. Containers, except those used in liquid withdrawal service up to and
including 40 pounds' propane capacity, shall be checked for leaks
immediately after filling. The test will be done by a qualified person who
has a certificate of fitness by checking each connection with a soapwater
solution or by total submersion in a water-filled container. Should
a leak exist, the container shall be emptied immediately and marked
with paint or indelible marker or other suitable means to positively
identify a container that leaks. A leaking container shall not be
transported from the filling site while it contains any product, either
liquefied or vapor.
C. All portable Department of Transportation and Interstate Commerce
Commission containers shall have the date of manufacture permanently
stamped on the collar; if permanently attached, on the cylinder; and, in
the case of containers more than 12 years old, shall have the date of the
most recent inspection, month/year, marked on the collar or cylinder.
D. Every person, firm or corporation offering filled liquefied petroleum gas
cylinders for sale or resale shall have a certified scale on the premises
to ensure that each portable cylinder containing liquefied petroleum
gas has not been filled beyond its safe capacity. Each such cylinder shall
be weighed before delivery to the purchaser to ensure that the cylinder
is not filled beyond acceptable limits.
§ 19-102 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-103
17:193
§ 19-104. Location of cylinders.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall establish standard rules and regulations as
to the location of all containers installed for the purpose of transferring
liquefied petroleum gas from one container to another. These rules and
regulations shall prevent the establishment or proliferation of said facilities
in congested areas or adjacent to important buildings or those with a
moderate or high life hazard.
§ 19-105. Permit required.
E. Container storage forbidden.
(1) No container of liquefied petroleum gas, either in use or in storage,
will be permitted inside or on the roof or balcony of any occupied
building or in or on any construction attached to an occupied
building, except as permitted in Subsections F and G below.
(2) Industrial lift trucks will comply with the provisions of the
appropriate standards of the NFPA.
(3) Storage of containers must be outside the building, at least 25 feet
from any building. Storage is to be in either a noncombustible top
and bottom vented structure or surrounded by a substantial metal
fence enclosure, such enclosure to be adequately secured against
access by unauthorized persons.
F. Department of Transportation specification cylinders with a maximum
water capacity of 2 1/2 pounds, used with completely self-contained
hand torches and similar applications, may be stored or displayed in a
building frequented by the public. The quantity of liquefied petroleum
gas shall not exceed 200 pounds.
G. Temporary or emergency use of liquefied petroleum gas equipment in
occupied or unoccupied buildings shall be approved by the Chief Fire
Marshal prior to use. Any tank used inside any building shall be
equipped with an excess flow valve to shut off the flow of gas if a hose or
connector is severed.
A. Permit required. Locations where propane is sold, stored for rental or
resale and/or transferred from one vessel to another must secure a
permit to operate from the Chief Fire Marshal of the Town of Islip.
B. Application for permit. Applications for permits shall be made to the
Chief Fire Marshal on forms provided and shall include the applicant's
answers in full to inquiries set forth on such forms. Applications for
permits shall be accompanied by such data as may be required by the
Chief Fire Marshal and fees as may be required by the Town of Islip.
C. Review and issuance. The Chief Fire Marshal shall review all
applications submitted, determine compliance with applicable
provision of the code and issue permits as required. If an application for
§ 19-103 ISLIP CODE § 19-105
17:194
§ 19-106. Transportation.
§ 19-107. Certificates of fitness.
a permit is rejected by the Chief Fire Marshal, he shall advise the
applicant of the reasons for such rejection.
D. Display of permits. A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise
readily accessible at each place of operation or carried by the permit
holder, as specified by the Chief Fire Marshal.
E. Permits shall be given full force and effect for a period of one year.
A. No person, firm or corporation, whose main or corporate offices are
located within the Town of Islip, shall use or cause to be used any motor
vehicle, tank truck, tank semitrailer or tank truck trailer for the
transportation of liquefied petroleum gas unless a permit to operate any
such vehicle has first been secured from the Chief Fire Marshal of the
Town of Islip. No permit shall be required under this section for any
motor vehicle that is used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum
gas, in containers not larger than 10 gallons' water capacity each
(approximately 34 pounds' propane capacity), with aggregate water
capacity of 25 gallons (approximately 87 pounds' propane capacity) or
when used in permanently installed containers on the vehicle as motor
fuel.
B. The permit shall be given full force and effect for a period of three
years. An approved marking shall be displayed on the vehicle for which
said permit is issued.
C. The transportation of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders, either empty or
full, is prohibited in the trunk of any passenger vehicle.
D. Cylinders larger than 10 gallons' water capacity or an aggregate in
excess of 25 gallons' water capacity shall not be transported in cars,
vans or any type of enclosed vehicle or in the enclosed area of any
vehicle.
E. Every person, firm or corporation holding a permit pursuant to
Subsection A of this section shall maintain an emergency response plan,
so that a qualified service person will be at the location of any reported
liquefied petroleum gas leak not more than one hour after notification
has been made to the permit holder. This plan shall include not more
than two telephone numbers for such notification that will be available
every day and at all times to the permittee's customers, the Division of
Fire Prevention, the Fire and Police Departments and the general
public. This plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Division of
Fire Prevention. Failure to maintain said plan, or failure to have a
qualified service person at the reported location of a leak within one
hour of notification, shall be cause for revocation of the permit required
by Subsection A of this section.
§ 19-105 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-107
17:195
A. Certificates of fitness required. Except as set forth in Subsection M
below, any person filling containers at locations where liquefied
petroleum gas is sold and/or transferred from one vessel into another
shall hold a valid certificate of fitness issued by the Chief Fire Marshal.
Such certificate is subject to revocation by the Chief Fire Marshal at
any time where the certificate holder displays evidence of
noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Application. All applications for a certificate of fitness shall be filed with
the Chief Fire Marshal on forms provided by the Chief Fire Marshal and
accompanied by the applicable fees.
C. Proof of qualifications. Every person applying for a certificate of fitness
shall furnish satisfactory proof to the Chief Fire Marshal that he is
familiar with materials, formulas, tools, techniques, standards, laws,
local laws, recognized good practices, safety precautions and
manufacturer's recommendations pertaining to the particular system,
materials, devices or operations he will be involved with and for which
the certificate of fitness is issued. He shall further prove that he is
physically competent to perform any and all actions necessary or
incidental to the operation for which the certificate of fitness is issued.
D. Investigation and examination. The Chief Fire Marshal shall investigate
every new application for a certificate of fitness. The investigation shall
include a written examination regarding the use, makeup and handling
of liquefied petroleum gas, and such examination shall include a
practical test. When the Chief Fire Marshal determines that the
applicant conforms to all the requirements of this article, he shall issue
the certificate of fitness.
E. The certificate of fitness shall be given full force and effect for a period
of three years.
F. Refusal of certificate of fitness. When the Chief Fire Marshal
determines that a candidate has failed an examination for a certificate
of fitness, he shall refuse to issue the certificate of fitness. Any
applicant may not apply again for the certificate of fitness within a tenday
period following the examination.
G. Transferability. A certificate of fitness shall not be transferable.
H. Renewal of certificate of fitness. Applications for renewal of a
certificate of fitness shall be filed in the same manner as an application
for an original certificate. Each such application shall be accompanied
by applicable fees. The granting of a renewal of a certificate of fitness
shall be accomplished in the same manner as for an original
certification of fitness, except that any person continuously engaged in
any activity for which a certificate of fitness is required will not, upon
renewal, be required to take a written examination.
I. Certificates of fitness issued. A certificate of fitness will be required of
any person performing the following activities:
§ 19-107 ISLIP CODE § 19-107
17:196
§ 19-108. Reporting of incidents.
Any incident involving liquefied petroleum gas, including but not limited
to leaks, fires, explosions or any other accidental discharge into the
atmosphere in excess of 8.5 cubic feet (one pound propane) must be
reported to the Chief Fire Marshal by the responsible party or his
representative. The initial report may be made by telephone and followed by
(1) Filling containers permanently located and installed outdoors and
equipped with appurtenances for filling by a cargo vehicle at
consumer sites.
(2) Selling liquefied petroleum gas or transferring liquefied petroleum
gas from one vessel into another.
J. Change of address. Each person holding a certificate of fitness shall
notify the Chief Fire Marshal, in writing, of any change in his business,
residential or other notification address within 10 days after such
change. Failure on the part of a person to give such notification shall
constitute grounds for revocation of said certificate of fitness.
K. Contents of certificate of fitness. A certificate of fitness issued by the
Chief Fire Marshal shall be in the form of an identification card. Said
card shall contain the following information to be valid:
(1) The purpose for which the certificate of fitness has been issued.
(2) The date of certificate of fitness issuance and the date of expiration.
(3) Other information as may be necessary to properly identify the
person to whom the certificate of fitness is issued.
(4) The signature of the person to whom the certificate of fitness is
issued.
(5) The name and signature of the Chief Fire Marshal who issued the
certificate of fitness or the Chief Fire Marshal's name and the
countersignature of his designated representative.
(6) Printed thereon, in bold type, the following: "THIS CERTIFICATE
DOES NOT EXCLUSIVELY RECOMMEND THE BEARER."
L. Requirement to display certificate of fitness. Any person to whom a
certificate of fitness has been granted in conformance with this article
shall, upon request, produce and show proper identification and his
certificate of fitness to anyone for whom he seeks to render his services
or to the Chief Fire Marshal.
M. A certificate of fitness, as otherwise required by this section, shall not
be required for any person selling, filling or delivering liquefied
petroleum gas who is the holder of a valid commercial driver's license
with a hazardous material endorsement.
§ 19-107 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-108
17:197
a written report. Under no circumstances shall a report be filed later than
24 hours after the incident.
§ 19-109. (Reserved)
§ 19-110. Storage, handling, installation, use and transfer.
The storage, handling, installation, use and transfer of liquefied petroleum
gas shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire Code
of New York State, except that more restrictive requirements as specified
in this article shall take precedence over any Fire Code of the State of New
York requirements.
§ 19-108 ISLIP CODE § 19-110
17:198
ARTICLE XVIII
Lumberyards and Woodworking Plants
§ 19-111. Permit required.
No person shall store in excess of 100,000 board feet of lumber without a
permit.
§ 19-112. Open yard storage.
§ 19-113. Operational fire hazards.
§ 19-114. Woodworking plants.
A. Lumber shall be piled with due regard to stability of piles and in no case
higher than 20 feet.
B. Driveways between and around lumber piles shall be at least 15 feet
wide and maintained free from accumulation of rubbish, equipment or
other articles or materials. Driveways shall be so spaced that a
maximum grid system unit of 50 feet by 150 feet is produced.
C. Permanent lumber storage, operating under a permit, shall be
surrounded with a suitable fence at least six feet high, unless storage is
within a building.
A. The burning of shavings, sawdust and refuse material shall be
permitted only under boilers, in furnaces or in incinerators or refuse
burners safely constructed and located. Stacks shall be provided with
approved spark arresters having openings not greater than 3/4 inch or
other effective means provided which will eliminate the danger from
sparks, such as an expansion chamber, baffle walls or other effective
arrangement. At boiler or other points where sawdust or shavings are
used as fuel, a storage bin of noncombustible construction with raised
sill shall be provided.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited except in specified safe locations in
buildings. Large "No Smoking" signs shall be painted on exterior
building walls and on signs erected at driveway edges. "No Smoking"
signs shall be posted throughout all buildings except in specific
locations designated as safe for smoking purposes.
A. Sawmills, planing mills and all other woodworking plants shall require
a permit from the Division of Fire Prevention.
B. All wood working plants and lumberyards shall be constructed,
operated and maintained in accordance with the appropriate standards
of the NFPA.
§ 19-111 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-114
17:199

ARTICLE XIX
Compressed Gas and Cryogenic Fluid
[Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-115. Scope.
This article shall apply to the storage, handling, and use of compressed
gases and cryogenic liquids as defined herein. Liquefied petroleum gases
and compressed gases uses in conjunction with welding or cutting
operations are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article.
§ 19-116. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPRESSED GAS —
CRYOGENIC FLUID — A fluid having a boiling point lower than -130° F.
(-89.9° C.) at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmosphere (psia) (an absolute
pressure of 101.3 kPa).
§ 19-117. Permit required.
A material, or mixture of materials that:
Is a gas at 68° F. (20° C.) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) of pressure;
and
(1)
Has a boiling point of 68° F. (20° C.) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa)
which is either liquefied, nonliquified or in solution, except those
gases which have no other health- or physical-hazard properties
are not considered to be compressed until the pressure in the
packaging exceeds 41 psia (282 kPa) at 68° F. (20° C.).
(2)
A.
The states of a compressed gas are categorized as follows:
Nonliquified compressed gases are gases, other than those in
solution, which are in packaging under the charged pressure and
are entirely gaseous at a temperature of 68° F. (20° C.).
(1)
Liquified compressed gases are gases that, in a packaging under
the charged pressure, are partially liquid at a temperature of 68° F.
(20° C.).
(2)
Compressed gases in solution are nonliquified gases that are
dissolved in a solvent.
(3)
Compressed gas mixture consist of a mixture of two or more
compressed gases contained in a packaging, the hazard properties
of which are represented by the properties of the mixture as a
whole.
(4)
B.
§ 19-115 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-117
17:201
A. Compressed gas.
(1) A permit shall be required for the storage, use or handling at
normal temperature and pressure (NTP) of compressed gases in
excess of the amounts listed in Table 19-117A.
(a) Exception: Vehicles equipped for and using compressed gas as
fuel for propelling the vehicle.
(2) A permit shall be required where the amount of compressed gases
in use or storage exceed the amounts listed in Table 19-117A, to
install, repair damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out
of service, close or substantially modify a compressed gas system.
(a) Exceptions:
[1] Routine maintenance.
[2] For emergency repair work performed on an emergency
basis, application for a permit shall be made within two
working days of the commencement of work.
Table 19-117A
Permit Amounts for Compressed Gases
Type of Gas
Amount (Cubic feet at
NTP)
Corrosive 200
Flammable (except
cryogenic fluids and
liquified petroleum gases)
200
Highly toxic Any amount
Inert and simple asphyxiant 6,000
Oxidizing (including ormen) 504
Pyrophoric Any amount
Toxic Any amount
B. Carbon dioxide systems used in beverage dispensing applications. A
permit shall be required for carbon dioxide systems used in beverage
dispensing applications having more than 100 pounds of carbon
dioxide.
C. Cryogenic fluids.
(1) A permit shall be required to produce, store, transport on site, use,
handle or dispense cryogenic fluids in excess of the amounts listed
in Table 19-117B.
§ 19-117 ISLIP CODE § 19-117
17:202
§ 19-118. (Reserved)
(a) Exception: Permits are not required for vehicles equipped for
and using cryogenic fluids as a fuel for propelling the vehicle or
for refrigerating the lading.
(2) A permit shall be required for installation of or alteration to
outdoor stationary cryogenic fluid storage systems where the
system capacity exceeds the amounts listed in Table 19-117B.
Maintenance performed in accordance with the Fire Code of New
York State is not considered to be an alteration and does not
require a permit.
Table 19-117B
Permit Amounts For Cryogenic Fluids
Type of Cryogenic
Fluid
Inside Buildings
(gallons)
Outside Buildings
(gallons)
Flammable More than 1 60
Inert 60 500
Oxidizing (includes
oxygen)
10 50
Physical or health
hazard not indicated
above
Any amount Any amount
§ 19-117 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-118
17:203

ARTICLE XX
Places of Assembly
§ 19-119. Permit required.
§ 19-120. Plan of exitways and aisles.
A plan showing the location of exitways and of aisles leading thereto shall
be submitted for approval to the Chief Fire Marshal, and an approved copy
shall be kept on display in the premises.
§ 19-121. Maximum allowable occupancy.
§ 19-122. Construction, maintenance and operation.
The construction, repair, maintenance and operation of every place of
assembly shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire
and Building Codes of New York.
§ 19-123. through § 19-124. (Reserved)
A. No place of assembly as defined in Subsection B of this section shall be
maintained, operated or used as such without a permit, except that no
permit shall be required for any place of assembly used solely as a place
of religious worship.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — Any room, space, building or portion thereof
used for gathering together persons for such purposes as deliberation,
worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement, awaiting
transportation or similar purposes when such room, space, building or
portion thereof has a capacity of 50 persons or more or has a net area
available for use by the occupants for assembly purposes of 500 square
feet or more.
A. A maximum allowable occupancy for every place of assembly or portion
thereof shall be determined by the Chief Fire Marshal. A suitable
placard or sign, as approved by the Chief Fire Marshal, shall be
prominently displayed in each place of assembly or portion thereof,
indicating the maximum allowable occupancy. Said placard or sign shall
be readily visible to the occupants.
B. The owner, operator, managing agent, manager or person in charge of
any place of assembly shall ensure that the maximum allowable
occupancy for any place of assembly or portion thereof is never
exceeded.
§ 19-119 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-123
17:205

ARTICLE XXI
Welding and Cutting
§ 19-125. Scope.
Welding or cutting shall include gas, electric-arc or flammable liquid
welding or cutting or any combination thereof.
§ 19-126. Permit required.
§ 19-127. Operations.
All welding and cutting operations shall be conducted in accordance with
the appropriate standards of the Fire Code of New York State.
A. A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, copartnership
or owner-operator performing welding or cutting operations, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section. This permit shall not be
required for each welding or cutting job location.
B. A permit shall not be required of any company, corporation,
copartnership or owner-operator when that entity has any valid permit
from the Division of Fire Prevention and such welding or cutting is
incidental to the purposes for which said permit is issued.
C. Application for a permit required by this article shall be made by the
company, corporation, copartnership or owner-operator performing the
welding or cutting operation or by his duly authorized agent.
§ 19-125 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-127
17:207

ARTICLE XXII
Electrical Systems
§ 19-128. Scope.
This article shall apply to the installation and alteration of wiring for electric
light, heat or power and signal systems operating on 50 volts or more
but shall not apply to the electrical installations in ships, railway cars,
automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a
railway, electrical or communication utility in the exercise of its function
as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that
purpose nor to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or
repair of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by any
person engaged in electrical manufacturing as his principal business.
§ 19-129. General requirements.
§ 19-130. Electrical inspector.
The Chief Inspectors of an approved electrical inspection service are hereby
authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring
installation, devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties within
the Town of Islip where they deem it necessary for the protection of life and
property and to approve or disapprove the same. The electrical inspectors
shall make such inspections and reinspections as may be requested, in
writing, by the Chief Fire Marshal and Chief Building Inspector and, in the
event of an emergency, shall make such inspections as may be requested
orally by an officer of the Town of Islip. It shall be the duty of the electrical
inspectors to furnish written reports to the Chief Fire Marshal and Chief
Building Inspector and the owners and/or lessees of property where
defective electrical installations and equipment are found on inspection and
to authorize the issuance of a certificate of compliance when electrical
installations and equipment are in conformity with this article.
A. All electrical installations shall be in accordance with the National
Electrical Fire Code, except that aluminum wiring shall not be
permitted on the load side of the service disconnect in dwellings,
buildings or structures for which residential occupancy is a permitted
use.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed or
to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat or power until an
application for inspection has been filed with an approved electrical
inspection service. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or
cause to be connected electrical wiring for light, heat or power to any
source of electrical energy prior to the issuance of a temporary
certificate or a certificate of compliance by an approved electrical
inspection service.
§ 19-128 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-131
17:209
§ 19-131. Exemption from liability.
This article shall not subject any approved electrical inspection service or
any inspector thereof to any civil or other liability for any damage to persons
or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or
failure to inspect or reinspect or the certificates issued as herein provided.
§ 19-131 ISLIP CODE § 19-131
17:210
ARTICLE XXIII
Fireworks
§ 19-132. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Includes any combustible or explosive combination or any
substance or composition or combination of substances or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges,
toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are
used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs,
sparklers or other devices of like construction and any devices containing
any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or other devices
containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall
not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of
0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy
guns or other devices for the use of such caps, the sale and use of which
shall be permitted at all times.
§ 19-133. Sale and discharge.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
store, offer concerning sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or
explode any fireworks, provided that the Chief Fire Marshal shall have
the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of
permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the municipality,
fair associations, amusement parks and other fraternal or service
organizations. Every such display shall be handled by a competent
operator approved by the Fire Marshal of the municipality and shall be
of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion
of the Chief Fire Marshal, after proper inspection, shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person.
B. Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 14 days in
advance of the date of display. After such a privilege shall have been
granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted
hereunder shall be transferable.
C. No permit authorizing the display of fireworks shall be granted unless
the applicant thereto furnishes evidence of commercial general liability
insurance with a general aggregate limit of not less than $4,000,000
and occurrence limit of not less than $2,000,000.
D. No permit authorizing the display of fireworks shall be granted unless
the Town of Islip is named insured under the required commercial
§ 19-132 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-133
17:211
§ 19-134. Manufacture, assembly, storage and handling.
general liability insurance, and such policy shall be noncancelable
without 10 days' prior written notice to the Town of Islip.
E. The display of fireworks shall be in accordance with the appropriate
standards of the Fire Code of the State of New York as well as the
specifications set forth in the New York State Penal Law. If any conflict
exists in the requirements, the more restrictive requirement shall take
precedence.
A. A permit shall be required for the manufacture, storage, assembly and
handling of any fireworks or pyrotechnic products.
B. The manufacture, assembly, storage and handling of fireworks or
pyrotechnic products shall be in accordance with the appropriate
standards of the Fire Code of the State of New York.
§ 19-133 ISLIP CODE § 19-134
17:212
ARTICLE XXIV
Marinas and Boatyards
§ 19-135. General provisions.
Marinas and boatyards shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the appropriate standards of the Fire Code of the State of
New York.
§ 19-136. Open fires.
No open fires or lighted charcoal grills shall be permitted on any dock or
pier or on board any boat or vessel in proximity thereto.
§ 19-135 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-136
17:213

ARTICLE XXV
Multiple-Unit Dwellings and Multiple-Residence Facilities
§ 19-137. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIPLE-RESIDENCE FACILITY — Any building, structure or portion
thereof in which more than four persons, unrelated to the owner, occupy
space, rooms or suites. This shall include but not be limited to hotels,
motels, apartment houses, rooming houses, boardinghouses, garden
apartments, nursing homes, convalescent homes, adult homes and
residential board and care facilities. This shall not apply to accessory
apartments nor to condominiums nor cooperatives wherein the living units
are individually owned nor to hospitals.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING — Any building or structure which contains
three or more individual dwelling units or spaces with a common roof
or otherwise physically connected, and shall include structures commonly
known as "townhouses," "garden apartments," "motels," "hotels,"
"apartment houses" and "condominiums."
§ 19-138. Fire and smoke detection systems.
Every multiple-unit dwelling and every multiple-residence facility shall be
equipped with an approved fire and smoke detection equipment as required
by Property Maintenance Code of New York State. All detection, notification
and other equipment and devices shall be located and installed in
accordance with the standardized procedures as approved by the Chief Fire
Marshal or his designee.
§ 19-139. Units under construction.
During the course of construction of any multiple-unit dwelling or multipleresidence
facility, upon installation of water mains on the construction
site, fire hydrants shall be immediately connected and maintained in an
operative condition. Access to all hydrants by fire-fighting apparatus shall
be provided.
§ 19-140. Permit required.
A. A permit for the construction of any multiple-unit dwelling shall be
required as specified in § 19-10H herein.
B. No person, group, business, corporation or other entity shall own or
operate any multiple-residence facility unless an annual permit has
been issued by the Division of Fire Prevention. All new and existing
multiple-residence facilities must obtain a permit to operate biannually.
§ 19-137 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-140
17:215
C. All multiple-residence facilities shall be in compliance with the
appropriate standards of the Fire Code and Property Maintenance Code
of New York State.
§ 19-140 ISLIP CODE § 19-140
17:216
ARTICLE XXVI
Elevators
§ 19-141. Fire Department emergency service system; key.
§ 19-142. through § 19-153. (Reserved)
A. All elevators in buildings with elevators that have a travel distance of
more than 25 feet shall be equipped with a Fire Department emergency
service system as required by the Building Code of New York Chapter
30.
B. Any elevator equipped with the Fire Department emergency service
system shall be controlled with a key and lock cylinder which is to be
designated by the Chief Fire Marshal.
C. The owner of any building covered by this article shall supply the Fire
District in which said building is located with a key and shall, in
addition, maintain a key in an accessible location on said premises and
shall inform the local Fire District, in writing, of the location of the key.
D. The owner of any building covered by this article shall file with the
Chief Fire Marshal or his designee written proof of compliance with the
requirements set forth above no later than six months from the date of
adoption of this article by the Town of Islip and shall thereafter file
annual compliance statements with the Chief Fire Marshal or his
designee, on a form prescribed or approved by the Chief Fire Marshal.
E. This article shall be effective upon adoption, but enforcement of its
provisions shall commence six months from the date of its adoption by
the Town Board and shall be submitted upon adoption to the State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code Council for approval as
required by law.
§ 19-141 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-142
17:217

ARTICLE XXVII
Fire Protection Systems
§ 19-154. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations and standards
applicable to the installation and maintenance of fire alarm systems, fire
sprinkler systems, and other fire protective systems that require Fire
Department response so as to ensure competent standards of workmanship
and thereby lessen the possibility of false alarms resulting from
malfunctions of unrecognized installations and lack of maintenance.
§ 19-155. Definitions. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any entity which receives signals from fire
alarm systems and relays information pertaining to such fire alarm systems
to the local Fire Department Headquarters or County Regional Dispatch
Center.
CONTACT LIST — A list of names and telephone numbers for five
representatives, one of who shall be capable of reporting to the premises
within 60 minutes of being contacted. This list shall be provided by the
applicant.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen occurrence or condition that calls for
immediate action.
FALSE FIRE ALARM — An alarm of fire, other than a malicious false
alarm, which causes the response of the Fire Department when there is no
discernible fire, abnormal heat, smoke or other occurrence that constitutes
an emergency.
FIRE ALARM DEVICE — Any device, including manually operated ones,
which, when activated by fire, smoke or other emergency requiring Fire
Department response, transmits a signal to local Fire Department
headquarters or to a central alarm station and/or produces any audible or
visible signal to which the local Fire Department is expected to respond.
Excluded from this definition and from the provisions of this article are
devices designed to alert the occupants of a building of an emergency
condition therein and which do not produce any audible or visible signal
which is perceptible outside of such building.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any arrangement of fire alarm devices, connected
together and to a control panel or panels, designed so that the activation of
any one device will cause an appropriate signal to operate.
FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN — Any person, licensed by the State of New
York, who maintains, installs, repairs, tests, inspects or otherwise performs
work on fire alarm systems.
§ 19-154 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-155
17:219
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Any fire alarm or any fire sprinkler system,
fire mains, and fire hydrants. One or more single-station or interconnected
smoke detectors, without central station monitoring or an exterior
notification device, shall not be considered a fire protection system. In the
case of one premises with more than one fire alarm control panel, each fire
alarm control panel shall be considered a separate fire protection system.
In the case of multiple sprinkler risers, each group of risers protecting
the same tenancy shall be considered one fire protection system. The fire
service main and fire hydrants connected thereto shall be considered one
fire protection system.
FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — Any arrangement of sprinkler heads, valves,
piping and accessories connected together, installed within a building or
structure and intended to discharge water in the event of a fire or abnormal
heat condition within the building or structure.
FIRE WATCH — The patrol of a building or portion thereof at intervals
determined by the Fire Marshal, by one or more individuals, for the
purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs
of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the local Fire
Department when deemed necessary and authorized by the Fire Marshal.
MALICIOUS FALSE ALARM — The willful and knowing initiation or
transmission of a signal, message or other notification of an event of fire,
smoke or other emergency when no such danger exists.
REPORT OF TESTING — A report indicating that a licensed contractor
has inspected a fire protection system in accordance with the applicable
standard(s) of the NFPA. The report shall contain at least the name and
location of the premises, any deficiencies noted and/or corrected, the name
and original signature of the inspector, his/her certification that the
inspection has been properly conducted and all statements related thereto
are true and correct and additional information as may be deemed
necessary by the Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-156. Permit required.
§ 19-157. Licensing and standards.
A. Every fire protection system shall first obtain a permit to install the
system from the Division of Fire Prevention by the owner of the system.
With each application the applicant must submit the fees required and
all other paperwork deemed pertinent by the Chief Fire Marshal to
process the application.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity to maintain, install, repair, test, inspect or otherwise
perform work on any fire alarm system without first obtaining a fire
alarm installer's license from the State of New York.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity to maintain, install, repair, test, inspect or otherwise
§ 19-155 ISLIP CODE § 19-157
17:220
§ 19-158. Repair notification. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
perform work on any fire extinguisher or fixed pipe suppression system
without first obtaining a license from the Suffolk County Fire
Extinguisher Licensing Board. [Amended 5-14-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity to maintain, install, test, inspect or otherwise
perform work on any fire sprinkler system without first obtaining a
license from the Town of Islip Plumbing Board. [Added 5-14-2019 by
L.L. No. 2-2019]
D. All fire protection systems and associated equipment shall be installed,
repaired, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with the
appropriate standards of the Fire Code of the State of New York.
[Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A. Prior to repairing, modifying, testing or inspecting any fire protection
system, equipment or device, or any auxiliary system, equipment or
device connected thereto, the person conducting such work shall notify
all entities that would receive automatic notification of the activation of
the fire alarm system, equipment or device. Such entities include, but
are not limited to, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the local Fire
Department, the central station monitoring agency, and the occupants
of the building.
B. Upon completion of the repairing, modifying, testing or inspection of
any fire protection system, equipment or device, or any auxiliary
system, equipment or device connected thereto, the person conducting
the work shall notify all entities that would receive automatic
notification of the activation of the fire alarm system, equipment or
device that the work is complete, as well as the operational status of the
system, equipment or device. Such entities include, but are not limited
to, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the local Fire Department, the central
station monitoring agency, and occupants of the building.
C. Fire watch.
(1) A fire watch shall be initiated by a property owner whenever a fire
protection system is out of service and authorized by the Fire
Marshal and shall meet the following requirements:
(a) At least one dedicated person shall be required to conduct
patrols. The Fire Marshal will determine the frequency of the
patrols based on the building and occupancy. Additional
personnel shall be added as necessary to meet the interval
requirements;
(b) All personnel conducting patrols shall be at least 18 years of
age, competent to identify fire hazards, capable of effectively
§ 19-157 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-158
17:221
§ 19-159. Installation and maintenance.
§ 19-160. False alarm procedures.
communicating the need for a fire department response,
physically capable to perform patrols and self-preservation,
and familiar with the structure and the emergency plan for the
structure;
(c) No personnel assigned to conduct patrols are to be assigned
any other duties during the fire watch;
(d) All personnel assigned to conduct patrols are to be provided
with at least one means approved by the Chief Fire Marshal or
their designee for notification of the local fire department; and
(e) An activity log shall be maintained in which all personnel
conducting patrols shall document their name, the date and
time of each activity performed related to the fire watch, and a
description of each activity performed related to the fire watch.
(2) The Fire Marshal may waive the requirement of a fire watch where
there is not a substantial risk to life safety or where alternatives to
maintain an equivalent level of safety are prescribed.
A. Every fire alarm system shall be thoroughly inspected and tested not
less than once each six months. Inspection shall be only by a fire alarm
technician. A report of testing shall be made on a form specified by the
Chief Fire Marshal and shall be submitted to the Division of Fire
Prevention.
B. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and service of his
or its fire alarm device equipment and shall be responsible for all
malfunctions of his or its equipment.
C. Devices which automatically transmit fire alarm signals to a Fire
Department or the dispatching facilities for a Fire Department shall be
prohibited unless specific written permission is issued by the Fire
Commissioners of said Fire Department or by the dispatching facility.
This shall not apply to signals transmitted to commercial central alarm
stations.
D. Taped message dialers. The use of taped message dialers to any Fire
Department, Police Department, dispatching facility for any Fire
Department or central station is hereby prohibited.
A. Immediately after it has been determined that a false fire alarm has
occurred, the owner of the fire protection system shall be given written
notice of the occurrence by the Division of Fire Prevention. The fire
protection system owner shall have 10 business days from the date of
the notice of the false alarm to have the problem corrected and send a
report of repairs to the Division of Fire Prevention. Failure to do so
§ 19-158 ISLIP CODE § 19-160
17:222
§ 19-161. (Reserved)
within 10 business days shall be deemed a violation of this article and
shall cause the revocation of the fire protection system registration.
To register the fire protection system after a revocation, the system
shall be thoroughly inspected and tested, regardless of any previous
inspection and testing that may have been performed. A report of such
testing shall be made on a form specified by the Chief Fire Marshal.
B. If the fire protection system is not properly registered with the Division
of Fire Prevention within 30 business days after the initial notice of the
false alarm, an appearance ticket returnable in a court of competent
jurisdiction and subject to the penalty provisions of § 19-16B of this
chapter shall be issued to the occupant and/or owner of the premises,
and in addition no owner or occupant of the premises shall continue the
use and occupancy of the premises until the fire protection system is
registered as per Subsection A set forth above.
C. After it has been determined that a false fire alarm has occurred, a
Town of Islip Fire Marshal shall affix a warning label to the fire alarm
panel and the annunciator panel, warning that the fire alarm shall not
be reset by anyone other than the local Fire Department or a Town of
Islip Fire Marshal. The warning label shall serve as required notice per
the Fire Code of the State of New York and shall read as follows:
[Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
WARNING WARNING WARNING
THIS FIRE ALARM SYSTEM SHALL BE RESET BY OR
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE FIRE DEPT. ONLY
Before opening this panel or working on any fire system attached
thereto the contractor or location manager shall notify the local F.D.
and the
Town of Islip Fire Marshal's office at (631) 224-5477
Failure to comply will result in the issuance of a criminal summons.
Should you cause an unnecessary fire dept. response additional
charges may
be brought against you pursuant to NYSFC 901.7 & 901.8
Local F.D.-
By order of the Islip Town Fire Marshal
D. It shall be unlawful to reset any fire alarm system in any building or
structure upon activation of said fire alarm systems unless under the
direction of the local Fire Department or a Town of Islip Fire Marshal.
This provision shall not prohibit the resetting of a fire alarm system by a
fire alarm technician while performing inspections, maintenance or
repairs. [Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-160 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-161
17:223

ARTICLE XXVIII
Multiple Storage Warehouses
§ 19-162. Definitions.
A multiple storage warehouse shall be defined as a building divided into two
or more individual spaces, which may be rented to one or more tenants, for
the storage of materials and equipment of the tenant. This shall include,
but not be limited to, buildings known as "mini storage," "public storage"
and the like. This shall not apply to the storage spaces of shopping centers,
apartment houses and similar buildings, when such spaces are used to store
materials and equipment incidental to the tenant's primary occupancy.
§ 19-163. Protection.
Every multiple storage warehouse constructed or renovated after the
effective date of this section shall be protected throughout by an approved
automatic fire extinguishing system.
§ 19-164. Storage of hazardous chemicals and materials prohibited.
The storage of any quantity of any hazardous chemicals or materials as
specified in Article XVI of Chapter 19 of the Code of the Town of Islip
shall be strictly prohibited in every multiple storage warehouse, new and
existing. The tenant of every such space in every multiple storage
warehouse shall be informed, in writing, by the owner of the premises that
such storage is strictly prohibited.
§ 19-162 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-164
17:225

ARTICLE XXIX
Emergency Access Systems
§ 19-165. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide emergency access to specific areas
of buildings, fire suppression equipment, fire alarm equipment, building
systems and information specified by the Chief Fire Marshal, for use by the
Fire Department at the time of an emergency or a reported emergency.
§ 19-166. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INFORMATION STORAGE CABINET — A cabinet-style vault approved by
the Chief Fire Marshal installed in an accessible location for the purpose of
containing information and documents related to the storage of hazardous
materials, site plans, building plans, emergency notification information or
any other information required by the Chief Fire Marshal, deemed to be
pertinent to the operations of the responding Fire Department.
KEY LOCK BOX — A container of a type approved by the Chief Fire Marshal
installed in an accessible location for the purpose of containing keys to gain
necessary access to areas of premises.
§ 19-167. Survey by Fire Marshal; specification of required
equipment.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall survey or cause to be surveyed each
establishment, except the interior of one- and two-family dwellings, and
shall specify what key lock box or information storage cabinet shall be
provided. In special occupancies more than one key lock box, information
storage cabinet or combination thereof may be required.
§ 19-168. through § 19-169. (Reserved)
§ 19-170. Maintenance.
Key lock boxes, information storage cabinets or combinations thereof which
have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or because of
any local law, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and
it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness
of any emergency access system so required, except this shall not prohibit
the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing the use of an emergency
access system to make repairs or alterations. The Division of Fire
Prevention shall be notified before alterations or repairs are made.
§ 19-171. Fire Department lock cylinder.
All key lock boxes and information storage cabinets shall be equipped with
single-lock cylinders. In no case shall any person or entity, other than an
§ 19-165 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-171
17:227
Islip Town Fire Marshal or a member of a Fire Department protecting the
subject premises, be issued, possess or use any key intended to operate the
Fire Department lock cylinder on any key lock box or information storage
cabinet.
§ 19-172. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to: one- or two-family dwellings; shopping
centers with fewer than four tenant spaces, unless served by a common fire
alarm system, sprinkler system or any occupant is a hazardous materials
permittee; freestanding mercantile occupancies unless occupant is a
hazardous materials permittee; other occupancies as determined by the
Chief Fire Marshal.
§ 19-171 ISLIP CODE § 19-172
17:228
ARTICLE XXX
Marine Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities
[Added 5-14-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 19-173. Scope.
This article shall provide regulations and standards regarding the operation
of marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities and the transfer of flammable and
combustible substances to and from watercraft.
§ 19-174. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLASS I LIQUIDS — Liquids categorized and defined as "Class I" liquids by
Article XIV of this chapter.
CLASS II LIQUIDS — Liquids categorized and defined as "Class II" liquids
by Article XIV of this chapter.
CLASS IIIA LIQUIDS — Liquids categorized and defined as "Class IIIA"
liquids by Article XIV of this chapter.
MARINE MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES — A property or a
portion thereof where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as
fuel for watercraft are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment on shore,
piers, wharves, floats or barges into the fuel tanks of watercraft and shall
include all other facilities used in connection therewith.
§ 19-175. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a marine motor fuel-dispensing facility
or otherwise dispense fuel to marine vehicles, whether by fixed pumping
stations or by tank vehicle, without first obtaining a permit for same from
the Chief Fire Marshal. A permit shall only be issued after an inspection by
The Chief Fire Marshal or his designee for compliance with the provisions
of this article and the Fire Code of New York State.
§ 19-176. Supervision.
A marine motor fuel-dispensing facility shall have an attendant or
supervisor who is fully aware of the operation, mechanics and hazards
inherent to fueling of watercraft on duty whenever the facility is open for
business. The primary function of said attendant or supervisor shall be to
supervise, observe and control the dispensing of Class I, II or III liquids or
flammable gases as defined by this chapter or the Fire Code of New York
State.
§ 19-173 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 19-177
17:229
§ 19-177. Storage and handling.
The storage and handling of Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquids at marine
motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this article and the Fire Code of New York State.
§ 19-178. Exclusive use.
Wharves, piers or floats at marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be
used exclusively for the dispensing or transfer of petroleum products to or
from marine craft, except that transfer of essential ship stores is allowed.
A. Class I liquids stored inside of buildings used for marine motor fueldispensing
facilities shall be stored in approved containers or portable
tanks. Storage of Class I liquids shall not exceed 10 gallons. This
provision shall not apply to storage in liquid storage rooms which are
maintained in accordance with the Fire Code of New York State.
B. Class II or IIIA liquids stored or dispensed inside of buildings used for
marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be stored in and dispensed
from approved containers or portable tanks. Storage of Class II or Ill
liquids shall not exceed 120 gallons.
C. Heating equipment installed in Class I, II or IIIA liquid storage or
dispensing areas shall comply with the Fire Code of New York State.
D. The dispensing of liquid fuels at marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities
as well as all equipment used at said facilities shall comply with the
provisions of this article and the Fire Code of New York State.
§ 19-177 ISLIP CODE § 19-178
17:230
Chapter 21
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 29.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Littering — See Ch. 32.
Water quality — See Ch. 66.
§ 21-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the Town of Islip through the regulation of solid waste
collection and disposal pursuant to the power granted the Town of Islip
under Chapter 632 of the Laws of 1982, as amended, and consistent with
the Solid Waste Management Plan of the Town of Islip and the laws of the
State of New York. Nothing herein is intended or should be construed to
modify or amend any terms or conditions of any contracts for solid waste
services to which the Town of Islip is a party in effect on the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 21-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words are intended to include and be
defined as follows:
ASH RESIDUE — All of the solid residue and any entrained liquids resulting
from the combustion of solid waste or solid waste in combination with fossil
fuel at a solid waste incinerator, including bottom ash, boiler ash, fly ash or
the solid residue of any air pollution control device used at a solid waste
incinerator.
BULK WASTE — An item of solid waste larger than two by two by four feet
or heavier than 50 pounds.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Control for the Town of Islip, or authorized personnel. For purposes of this
definition, said personnel shall include officers or employees of the Islip
Resource Recovery Agency.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Any solid waste material
defined under 6 NYCRR 360-1.2(6), (22) and (33), except as said material
may be restricted or conditioned for acceptance at a Town of Islip disposal
facility.
CONTAINER — Any box, can, drum, compactor or other receptacle provided
by persons licensed to provide solid waste services to nonresidences and
multiple residences in the Town of Islip and used for the storage of solid
waste pending collection.
§ 19-178 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-2
17:231
DISPOSAL FACILITY — Any solid waste management facility or site
operated by or on behalf of the Town of Islip or the Islip Resource Recovery
Agency, including facilities located outside of the Town of Islip and
designated as such by the Commissioner.
DISPOSAL FEE — The fee charged to receive and dispose of solid waste at
a disposal facility, which fee may be modified from time to time by the Board
of Directors of the Islip Resource Recovery Agency.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Has the same meaning as set forth in 6
NYCRR Part 364, as the same may be amended from time to time.
ISLIP RESOURCE RECOVERY AGENCY — That public authority created
pursuant to Chapter 632 of the Laws of 1982, as amended, the members of
which consist of the Town Board of the Town of Islip.
MECHANIZED CONTAINER — A container used for the storage of solid
waste on the premises of a generator which is equipped with any
mechanical device to compact the solid waste stored therein.
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — Any building or parcel of land not receiving
solid waste services through any Town of Islip Special Garbage and Refuse
District and containing four or more rental units, including but not limited
to mobile homes and cooperative apartment units, or condominium units
occupied as residential dwellings.
NONRESIDENCE — Any building or parcel of land not used as a residence
or a multiple residence as defined in this section.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation or
any and all combinations of individuals acting in concert.
RECYCLABLES — Those components of the solid waste generated within
the Town of Islip which are capable of being recycled or reused in place
of virgin materials and for which economic markets exist. Said components
shall be determined pursuant to this chapter, but shall include newspaper,
corrugated cardboard, ferrous metals, glass, plastics, aluminum and yard
waste, unless otherwise determined by the Commissioner.
REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE — All material so defined under 6 NYCRR
360-17 and relevant sections of the Public Health Law of the State of New
York.
RESIDENCE — A building or parcel of land having three or fewer dwelling
units, located within and serviced through a Special Garbage and Refuse
District of the Town of Islip.
RESIDENT — A person residing in a residence.
SOLID WASTE — Materials or substances discharged or rejected as being
spent, useless, worthless or unwanted by the owner at the time of such
discard or rejection, except sewage and other highly diluted water-carried
materials or substances and those in gaseous form. Such wastes shall
include but are not limited to garbage, sludge, rubbish, ashes, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, dead animals, offal, abandoned vehicles, tires,
§ 21-2 ISLIP CODE § 21-2
17:232
agricultural waste, industrial waste, commercial waste and construction
and demolition debris.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACCOUNT — The registration of any person who
delivers solid waste from a single nonresidence or multiple residence to a
Town disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE SERVICES — The business of handling, removal, storage or
disposal of solid waste, including but not limited to placing or removing
containers for solid waste on or from sites within the Town not owned by
the person placing or removing the containers and transporting solid waste
from or to any location within the Town.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Dividing solid waste into some or all of its
component parts at the point of generation, including the separation of
recyclables from each other or the separation of recyclables from other
solid waste.
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Islip or the Board of
Directors of the Islip Resource Recovery Agency, unless otherwise stated
herein.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Islip.
TRANSFER STATION/RECYCLING CENTER — Any combination of
structures, machinery and facilities used for the off-loading of solid waste
from collection vehicles, the recovery of recyclables from said solid waste
and the reloading of nonrecyclable solid waste into vehicles for disposal.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, garden debris, shrubs, branches
and similar material as designated by the Commissioner.
§ 21-3. Determination of recyclable solid waste.
For purposes of General Municipal Law § 120-aa, the determination of
whether any component of the solid waste stream generated within the
Town of Islip is capable of being reused or recycled and is a component for
which economic markets exist, as that term is defined in General Municipal
Law § 120-aa, shall be made by the Commissioner after notice and the
opportunity for a public hearing, unless any such component is so
determined by action of the State of New York. As of the effective date
of this section, such components shall be deemed to be newspapers,
corrugated cardboard, ferrous metal, aluminum beverage containers,
plastic beverage containers and glass, pending any subsequent
determination by the Commissioner. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit the recycling or reuse of any material or substance in any market
which may appear from time to time absent action by the Commissioner or
the State of New York.
§ 21-4. Provisions for residences; penalties for offenses.
§ 21-2 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-4
17:233
A. It shall be the responsibility of all residents of the Town of Islip to
separate and place out for collection all recyclable components of solid
waste generated at their residences.
B. The Commissioner shall have the authority to designate the recyclable
components of the residential waste stream and to further designate
the day or days upon which said recyclables and/or any other
component of the residential waste stream shall be placed out for
collection by the Town of Islip or its designated agents.
C. Ownership of recyclables set out for collection at residences shall
thereupon vest in the Town. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect,
remove or dispose of recyclables which are the property of the Town
without first having obtained the license required by this chapter.
Persons who collect or remove recyclables which belong to the Town
shall deliver and dispose of the same at such location as the
Commissioner shall designate for that purpose.
D. It shall be unlawful for any resident to place out for collection with solid
waste any recyclables designated by the Commissioner for separate
collection. It shall be unlawful for any resident to place grass clippings
out for collection by the Town of Islip or its designated contractors at
any time.
E. Garbage receptacles. [Added 6-10-2008 by L.L. No. 5-200823]
(1) Any person receiving residential solid waste collection services
shall provide suitable standard metal or plastic garbage
receptacles for deposit of garbage and household solid waste. Said
receptacles shall be watertight, kept covered with a cover and
maintained in a sanitary condition by periodic cleaning.
(2) When household garbage is wet or contains animal carcasses or
other putrescible material, said garbage shall be bagged in a
manner that prevents insects, vector or any other public health and
safety hazards.
(3) Garbage receptacles are to be placed at the curb no earlier than
4:00 p.m. on the day before collection and shall be removed from
the collection point to a location to the rear of the front line of the
main dwelling no later than 12:00 noon the day after the day of
collection.
F. Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be considered a violation of
law and shall be punishable as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
(2) For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $100.
23.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 21-4 ISLIP CODE § 21-4
17:234
§ 21-5. Provisions for nonresidences and multiple residences;
penalties for offenses.
§ 21-6. Recyclables generated at nonresidences and multiple
residences.
§ 21-7. Disposal.
(3) For a third or subsequent offense, by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in possession of any
nonresidence or the record owner or managing agent of any multiple
residence in the Town of Islip to provide for the collection of solid waste
from said nonresidence or multiple residence by any person not
licensed to provide solid waste services pursuant to this chapter;
provided, however, that any such person may deliver solid waste
generated only at that nonresidence or multiple residence to Town
disposal facilities upon the payment of the proper fee therefor and in
conformance with the rules of the facility and the laws of the County of
Suffolk and the State of New York governing the transport of waste
material over the public roads. Such persons may establish a solid
waste disposal account at a Town disposal facility for the regular
delivery of such waste.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place solid waste into a container
provided for collection by, or for the use of, another person without the
express written consent of the person providing said container.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of waste generated at
nonresidences in Town of Islip waste or recycling containers placed on
the public streets or other locations, except those expressly designated
for such waste.
D. Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be considered a violation of
law and shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in
§ 21-4E.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all persons owning or in possession of
any nonresidence or multiple residence to provide for the separation of
the solid waste generated at said nonresidence into recyclable
components as defined in § 21-3 hereof.
B. (Reserved)
A. Solid waste generated within the Town of Islip shall be disposed of only
at a disposal facility unless otherwise provided herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or transport any
solid waste generated within the Town of Islip for disposal, processing,
sorting or any other purpose to any location other than a disposal
§ 21-4 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-7
17:235
§ 21-8. Dumping prohibited. [Amended 8-31-1994]
facility, except by condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
or with the approval of the Commissioner pursuant to § 21-10 hereof.
C. The Commissioner shall have the authority to designate a disposal
facility for all waste generated within the Town of Islip and for the use
of all persons licensed to provide solid waste services pursuant to this
chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to place a hazardous substance out
for collection with solid waste or recyclables in the Town of Islip or to
collect, transport or dispose of hazardous substances in the Town of
Islip without a license or permit to do so from the State of New York or
other appropriate authority.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to place regulated medical waste out
for collection with solid waste or recyclables in the Town of Islip or to
collect, transport or dispose of regulated medical waste within the
Town of Islip without a license or permit to do so from the State of New
York or other appropriate authority.
F. Any violation of this section shall be considered a Class A misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment up to one year or a
fine of up to $5,000, or both, and any such violations shall be subject to
additional penalties as set forth in § 21-15 of this chapter. Any person,
individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation or any and all
combinations of individuals acting in concert found to be in violation of
this section may be subject to additional penalties in accordance with
the laws of the State of New York. [Amended 8-31-1994]
G. (Reserved)
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Islip Town Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to create, maintain, suffer or permit the
accumulation of a quantity of solid waste in excess of one cubic yard
upon any street, lot, park, public place, open space or other area,
whether publicly or privately owned, unless said area is licensed for
that purpose under this chapter or said solid waste is stored in a
container or otherwise subject to a lawful contract for removal and
disposal by a person licensed by this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any conditionally exempt generator, small
quantity generator or generator of hazardous wastes, liquid wastes
and/or solvents, as defined in 6 NYCRR Part 371, ignitable wastes, as
defined in 40 CFR 261.21, or pesticides, as defined in 40 CFR 261.32
and 261.33, to dispose upon any street, lot, park, public place or open
space, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to
storm drains, sumps, natural or man-made ponds, cisterns, wells,
streams or waterways, any of the substances described in this
subsection.
§ 21-7 ISLIP CODE § 21-8
17:236
§ 21-9. Permits for solid waste services.
C. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $10,000 or to one year's imprisonment, or both.
Nothing herein shall relieve said person or the record owner of the
property upon which the waste is deposited from removing said waste
upon order of the Town Board, nor shall this section in any way restrict
the Town Board from otherwise acting to remove the material pursuant
to law.
A. No person shall engage in the business of collecting solid waste or
otherwise render solid waste services to anyone without a permit as
hereinafter provided. Any person found to be in violation of this
subsection shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $500 and no more than $10,000 or one year's
imprisonment, or both. [Amended 8-31-1994]
B. Contents of application.
(1) A permit application shall be made, in writing, on the form
prescribed by the Town Clerk, submitted to the Town Clerk and
accompanied by a fee of $750 for the first vehicle and $250 for each
additional vehicle applied for and $7.50 for each container
provided to places of service within the Town of Islip. [Amended
8-31-1994; 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
(2) Names to be included.
(a) The application shall contain the name of the applicant or, if a
partnership or corporation, the names of all partners, officers,
directors and all persons holding 5% or more of a financial
interest in said partnership or corporation. If the applicant is a
corporation which is wholly or partially owned by another
corporation, the parent corporation shall be identified,
together with the names of the officers and directors of the
parent corporation.
(b) The application shall contain the name of any individual
applicant, partnership, officer, director or any person holding
5% or more financial interest in said business or corporation,
who has been convicted of any crime or committed an act for
which a civil sanction or penalty was imposed or is under
indictment for any crime. [Added 8-31-1994]
(3) A permit application shall be accompanied by a current Suffolk
County Department of Health Services solid waste permit
applicable to any and all vehicles submitted.
(4) The applicant shall also provide the Town with a statement sworn
to by the applicant, if an individual, or a partner or an officer of the
§ 21-8 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-9
17:237
§ 21-10. Obligations of permit holders; exceptions.
applicant corporation, as the case may be, containing the following
information:
(a) A complete list of all nonresidences and multiple residences
serviced by the applicant at the time of application, including
the name, address and telephone number of each such
customer.
(b) A complete list of all containers provided by the applicant to
nonresidences and multiple residences in the Town of Islip,
which list shall include the location, capacity and frequency of
collection of each such container at the time of application.
(c) A complete list of all nonresidences and multiple residences
serviced by the applicant at which the collection of sourceseparated
recyclables is performed in a manner or at a time
other than that employed to collect solid waste at the time of
application.
(5) The information required pursuant to this subsection shall be
regarded by the Town as trade secrets which, if disclosed, could
cause substantial injury to the competitive position of the person
submitting the information.
C. All vehicles for which fees are paid pursuant to Subsection B(1) above
shall, upon issuance of a permit, be provided with two Town of Islip
decals indicating that the vehicle is permitted. These decals shall be
securely fastened and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle at all
times. In addition, all vehicles shall conspicuously display, in letters at
least six inches high, the name and telephone number of the permit
holder. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permit holder
to utilize such a vehicle for the provision of said waste services, without
the express permission of the Commissioner, unless ownership or
possession of the vehicle is lawfully transferred to such other person
and a new permit issued. [Added 8-31-1994]
A. The issuance of a solid waste services permit shall obligate the holder
to deliver all solid waste collected within the Town of Islip, excluding
recyclables separated by commodity type and collected separately at
the place of generation, to Town disposal facilities.
B. The Commissioner may release a permit holder from all or part of the
obligation contained in Subsection A above under the following
circumstances:
(1) Upon approval by the Commissioner of a recycling plan submitted
by the permit holder, pursuant to which recyclables commingled
with solid waste collected at nonresidences or multiple residences
are to be extracted for sale or reuse and the residue delivered to
Town disposal facilities. [Amended 8-31-1994]
§ 21-9 ISLIP CODE § 21-10
17:238
(a) Any such plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following
elements:
[1] The name, location, container size and collection schedule
of all customer stops to be included in the waste stream
included in the plan.
[2] An estimate, supported by adequate documentation or
other evidence, of the aggregate weight of the total solid
waste to be collected under the plan on a monthly basis,
seasonally adjusted.
[3] An estimate, supported by adequate documentation,
including identification of markets or buyers, of the types
and aggregate quantities of recyclables to be extracted
from the solid waste collected under the plan on a monthly
basis, seasonally adjusted.
[4] Identification of the facility or description of the method to
be employed to extract the recyclables from the solid
waste collected under the plan.
[5] Financial security, in a form acceptable to the
Commissioner, ensuring the payment of the Town of Islip
tipping fees to be incurred by the delivery of the solid
waste residue after extraction of recyclables pursuant to
the approved plan, which security shall be drawn upon in
the event that said residue is not delivered to Town
disposal facilities.
(b) A plan approved pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to
amendment, including temporary modifications in the
estimated amounts of solid waste, recyclables or residues to be
collected or delivered, for good cause shown and upon prior
notice to the Commissioner.
(c) Persons holding solid waste services permits from the Town on
the effective date of this chapter shall not be relieved of the
obligation to deliver solid waste collected to Town of Islip
disposal facilities as a condition of said permit under the prior
code.
(2) Upon a determination by the Commissioner that Islip disposal
facilities are for any reason not available to receive all or part of the
solid waste collected by permit holders within the Town of Islip.
Any release of a permit holder from the obligations of this section
due to unavailability of Islip facilities shall be effective for the
duration of such unavailability, as determined by the Commissioner.
§ 21-10 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-11
17:239
§ 21-11. Hours of collection.
No collections shall be made at multiple residences or nonresidences prior
to 5:00 a.m. or at residences prior to 6:00 a.m., except with the prior
approval of the Commissioner.
§ 21-12. Transfer station/recycling center.
§ 21-13. Transfer station/recycling center permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person performing solid waste services in
the Town of Islip to deliver solid waste generated in the Town of Islip to
a transfer station/recycling center except pursuant to a recycling plan
submitted and approved pursuant to § 21-10B hereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a transfer station/
recycling center within the Town of Islip unless said transfer station/
recycling center is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
A. A permit application shall be made, in writing, on the form prescribed
by the Town Clerk and accompanied by a fee of $750. A permit issued
pursuant to this section shall be valid for one year and shall be
renewable annually after submission of the required fee and application
materials. [Amended 8-31-1994]
B. The application shall contain the information required in § 21-9B(2)
above. [Amended 8-31-1994]
C. No permit shall be granted unless the applicant can produce a valid
transfer station operating permit issued by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation for the proposed site and
further demonstrate that the proposed transfer station/recycling center
is consistent with the Town's Solid Waste Management Plan.
D. The grant of a permit shall bind the applicant to provide the Town of
Islip with the following information on a quarterly basis:
(1) Gross tons of mixed solid waste and recyclables received.
(2) Gross tons of recyclables removed from solid waste delivered.
(3) Net tons of nonrecyclable solid waste reloaded onto vehicles for
disposal.
(4) Total container capacity of all nonresidential stops and multipleresidence
stops serviced by collection vehicles delivering mixed
solid waste and recyclables to the facility.
(5) Location and container capacity of all nonresidential and multipleresidence
stops located within the Town of Islip serviced by all
collection vehicles delivering mixed solid waste and recyclables to
the facility.
§ 21-11 ISLIP CODE § 21-13
17:240
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. (Reserved)
I. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a transfer station/recycling center,
an application shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Division
of the Town of Islip. Approval will be based on the following criteria and
requirements:
(1) Submission of a site plan to the Planning Division. The plan shall
include the precise location of all buildings, structures, employee
and truck parking, loading, unloading and traffic areas, internal
circulation, container storage areas, storage areas for recycling
and any other information deemed pertinent to an adequate review
of the proposal. All requirements for the submission and issuance
of building permits and change of use permits shall be met.
(2) A minimum lot area of two acres and the right to require a greater
lot area. Such requirement will be based on the scale of operation
as measured by the size of the buildings proposed for the site, the
volume of solid waste handled on a daily basis and the
requirements for vehicle parking and movement or a finding that
the operation cannot be adequately screened from adjoining
property.
(3) A minimum distance of 200 feet from property zoned for residential
use.
(4) Submission of a route plan to indicate that traffic generated by the
facility will have a minimal impact on residential streets.
(5) Provision of adequate lanes for vehicles entering the facility.
(6) All sorting, baling, processing, crushing and similar intensive
activity associated with the facility, including the storage of all
containers containing recyclable and any other materials, shall be
contained inside a completely enclosed building.
(7) Outdoor use of the property shall be restricted to the parking and
maneuvering of vehicles and the storage of empty containers.
(8) The storage of said containers shall be restricted to locations
specifically identified on the site plan. This equipment shall be
located and screened in such a manner so as to not be visible from
the street or from adjoining properties.
(9) On-street parking of vehicles, containers or any other equipment or
materials in any way connected with the facility shall be prohibited.
§ 21-13 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-13
17:241
§ 21-14. Additional nonresidence and multiple residence
requirements.
(10) Where feasible, truck loading and unloading areas shall not face
the street.
(11) A minimum of 20 feet of landscaping, including street trees in
accordance with the Land Development Regulations of the Town of
Islip, shall be planted and maintained along all street frontages.
(12) An eight-foot-high chain link fence with stockade attached shall be
installed and maintained directly behind said landscaped areas.
(13) The maximum height of the facility shall not exceed 30 feet.
(14) Protective barriers around those portions of the building
vulnerable to damage from vehicle movements shall be provided.
J. Application for variances from the requirements governing minimum
lot area and minimum distances from residences shall be made to the
Planning Board.
K. Grant and acceptance of this permit shall constitute consent to allow
inspection of the premises by the Town of Islip for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this section. Inspection shall be upon
reasonable prior notice to the permit holder.
L. Nothing in this section shall exempt an applicant or facility from
compliance with zoning or other requirements of the Islip Town Code.
A. A person who provides solid waste services to a nonresidence or
multiple residence customer shall:
(1) Provide the customer with a container for solid waste and/or
recyclables sufficient for the customer's needs. All such containers
shall be conspicuously labeled with the name and telephone
number of the person providing solid waste services and the
volume of the container, expressed in cubic yards. [Amended
8-31-1994]
(2) Within one week of a request by the customer, provide solid waste
services to any nonresidence or multiple residence within 1/2 mile
of any other such customer to whom the person provides solid
waste services or arrange for another person to provide such
services or provide such services after being ordered to provide
such services by the Commissioner.
(3) Specify on each bill to a customer the rate charged per unit of solid
waste removed and the rates charged per unit of recyclables
serviced.
(4) Remove any solid waste container provided by him within 21 days
after solid waste services are terminated.
§ 21-13 ISLIP CODE § 21-14
17:242
§ 21-15. Denial, suspension and revocation of permits; penalties for
offenses.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, the
Commissioner shall have the authority to direct the person providing
solid waste services to immediately remove, or, in the alternative, to
direct Town personnel to immediately remove, any waste in a container
remaining uncollected for a period of seven days or more or any waste
which by its nature or condition presents an immediate nuisance or
threat to the public health. In the event that the Town removes said
waste, the person providing the container shall be liable to the Town for
the cost of collection and disposal. [Added 8-31-1994]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Town Clerk,
pursuant to Chapter 50B of the Town Code, or the Town Board may
refuse to issue or may suspend or revoke a permit issued to any person
if such permittee or applicant or any person having a financial interest
therein is convicted of a crime or is otherwise determined to be
undesirable or incapable of properly rendering solid waste services.
B. The issuance of a solid waste services permit under this chapter shall
obligate the holder to the payment of a civil penalty and/or the
suspension or revocation of the permit granted hereunder if, after
notice and hearing and by a preponderance of the evidence, the holder
is found to have violated the conditions of the permit as set forth in this
chapter. Civil penalties shall be imposed for violations of this chapter
pursuant to the following schedule:
(1) For a first violation the penalty shall be $2,500.
(2) For a second violation within three years, the penalty shall be
$5,000.
(3) For a third or subsequent violation within any three-year period,
the penalty shall be $10,000.
(4) A third or subsequent violation within any three-year period shall,
in addition, subject the permit of the violator to suspension or
revocation by the Town Board.
C. Any suspension of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be for a
definite period of up to one year, which period shall be deemed to
extend into the term of the next renewed permit if the term of
suspension is longer than the period remaining under the instant
permit. Any suspension ordered pursuant to this chapter may be
accompanied by such terms and conditions imposed by the Town Board
which may provide reasonable assurance that the permit holder does
not engage, directly or indirectly, in the provision of solid waste
services in the Town during the term of suspension. Violation of the
terms and conditions of any suspension shall be grounds for revocation
of the permit.
§ 21-14 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-15
17:243
§ 21-16. Administrative hearings.
D. Any revocation of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall preclude the
former permit holder as an individual and, if a partnership, its partners
and, if a corporation, its officers, directors and shareholders holding
over 5% of the stock of said corporation at the time of revocation from
engaging in the business of providing solid waste services in the Town
of Islip for a minimum period of five years. Any such former permit
holder may apply for a new permit after the expiration of said five-year
period; provided, however, that all such applications shall be approved
or denied by majority vote of the Town Board. The Town Board, in
considering such an application, may, in its discretion, and in addition
to any other relevant information, consider such mitigating or
aggravating factors as the nature of the incident or incidents giving rise
to the revocation, the relative culpability of the applicant in said
incident and the past history of the applicant in Islip or other licensing
jurisdictions. Nothing in this section is intended or shall be construed
as creating a right to the reinstatement of any permit after the
expiration of five years or any other period of time.
A. Hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be had upon at least
10 days' written notice to the permit holder setting forth the specific
nature and circumstances of the alleged violation of the conditions of
permit.
B. The burden of proof in establishing a violation shall be upon the Town.
C. Hearings shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the
Commissioner. The hearing officer shall be the Commissioner, Deputy
Commissioner or executive officer of a department of the Town, other
than the Department of Environmental Control. The hearing officer
shall have the power to set the time and place of the hearing, grant
recesses and adjournments, rule upon motions and requests, rule upon
the admissibility of evidence and make findings of fact.
D. The permit holder may be represented by counsel.
E. Witnesses shall be sworn and subject to cross-examination. A
stenographic record of the proceedings shall be kept.
F. Evidence submitted shall be relevant and may include evidence as to
the history and character of the permit holder if a suspension or
revocation of the permit is potentially at issue. Hearsay evidence shall
be admissible, but shall be accorded such weight as the hearing officer
deems appropriate, consistent with its reliability.
G. Findings of fact shall be made by the hearing officer, in writing, upon a
preponderance of the evidence.
H. Upon a finding that a violation is proved, the Commissioner shall
impose the monetary civil penalty which shall be applicable.
§ 21-15 ISLIP CODE § 21-16
17:244
§ 21-17. Seizure of evidence.
I. If, as a result of a finding of violation, the permit of the violator is
subject to suspension or revocation, the Commissioner, in addition to
imposing the appropriate monetary civil penalty, shall forward the
findings of fact and the record of the hearing to the Town Board. The
Town Board may determine to take no further action and so notify the
permit holder. In the alternative, upon at least 10 days' written notice to
the permit holder and the public, but not later than 90 days after the
close of the administrative hearing, the Town Board may convene a
public hearing solely to determine whether, on the basis of the violation
found, the past history and performance of the permit holder and such
other evidence as the Board may receive at the public hearing, the
permit should be suspended or revoked. A public hearing commenced
for this purpose may be adjourned for such reasonable periods as the
Board deems necessary to receive and evaluate the evidence. Within 30
days of the close of the public hearing, the Board shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked and, if suspended,
the period of suspension or whether no further action shall be taken.
J. In the event of any denial of an application for a permit or any denial or
disapproval of a recycling plan proposed hereunder or upon the finding
of a violation and the imposition of any administrative penalty after
hearing pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or holder of the permit
against whom such action is taken may appeal the determination of the
Commissioner or the Town Clerk to the Town Board of the Town of Islip
by filing with the Town Clerk a written request for the review of said
determination within 30 days of the date of said determination. All such
requests for review shall be in writing and shall contain a full and
complete statement of the reasons for reversal or modification of said
determination, including any supporting documentation. The Town
Attorney, on behalf of the Commissioner or the Town Clerk, shall have
the opportunity to reply to the request for review. The Town Board shall
render its decision to uphold, reverse or modify the determination at
issue within a reasonable time thereafter. The decision of the Town
Board shall be in writing and shall be final.
K. No penalty imposed by any determination hereunder shall be effective
until 30 days after said determination, unless a request for review is
filed, in which case said penalty shall not be effective until the Town
Board renders its decision.
A. By a vehicle's entry into a disposal facility, the owner and operator of
that vehicle shall be deemed to consent to the searches and seizures
hereinafter provided.
B. Any vehicle which enters a disposal facility may be searched and its
contents examined by Town employees to determine compliance with
the rules and regulations of that facility governing delivery of materials
to that facility.
§ 21-16 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-17
17:245
C. Any police officer shall have the power to seize without a warrant, for
conservation, health, safety or evidentiary purposes, any material he
has cause to believe is a hazardous substance or regulated medical
waste collected or transported through the Town in violation of the
applicable provisions of this chapter. Any material seized under this
subsection and determined to be a hazardous substance or regulated
medical waste shall be disposed of as deemed appropriate by the
Commissioner, and any costs associated with such disposal shall be
assessed against the person or persons in possession of said materials.
D. Any police officer shall have the power to seize without a warrant, for
conservation, health, safety or evidentiary purposes, any vehicle he has
cause to believe has been or is being knowingly used to unlawfully
dump, store, transport or dispose of any solid waste, including
hazardous substances, regulated medical waste, tires or other
materials. A seized vehicle may be forfeited as hereinafter provided.
E. The seized vehicle shall be delivered by the police officer having made
the seizure to the custody of the Town Attorney, together with a report
of all the facts and circumstances of the seizure, as soon as practical
under the circumstances.
F. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to inquire into the facts of the
seizure so reported to him and, if it appears probable that a forfeiture
should be incurred for the determination of which the institution of
proceedings in the Supreme Court is necessary to cause the proper
proceedings to be commenced, at any time within 30 days from the date
of seizure, to declare such forfeiture, unless, upon inquiry and
examination, the Town Attorney decides that such proceedings cannot
probably be sustained or that the ends of public justice do not require
that they should be instituted or prosecuted, in which case the Town
Attorney shall cause such seized property to be returned to the owner
thereof. The Town Attorney shall make his determination as to whether
or not it appears probable that a forfeiture has been incurred within
one business day after the delivery of the vehicle to his custody.
G. Notice of the institution of the forfeiture proceeding shall be served
either personally on the owner of the seized vehicle or by registered
mail to the owner's last known address and by publication of the notice
once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published or
circulated in the Town.
H. Forfeiture shall not occur where the owner establishes, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the use of such seized vehicle in
violation of this chapter was not intentional on the part of the owner or
that said seized vehicle was used in violation of this chapter by any
person other than an owner thereof while such seized vehicle was
unlawfully in the possession of a person who acquired possession
thereof in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or any
state.
§ 21-17 ISLIP CODE § 21-17
17:246
§ 21-18. Clothes dropoff bins. [Added 9-9-2008 by L.L. No. 9-200824;
amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 14-2008; 10-13-2010 by L.L. No.
11-2010]
I. The Town Attorney, having custody of the seized vehicle after such
judicial determination of forfeiture, shall, at his discretion, either retain
such seized property for the official use of the Town or, by a public
notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited property at public sale.
The net proceeds of such sale, after deduction of lawful expenses
incurred, shall be paid into the general fund of the Town.
J. Whenever any person interested in any property which is seized and
declared forfeited under the provisions of this section files with a
Justice of the Supreme Court a petition for the recovery of such
forfeited property, the Justice of the Supreme Court may restore said
forfeited property upon such terms and conditions as he deems
reasonable and just, if the petitioner establishes either of the
affirmative defenses set forth in Subsection H of this section and that
the petitioner was without personal or actual knowledge of the
forfeiture proceedings. If the petition is filed after the sale of the
forfeited property, any judgment in favor of the petitioner shall be
limited to the net proceeds of such sale after deduction of the lawful
expenses and costs incurred by the Town Attorney.
K. No suit or action under this section for wrongful seizure shall be
instituted unless such suit or action is commenced within two years
after the time when the property was seized.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE NOT-FOR-PROFIT — Any organization formed pursuant
to N-PCL § 201(b), Type-B.
CLOTHES DROPOFF BIN (BIN) — A closed container, metal or
otherwise, having an opening through which new or used clothing or
household goods only can be deposited and stored until pickup by the
registrant, also known as the "owner."
NON-CHARITABLE NOT-FOR-PROFIT AND FOR-PROFIT — Any
organization other than one formed pursuant to N-PCL § 201(b), Type-
B.
ORGANIZATION — An individual, business, partnership, association,
firm, company or corporation of any kind.
OWNER — The organization or person having legal title to the bin. Said
legal title shall be established by a bill of sale, a chattel mortgage, a
titled document or any other documentation evidencing ownership.
24.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 21-18 through 21-20 as §§ 21-19
through 21-21, respectively.
§ 21-17 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-18
17:247
REGISTRANT — Any organization or person that registers a clothes
dropoff bin with the Islip Town Clerks office pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Permit required; dates of issuance and expiration.
(1) Permit required for placement, emptying and removal. It shall be
unlawful for any person, except the Town of Islip or other municipal
agency to maintain, place, empty or remove or cause to be
maintained, placed, emptied or removed a clothes dropoff bin
without having first obtained a permit issued by the Islip Town
Clerk.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Permit required. A clothes dropoff bin permit shall be affixed to
every bin used by the permit holder for the collection and storage
of new or used clothing. A permit issued to a registrant shall be
affixed to the bin prior to placement. The permit shall be placed on
the same side of the bin as the chute used for the deposit of the
clothing. Next to the permit there shall be placed in clear lettering
the name and telephone number of the registrant. Upon the sale or
transfer of a bin, the new owner shall obtain a new permit from the
Islip Town Clerk's office and shall abide by the aforementioned
placement provisions.
(4) A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one yew from
its date of issuance. Said permit can be renewed for successive
one-year periods upon application to the Islip Town Clerk and upon
payment of any applicable fees.
C. Application for permit; contents: fees.
(1) The person wishing to obtain a dropoff bin permit shall complete a
registration application in such form as to be acceptable to the Islip
Town Clerk. Such application shall include but not be limited to:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person,
applying for the permit;
(b) The proposed location/address where the bin is to be placed,
together with the estimated duration of occupancy;
(c) The name, telephone number and written consent of the owner
of the location at which the bin is to be placed;
(d) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who
will be placing the bin;
(e) Information as to the manner and schedule for which the bin is
to be emptied or removed; and
§ 21-18 ISLIP CODE § 21-18
17:248
(f) The destination of the clothing or other items to be removed
from the bin.
(2) Permitting fees:
(a) Not-for-profits: An application permitting fee of $100 shall be
charged in advance for each one-year period the bin is in place
at the permitted locations. Said permitting fee of $100 shall
cover the fees for all bins placed by the not-for-profit. Said fee
shall be paid to the Islip Town Clerk in cash or by check. At the
time of payment of said fee, proof that the registrant is a
recognized § 501(c)(3) charitable organization must be
submitted to the Islip Town Clerk in at least two of the
following formats:
[1] Section 501(c)(3) IRS determination letter or letter of good
standing from the state or federal government oversight
agency;
[2] Certificate of incorporation indicating a charitable
purpose. together with a tax identification number;
[3] A letter addressed to the Islip Town Clerk on the not-forprofit's
letterhead and signed by an authorized signatory
stating that at least 25% of the revenue obtained from the
clothing bin is donated back to the not-for-profit.
(b) For-profit businesses: An application permitting fee of $100
per bin shall be charged in advance for each one-year period
the bin is in place at the permitted locations. Said fee shall be
paid to the Islip Town Clerk in cash or by check.
D. Permit number. Each approved permit application shall be given a
permit number issued by the Islip Town Clerk that shall be affixed to the
bin as required by this chapter and shall identify the bin as a for-profit
or not-for-profit bin.
E. Penalties for offenses: continuing offenses.
(1) In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for an offense
against the Penal Law, any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less
than $150 per day, but not more than $1,000 for the first such
offense.
(2) For each subsequent violation following a first offense, a violator of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 per
day, but not more than $2,500 in a one-month period. The Town
may also bring an action or proceeding to enjoin the offense and to
recover the costs incurred by the Town for removing and/or storing
the bin or otherwise remedying conditions brought about by the
offense of this chapter.
§ 21-18 FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES § 21-18
17:249
§ 21-19. Severability. [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 14-2008]
If any term, part, provision, section, subdivision or paragraph of this
chapter shall be held unconstitutional or ineffective, in whole or in part,
then, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective, this chapter
and such term, part, provision, section, subdivision or paragraph thereof
shall be in full force and effect, and such determination shall not be deemed
to invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions
or paragraphs thereof.
§ 21-20. When effective. [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 14-2008]
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.25
Chapter 21A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 22
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 5. Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 22-1. Purpose.
(3) In the event that the Town of Islip or any of its agencies is required
to retrieve a bin that is in violation of this chapter, the Town may
also bring an action or proceeding against the owner or registrant
or for-profit or not-for profit to enjoin the offense and to recover the
costs incurred by the Town for removing and/or storing the bin or
otherwise remedying conditions brought about by the offense of
this chapter. Storage fees shall be $25 per day.
A. The Town of Islip hereby declares that the raising of funds for the
promotion of bona fide charitable, educational, scientific, health,
religious and patriotic causes is in the public interest and would
thereby benefit all the residents of the Town of Islip.
B. The conducting of games of chance in the past, while also being illegal,
was subject to exploitation by professional gamblers as well as by the
undesirable elements of organized crime.
25.Editor's Note: Former § 21-21, Penalties for offenses, added 8-31-1994, was repealed
12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 14-2008.
§ 21-18 ISLIP CODE § 22-1
21A:250
§ 22-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED GAMES OF CHANCE HALL LESSOR — An authorized
organization which has been granted a lessor's license pursuant to this
chapter to lease a hall in which games of chance are to be conducted.
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes any bona fide religious or
charitable organization or bona fide educational or service organization or
bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen which shall have as
a dominant purpose one (1) or more of the lawful purposes as defined in
this chapter. Such organization shall be in existence and operating for this
lawful purpose for a period of at least three (3) years immediately prior to
applying for a license under this chapter. No political party shall be seen as
an "authorized organization."
AUTHORIZED SUPPLIER OF GAMES OF CHANCE EQUIPMENT — Any
person, firm, partnership or organization licensed by the Board to sell or
lease games of chance equipment or paraphernalia which comply with the
specifications and regulations established by the Board. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent an authorized organization from purchasing common
articles, such as cards and dice, from normal sources of supply of such
articles or from constructing equipment and paraphernalia for games of
chance for its own use. However, no such equipment or paraphernalia
constructed by an authorized organization shall be sold or leased to any
other authorized organization without the written authorization of the
Board.
BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Islip.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Includes specific "games of chance" in which prizes
are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color
or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but does not include
games commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" and also does not include slot
machines, bookmaking and policy or numbers games, as defined in § 225.00
of the New York State Penal Law. No "game of chance" shall involve the
wagering of money by one player against another.
LAWFUL PURPOSE — Includes one (1) or more of the following purposes or
causes:
C. It is hoped that this chapter of the Code of the Town of Islip will allow
the bona fide authorized organization to raise funds in order that it may
continue and expand its community service, while at the same time
ensuring that the funds so raised will not be exploited and used for
other purposes.
Shall benefit needy and deserving persons, in allowing for their
religious or educational advancement, or relieving them from disease
or distress, or by aiding their physical well-being, or by helping them
A.
§ 22-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 22-2
22:251
LICENSE PERIOD — The conducting of any type of game of chance on
any one (1) occasion which shall not exceed the period of fourteen (14)
consecutive hours. No series of prizes on any one (1) "license period" shall
exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000).[Amended 6-6-78]
PRIZE — A sum of money or item of merchandise or service which is
awarded to one who wins a game of chance, and where those who do not
win surrender their currency, at the conclusion of a single operation of
a game of chance. No "prize" for any one (1) participant in any one (1)
operation of such game of chance shall exceed one hundred dollars ($100.).
If a "prize" is awarded based on odds, only that portion in excess of the
winning wager made shall be considered the "prize." If merchandise or
services are awarded as the "prize," the value shall be seen as the actual
cost of the merchandise or service.
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
§ 22-3. Application for license.
to establish themselves as worthy and useful citizens, or by enhancing
their loyalty to the government.
Those which shall initiate, perform or foster worthy public works or
shall enable or further the erection or maintenance of public structures.
B.
Those which shall otherwise lessen the burdens borne by government
or which are voluntarily undertaken by an authorized organization to
augment or supplement services which the government would normally
render to the people.
C.
A. License application procedure to conduct games of chance shall be as
follows:
(1) Each applicant shall file with the Clerk a written application, on a
form to be supplied by the Clerk, duly executed and verified, which
shall contain the following information:
(a) The identification number issued to the applicant by the New
York State Racing and Wagering Board.
(b) The name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to the organization to enable the Clerk to
determine whether or not the applicant is a bona fide
organization.
(c) The date on which the applicant organization was incorporated
or came into being.
(d) The names and resident addresses of its officers; the place or
places where, and the date or dates and the time or times
when, the applicant intends to conduct the games of chance.
(e) The amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be
given directly or indirectly for each occasion for the use of the
§ 22-2 ISLIP CODE § 22-3
22:252
§ 22-4. Application investigation.
premises or hall of another authorized organization licensed
under the provisions of this chapter to conduct games of
chance or for the use of the premises or hall of an authorized
games of chance hall lessor.
(f) All other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in
connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such
games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons
to whom and the purposes for which they are to be paid.
(g) The purpose to which the entire net proceeds of such games of
chance are to be devoted and in what manner.
(h) A statement that no commission, salary, compensation, reward
or recompense will be paid to any person for conducting such
games of chance or for assisting therein except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
(2) Each application shall designate not less than four (4) active and
bona fide members of the applicant organization under whom the
games are to be conducted and shall have attached to it a
statement, duly executed and verified by the members so
designated, that they will be responsible for the manner in which
the games are conducted with the terms of the license and any
rules or regulations that may or may not be placed in effect by the
Board.
B. License application procedure for authorized games of chance hall
lessors shall be as follows:
(1) Each applicant shall file with the Clerk a written application, on a
form to be supplied by the Clerk, duly executed and verified, which
shall contain the following information:
(a) Name and address of the applicant.
(b) Designation and address of the premises or hall intended to be
covered by the license sought and the owner thereof.
(c) A statement that the applicant in all respects is qualified as an
authorized organization as defined by this chapter.
(d) The proposed rent for one (1) occasion.
C. License application fee. [Repealed 6-6-78]
A. License to conduct games of chance. The Clerk shall make an
investigation of the qualification of each applicant and the merits of
each application. Such investigation shall include but shall not be
limited to the following:
§ 22-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 22-4
22:253
§ 22-5. License fees; duration of license.
§ 22-6. Transfer of funds.
On or before the 30th day of each month, the Clerk shall transmit to the
State Comptroller a sum equal to fifty percent (50%) of all authorized games
of chance hall lessors' license fees, plus the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.) per
license period for the conduct of games of chance collected by the Clerk
during the preceding month.
§ 22-7. Display of license.
(1) That the applicant is duly qualified and that all statements made on
the application are accurate.
(2) That the members named in the application are in fact bona fide
members of the organization, that they are of good moral character
and that they have not been convicted of a crime.
(3) That it appears that the applicant is capable of conducting such
games of chance in accordance with this chapter and that the
proceeds will be used solely in accordance with this chapter.
B. License for authorized games of chance hall lessor. The Clerk shall
make an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the
merits of each application. Such investigation shall include but shall not
be limited to the following:
(1) That the applicant is an authorized organization to conduct games
of chance.
(2) That the issuance of such a license is in the public interest.
(3) That the organization that is to use the premises or hall is a duly
licensed authorized organization.
(4) That the funds received from the leasing shall be used for the
lawful purpose of the organization.
(5) That it appears that the applicant is capable of conducting such
games of chance in accordance with this chapter and that the
proceeds will be used solely in accordance with this chapter.
A. License to conduct games of chance. The license fee shall be twentyfive
dollars ($25.) for each license period.
B. License as authorized games of chance hall lessor. The license fee shall
be fifty dollars ($50.) for each license period that a duly licensed
authorized organization leases the premises or hall. The license issued
pursuant to this section shall be for one (1) occasion only.
C. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be effective for a period
of time exceeding one (1) year.
§ 22-4 ISLIP CODE § 22-7
22:254
§ 22-8. Restrictions on conducting games of chance.
A. License to conduct games of chance.
(1) Each license shall contain the name of the licensee, the address of
the licensee, the names and addresses of the members under whom
the games are to be conducted, the place and time when the games
are to be conducted, the purpose the funds raised will be used for,
that the net prize winnings will not exceed the legal limit and any
other items that may be required by the Board.
(2) Said license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where
the game is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
B. License to lease premises or hall.
(1) The license shall contain the name and address of the authorized
organization games of chance hall lessor, the address of the
premises or hall to be leased, the permissible rent and any and all
rules and regulations as may be stated by the Board.
(2) Said license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where
the game is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
A. No person or organization shall conduct games of chance or lease
premises allowing them to be conducted unless first obtaining a license
from the Clerk to do so.
B. Any rent charged for the leasing of a hall or premises to conduct games
of chance shall be an absolute figure and may not be based on a
percentage rate of the total revenue.
C. Equipment, if leased, must be leased from an authorized dealer licensed
by the Board or from another authorized organization with the approval
of the Board.
D. The entire net proceeds received from the conduct of the games must
be used for the lawful purposes of the authorized organization.
E. No single prize can exceed the amount or value of one hundred dollars
($100.).
F. No wager can exceed the amount or value of ten dollars ($10.).
G. No series of prizes on any one (1) license period shall exceed the
amount or value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
H. No person except a member of the authorized organization conducting
the games, or its recognized auxiliary organization, shall participate in
the management or operation of said games, nor shall any person be
paid for providing this service.
I. No games of chance shall be conducted by an authorized organization
more than twelve (12) times in a calendar year.
§ 22-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 22-8
22:255
§ 22-9. Financial statement.
J. No games of chance shall be conducted except between the hours of
12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Thursday, and
between the hours of 12:00 noon Friday and Saturday to 2:00 a.m., and
until 2:00 a.m. Sunday and, at the discretion of the Town Clerk, on
Sunday to run until 2:00 a.m. Monday. Games of chance will not be
allowed to be held at any other time. [Amended 6-8-78]
K. Subject to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, beer
may be offered for sale during the conduct of the games, but the
offering of all other alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
L. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to
participate in the games, take part in the management of the games or
be allowed on the premises during the conduct of the games.
M. Not more than two dollars ($2.) shall be charged by any licensee for
admission.
N. Every winner and every prize shall be determined and awarded, as well
as delivered, within the same calendar day as the game was conducted.
O. No alcoholic beverage of any kind shall be awarded as a prize in any
game of chance.
P. No game of chance shall be advertised as to its location, except that one
(1) sign, in accordance with the Code of the Town of Islip,26 may be
displayed on or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by a
licensed authorized organization; and when an organization is licensed
to conduct games of chance on premises of an authorized games of
chance lessor, one (1) additional such sign may be displayed on or
adjacent to the premises in which the games are to be conducted.
A. Within seven (7) days after the conclusion of any license period, the
authorized organization that conducted the games and the members
who were in charge of such conduct shall furnish the Clerk a statement,
signed by the members in charge, affirmed by them as true under the
penalties of perjury, showing the amount of the gross income from the
conduct of such games of chance, the expenses incurred as paid or to be
paid, other than the prizes awarded for winning a game of chance, the
name and address of each person the expenses were paid to or will be
paid to, with a detailed explanation of the need for such expenditure,
the description of the merchandise or service rendered, the net
proceeds obtained from the conduct of the games and the uses for
which said moneys have been used or will be used, and a list of all
prizes offered and given, with the values thereof. It shall be the duty of
the licensee to maintain and keep all books and records that are
necessary to verify the particulars of the financial statement rendered.
26.Editor's Note: For sign regulations, see Ch. 68, Zoning, Article XXIX.
§ 22-8 ISLIP CODE § 22-9
22:256
§ 22-10. Examination of books and records.
The Clerk shall have the power to examine or cause to be examined the
books and records of:
§ 22-11. Prohibited acts.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, corporation, association
or organization to:
B. Upon filing said financial statement with the Clerk, the authorized
organization shall pay to the Clerk, by certified check, an additional
license fee based on a percentage of the net proceeds of the period
covered by the statement. The percentage rate shall be based upon a
schedule which shall be established by the Board. [Amended 12-6-77]
A. Any authorized organization which is presently or which has been
licensed to conduct games of chance, as far as they might relate to the
conducting of these games of chance and the disposition of the net
proceeds derived therefrom. In addition, the Clerk may examine or
cause to be examined any manager, officer, member or agent of the
authorized organization, under oath, in relation to any matter which
may be related to the conduct of the games of chance and the
disposition of the net proceeds.
B. Any authorized games of chance hall lessors, as far as they might relate
to the leasing of a hall or premises for games of chance and, in addition,
the Clerk may examine or cause to be examined any manager, officer,
member or agent of the lessor, under oath, in relation to such leasing
and the disposition of the net proceeds derived therefrom.
A. Make any false statement in any application for any license authorized
under this chapter.
B. Pay or accept payment for the use of any hall or premises for
conducting games of chance in an amount greater than the amount set
forth in the license provided for by this chapter.
C. Fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record and
reflect all transactions connected with the conducting of games of
chance or the leasing of the hall or premises for such purpose.
D. Falsify or make any false entry in any books or records relating to the
manner of conduct of such games of chance, the rents received and the
manner of disposition of the net proceeds.
E. Divert or pay any portion of the net proceeds of any game of chance to
any person, association, corporation or organization except in the
furtherance of one (1) or more of the lawful purposes as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 22-9 GAMES OF CHANCE § 22-11
22:257
§ 22-12. Penalties for offenses.
§ 22-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person,
association, corporation or organization or set of circumstances shall be
adjudged unconstitutional or in violation of any other law by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter or the application
thereof to any other person, association, corporation or organization or set
of circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 22-14. Effective date.
The provisions of this chapter shall not become effective until adopted by
the Town Board of the Town of Islip, after a public hearing, and until the
proposition, as approved by the Town Board of the Town of Islip, shall be
submitted to the voters of the Town of Islip at a general or special election
and approved by a vote of the majority of the qualified voters of the Town
of Islip voting thereon. In no event will the provisions of this chapter be
effective within the Town of Islip prior to January 1, 1977.
§ 22-15. Enforcement. [Added 6-6-78; amended 2-6-79]
Enforcement of the rules and regulations of this ordinance shall be pursuant
to the General Municipal Law, § 194(1). That section permits the chief
law enforcement officer of the municipality to exercise rigid control and
close supervision over all games of chance conducted under any license.
Therefore, the Supervisor, or those designated by him, is hereby delegated
the responsibility of control and supervision of all games of chance.
F. Violate any of the rules, restrictions or guidelines that are established
and set forth in this chapter.
A. Any person, association, corporation or organization, or member,
officer, agent or employee of any such entity, who shall be found, by a
court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or
to a period of incarceration not to exceed one (1) year, or both.
B. In addition, any person, association, corporation or organization found
guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit any license
issued pursuant to this chapter and shall be barred from and be
ineligible to apply for such a license pursuant to this chapter for at least
a period of five (5) years from the date of such forfeiture.
§ 22-11 ISLIP CODE § 22-15
22:258
Chapter 23
GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Building and Housing — See
Ch. 6.
Department of Waste Disposal — See Ch. 63.
§ 23-1. Intent.
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in Section 29a thereof,
authorizes political subdivisions of the state to provide for the continuity
of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent attack upon
the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. The General Municipal
Law, in Section 60 thereof, authorizes political subdivisions to provide for
the continuity of their governments in the event of other public disasters,
catastrophes or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such
laws, this local law is adopted so that on such occasions the government
of the Town of Islip, New York, may continue to function properly and
efficiently under emergency circumstances.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall mean and include:
ATTACK — Any "attack," actual or imminent, or series of "attacks," by an
enemy or foreign nation upon the United States, causing or which may
cause substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the
United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shellfire,
or nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or
other weapons or processes.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that a substantial number
of the residents of the Town of Islip either sustain injury, become ill, are
infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the
result of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a substantial number
of such residents is imperiled, damaged or destroyed; and it is necessary
and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that the
continuity of the government of the Town of Islip be assured in order that it
be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential
powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such disasters, catastrophes and
emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to, conflagrations,
explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal waves,
pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power
or essential transportation services or any incident or occurrence which
causes or threatens to cause danger of life, health or property from
exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
§ 22-15 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23-2
23:259
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is vacant or at
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
of the incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to
the provisions of any general, special or local law other than this local law.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this local law for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties,
but not the office, of a Town officer in the event that neither such officer nor
any "duly authorized deputy" is able, due to death, absence from the Town
or other physical, mental or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties
of the office.
§ 23-3. Designation, status, qualifications and terms of designation
of emergency interim successor.
A. Elective officers. Within thirty (30) days following the effective date of
this local law and thereafter within thirty (30) days after first entering
upon the duties of his office, each elective officer shall, in addition to
any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency
interim successors to the powers and duties of his office and specify
their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so
that there will be not less than three (3) duly authorized deputies or
emergency interim successors, or combination thereof, to perform the
powers and duties of the office.
B. Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law
to appoint officers shall, within the time specified in § 23-3A, in addition
to any duly authorized deputy, designate for each such appointive
officer such number of emergency interim successors to such officers
and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized
deputy so that there will be not less than three (3) duly authorized
deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination thereof, for
each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists of members
having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review and, as
necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency interim
successors by such board within thirty (30) days after a new member
elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon the duties
of his office as a member of such body of officers.
C. Review of designations. The incumbent, in the case of those elective
officers specified in § 23-3A, and the appointing officer or body of
officers specified in § 23-3B, shall from time to time review and, as
necessary, promptly revise the designations of emergency interim
successors to insure that at all times there are at least three (3) duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination
thereof, for each elective and appointive officer of the Town.
D. Qualifications. No person shall be designated to nor serve as an
emergency interim successor unless he is legally qualified to hold the
§ 23-2 ISLIP CODE § 23-3
23:260
§ 23-4. Assumption of powers and duties.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in
§ 23-3A or B of this local law or his duly authorized deputy, if any, is unable,
due to death, absence from the Town or other physical, mental or legal
reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the office, the emergency
interim successor of such officer highest in rank in order of succession
who is able to perform the powers and duties of the office shall, except
for the power and duty to discharge or replace duly authorized deputies
and emergency interim successors of such officer, perform the powers and
duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall perform such
powers and duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or
his duly authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office or undertakes the
performance of the powers and duties of the office, as the case may be,
or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or
appointed to fill such vacancy and qualifies as provided by law.
§ 23-5. Recording and publication of designations.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the Town Clerk,
and each designation, replacement or change in order of succession of any
emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order
of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such data
regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors and
the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify in writing
each designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim
successor and his rank in order of succession and also shall notify in writing
any person previously designated who is replaced or whose place in order
of succession is changed.
§ 23-6. Qualifications for taking office.
At the time of their designation or as soon thereafter as possible, emergency
interim successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as
may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and duties of the
office to which they may succeed.
office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to
succeed.
E. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
F. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary unless otherwise provided by local law. He shall, however, be
entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred in
the performance of his powers and duties.
§ 23-3 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23-7
23:261
§ 23-7. Quorum and vote requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Supervisor or his duly
authorized deputy or emergency interim successor performing his powers
and duties may suspend quorum requirements for the Town Board. If
quorum requirements are suspended, any local law, ordinance, resolution
or other action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative
vote of a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or
approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting
thereon.
§ 23-8. Severability.
If any section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this local
law shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the section, subdivision, sentence,
clause, phrase or portion thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 23-9. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon its adoption and the filing of one (1)
certified copy thereof with the Town Clerk, one (1) certified copy in the
office of the State Comptroller and three (3) certified copies in the office of
the Secretary of State.
Chapter 23A
GRAFFITI
§ 23A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Graffiti and Defacement of Public and
Private Property Law."
§ 23A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BROAD-TIP INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker/pen or similar
implement containing fluid that is not water soluble and which has a flat or
angled writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
COMMUNITY SERVICE — Any organization or program employed by the
criminal courts or judiciary to provide for appropriate alternative sentences
to fine or imprisonment.
DEFACE — To mar the face or surface of, disfigure, injure or spoil the
appearance of.
§ 23-7 ISLIP CODE § 23A-2
23:262
ETCHING ACID — Any liquid, cream, paste, solution, compound, or similar
chemical substance that can be used to etch, draw, carve, sketch, engrave,
or otherwise alter, change or impair the physical integrity of glass or metal.
GRAFFITI — An inscription, word, figure, painting, drawing, covering mark
or design which is written, scratched, painted or drawn upon any wall,
building, monument, statue, structure, rock, or upon any other surface
without the permission of the owner.
§ 23A-3. Legislative intent.
A. The use of broad-tip pens, broad-tip indelible markers, aerosol spray
paint cans, etching acid or other marking devices used in connection
with writing graffiti on walls, public and private buildings, statues,
monuments and other structures has become a major problem in the
Town of Islip requiring serious punishment for the perpetrators. The
unabated proliferation of graffiti is a physical blight upon the landscape
of the Town and is destroying the aesthetic qualities of its communities.
The defacing of such public property and the use of foul language in
graffiti writing is harmful to the general public and is violative of the
good and welfare of the people of the Town of Islip. The Town of Islip
has seen an increase in the use of graffiti used by gangs to intimidate,
instill fear and harm others within our community. Any persons using
graffiti to specifically intimidate and instill fear on others based on their
race, color, religion, disability, sexual orientation, national origin or
ancestry will not be tolerated within the Town of Islip. Therefore, Town
Board intervention is necessary and advisable to regulate the
distribution and sale of aerosol cans and similar products used in
writing graffiti. Punishment by fine or imprisonment insofar as
offenders are concerned has failed to stop this type of vandalism. It is
the intent of the Town Board that any person guilty of writing graffiti on
public or private buildings or structures should be punished so that the
punishment shall fit the crime. The Town Board, accordingly,
recommends to the judiciary, when an offender has been convicted of
violating this chapter, that he be sentenced to remove graffiti under the
supervision of those agencies designated by the judiciary to supervise
offenders sentenced to community service in addition to any other
penalty provided by this chapter.
B. The Town Board further finds, based upon past experience, that such
defacement of property is most often committed by persons under 18
years of age using aerosol spray paint cans, broad-tipped indelible
markers and etching acid; that such persons rarely have a legitimate
need for such aerosol cans, markers or etching acid; that, where such a
need exists, such aerosol cans, markers or etching acid may be
furnished by a parent or guardian; and, therefore, that within the Town
the sale of aerosol spray paint cans, broad-tipped indelible markers and
etching acid should be prohibited and persons engaged in the retail sale
of such aerosol cans, markers and etching acid should be required to
take reasonable steps to prevent the theft of such cans and markers.
§ 23A-2 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23A-4
23:263
§ 23A-4. Prohibited acts.
§ 23A-5. Sale of aerosol cans, broad-tip indelible pens/markers,
etching acid.
A. No person shall make graffiti of any type on any public or private
building, structure or any other real or personal property owned by any
person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other legally
recognized entity, including any public corporation, agency or entity
without the consent and express permission of the owner or proprietor
thereof or, in case of public property, of the person having charge,
custody or control thereof.
B. Nor shall any person disfigure, cut, cover or rub with or otherwise place
filth or excrement of any kind on any public or private building,
structure or any other real or personal property owned by any person,
firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legally recognized
entity, including any public corporation, agency or entity, without the
consent and permission of the owner, proprietor thereof or, in the case
of public property, of the person having charge, custody or control
thereof.
C. No person committing a violation of the provisions of § 23A-4A or B of
this chapter shall write, paint, or draw any word, picture, inscription,
design, figure, phrase, statement, symbol, or mark of any type which
indicates bias or hatred of a person's race, color, religion, disability,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry.
(1) Rebuttable presumption. The use of a word, picture, phrase,
statement or symbol that is recognized as hateful, derogatory or
inflammatory towards a race, color, religion, disability, sexual
orientation, national origin or ancestry in graffiti shall create a
rebuttable presumption that such words, pictures, phrase,
statements or symbols were depicted intentionally to show bias or
hatred of the persons selected due to the victim's race, color,
religion, disability, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry.
D. No person shall provide, or make available to any other person, an
aerosol spray paint can, or a broad-tip indelible pen/marker, or etching
acid, if that person knows or has reason to know that said other person
intends to violate any section of this chapter.
E. No person within the Town of Islip shall possess, under any
circumstances evincing intent to use the same in order to change or
deface property, any aerosol spray paint can, broad-tip indelible pen/
marker, etching acid or any other tool, instrument, article, substance,
solution or compound designed or commonly used to deface property
with graffiti.
§ 23A-4 ISLIP CODE § 23A-5
23:264
§ 23A-6. Civil liability.
A. Sale to minor. No person within the Town of Islip shall sell or offer to
sell an aerosol spray paint can, or broad-tip indelible pen/marker, or
etching acid, to any person under 18 years of age.
B. Purchase by minor. No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or
attempt to purchase an aerosol spray paint can, or a broad-tip indelible
pen/marker, or etching acid.
C. Aid or assistance of purchase by a minor. No person within the Town of
Islip shall knowingly aid or assist a person less than 18 years of age in
the purchase of an aerosol spray paint can, or a broad-tip indelible pen/
marker, or etching acid.
D. Display. Any person selling or offering for sale aerosol spray paint cans
shall only display and/or offer for sale aerosol spray paint cans in a
secure enclosed display or behind a sales counter which is not
accessible to the public.
E. Notification signs. Any person selling or offering for sale aerosol spray
paint cans, or broad-tip indelible pens/markers, or etching acid shall
post in a conspicuous place, containing all capital lettering not less than
two inches in height on a contrasting background, a sign which clearly
states: "UNDER PENALTY OF LAW AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTION, IT
IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CANS, BROAD-TIP
INDELIBLE PENS/MARKERS, OR ETCHING ACID TO ANY PERSON
UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS."
A. Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legally
recognized entity, including any municipality, damaged as a result of
any conduct prohibited by this chapter may bring a civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction against a person convicted of any
violation of this chapter for the damages so sustained, including, but
not limited to, the cost of repairing and/or cleaning the condition.
B. Parents or legal guardians responsible.
(1) Used in § 23A-6B herein, the term "legal guardian" shall not apply
to any state or local social service department or agency, nor any
foster parent so designated by a state or local social service
department or agency or by court order.
(2) Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legally
recognized entity, including any municipality, damaged as a result
of any conduct prohibited by this chapter by a person under the age
of 18 years (hereinafter referred to as the "minor") who has had a
finding of guilt entered against him/her for a violation of this
chapter, in addition to a civil action under § 23A-6A against that
minor, may also bring a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction against that minor's parent and/or legal guardian for
the damages so sustained including, but not limited to, the cost of
§ 23A-5 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23A-6
23:265
§ 23A-7. Removal of defacement required.
repairing and/or cleaning the condition, if the plaintiff can prove
by the preponderance of the evidence that the parent and/or legal
guardian:
(a) Participated in violations of this chapter; or
(b) Had knowledge of the minor's intent to violate this chapter and
encouraged or permitted it; or
(c) Knowing of the minor's intent to violate this chapter, provided
the minor with the means to do so; or
(d) Gave or allowed the minor access to those items prohibited in
§ 23A-5A through C above, resulting in a violation of this
chapter; or
(e) Violated § 23A-5A through C above resulting in a violation of
this chapter; or
(f) Being aware of the fact that the minor had previously had a
finding of guilt entered against him/her under this chapter,
gave or allowed the minor to have access to an aerosol spray
paint can, a broad-tipped indelible marker, etching acid, or
another tool, instrument, article, substance, solution or
compound designed or commonly used to deface property with
graffiti, resulting in a violation of this chapter.
A. It is the responsibility of the owner, and/or his or her agent, and/or his
or her person-in-charge of any building or structure which has been
defaced with graffiti without the owner's, and/or his or her agent's, and/
or his or her person-in-charge's prior written permission, to completely
remove said graffiti from the building or structure within 20 days of
receipt of written notice of the defacement by the Town of Islip, unless
the owner, and/or his or her agent, and/or his or her person-in-charge
has entered into an agreement and waiver with the Town under
Subsections B and C below.
B. Fees for Town removal. There shall be a fee for the Town removal of
graffiti after the owner, and/or his or her agent, and/or his or her
person-in-charge of said building or structure completes the filing of a
waiver of liability as defined in Subsection C below with the Town. This
waiver of liability is due prior to the Town's removal of the subject
graffiti and/or defacement. The fee shall be $100 for residential
properties and $500 for commercial properties. In the event a property
owner claims the graffiti was the result of a crime and can produce a
police report attesting to this, there shall be no fee for the graffiti
removal. The Town of Islip shall provide a bill for the cost of the removal
to the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office in an attempt to recover
the cost of the service performed by the Town through restitution and/
§ 23A-6 ISLIP CODE § 23A-7
23:266
or shall initiate civil litigation to recoup the cost of the graffiti removal
from the offender. [Amended 7-16-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013]
C. Waiver. In order to induce the Town to remove graffiti as set forth in
§ 23A-7B above, the owner, and/or his or her agent, and/or his or her
person-in-charge of a commercial or private building or structure
located within the Town of Islip shall be provided with a waiver of
liability which holds the Town harmless in the removal of the graffiti/
defacement. It shall fall within the responsibility of the owner, and/or
his or her agent, and/or his or her person-in-charge of that structure to
properly complete such waiver of liability as a condition precedent to
the removal of the subject graffiti or defacement by the Town in a form
prepared by the Town and to return it to the designated representative
of the Town as indicated on such waiver.
D. Failure to completely remove said graffiti from a building or structure
or failure to enter into an agreement as referred to in Subsection C
above with the Town within the period set out in § 23A-7A above shall
be a violation.
E. Should the owner, and/or his or her agent, and/or his or her person-incharge
of any building or structure fail to remove the graffiti or
defacement that depicts a word, picture, phrase, design, figure,
statement, symbol or mark of any kind that is recognized as hateful,
derogatory or inflammatory towards a race, color, religion, disability,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry within a seventy-twohour
period, the Town shall take the necessary steps for the immediate
removal of such graffiti or defacement, provided that:
(1) Notice. The Commissioner of the Department of Public Works or his
or her designee shall notify the property owner in writing and/or
his or her agent, and/or his or her person-in-charge of the building
or structure by telephone, in person, by posting such notice on the
offending structure, or by certified mail of the violation and shall
specify the work required and specify the length of time during
which the work must be commenced. The Commissioner shall
advise the property owner and/or his or her agent, and/or his or her
person-in-charge of the consequences of the failure to comply.
(2) Failure to comply. In the event that the owner, and/or his or her
agent, and/or his or her person-in-charge neglects or refuses to
comply with the Commissioner's notice in the specified time, the
Commissioner is authorized to commence proceedings for a Special
Town Board meeting or present at regular Town Board meeting
where evidence shall be presented of the nature of the offensive
markings so as to authorize the Town Board to determine whether
such offensive markings are a danger to the community, and,
therefore, a public nuisance and to be treated as such under the
Islip Town Code with the required work to remove the graffiti and/
or defacement and to include all cost incurred by the Town in the
next regularly scheduled tax bill, and, in addition, the owner, and/or
§ 23A-7 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23A-7
23:267
§ 23A-8. Penalties for offenses.
his or her agent, and/or his or her person-in-charge shall be guilty
of a violation.
A. Any person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of § 23A-4A,
B, or D of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both. If a person having already been
convicted of any of these provisions is convicted of a subsequent
violation of these provisions within five years, that subsequent
conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $750, nor more
than $2,500.
B. Any person convicted of a violation of § 23A-4C of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a mandatory fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than
$2,500 and/or imprisonment for not more than one year. If any person is
convicted of a second violation of the provisions of § 23A-4C of this
chapter within five years of a prior conviction, that subsequent
conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $2,500, nor
more than $5,000 and imprisonment of not less than 15 days nor more
than one year.
C. Any person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of § 23A-4E
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a mandatory fine of not less than $250
and not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than three
months, or both. If any person is convicted of a subsequent violation of
the provisions of § 23A-4E of this chapter within five years of a prior
conviction, that subsequent conviction shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $500, nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more
than three months, or both. [Amended 7-16-2013 by L.L. No.
9-2013]
D. Any person who is convicted of a violation of § 23A-5 of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a mandatory fine of not less than $1,000 nor more then
$2,500 and/or imprisonment for not more than one year. If any person is
convicted of a subsequent violation of the provisions of § 23A-5 of this
chapter within five years of a prior conviction, that subsequent
conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $2,500, and no
more than $5,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both.
E. Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legally
recognized entity who is convicted of a violation of § 23A-7A shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each seven-day period that the
person, corporation, partnership, association or other legally
recognized entity fails to act shall constitute an independent and
continuing violation of § 23A-7A.
§ 23A-7 ISLIP CODE § 23A-8
23:268
§ 23A-9. Graffiti and Litter Removal Task Force.
§ 23A-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy and in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 23A-11. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, nor
construed to be in conflict with, the provisions of Penal Law of the State of
New York, nor any other local law or ordinance of the County of Suffolk or
the Town of Islip, and are not deemed to be exclusive of any other remedies
available under any application of federal, state, or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
F. Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legally
recognized entity who is convicted of a violation of § 23A-7E, in addition
to any other penalties that may be applicable for any other violations of
§ 23A-7A shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 and/or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days. Each day that the person,
corporation, partnership, association or other legally recognized entity
fails to act shall constitute an independent and continuing violation of
§ 23A-7E. [Amended 7-16-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013]
A. Chapter 23A of the Islip Town Code hereby establishes the Graffiti and
Litter Removal Task Force that will assess the scope and nature of the
Town's graffiti problems; discuss prevention and education; examine
the effectiveness of existing provisions of laws aimed at curbing graffiti
vandalism; and propose amendments to strengthen the Town's
legislation.
B. The Graffiti and Litter Removal Task Force shall consist of nine
members who will meet quarterly.
C. The Members will be appointed for a one-year term by the Town Board
at the first organizational meeting of the 2010 calendar year. Members
will be appointed at the first organizational meeting of the following
calendar years. The Task Force shall meet at least quarterly and at
other times as may be requested by the Town Board or as set by the
Chair of the Task Force who shall be appointed by the Town Board.
§ 23A-8 GOVERNMENT: CONTINUITY § 23A-12
23:269
§ 23A-12. Adoption of chapter.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon filing with
the Secretary of State of the State of New York. All prior laws and parts of
law in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 24
DEFENSE OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTED
OFFICERS
§ 24-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as "Legal Defense of Town Officers, Employees
and Appointed Volunteers."
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this local law, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGENCY EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position as an officer, director,
trustee or salaried employee, which position was appointed by the Board of
one (1) of the following youth service agencies: West Islip Youth Enrichment
Services (Y.E.S.), Central Islip Youth Development Corporation, Brentwood
Youth Development Corporation, Holbrook Youth Development Corporation,
Connetquot Youth Development Corporation, Bay Shore Citizens Concerned
for Youth and Islip-East Islip Youth Development Corporation.
APPOINTED VOLUNTEER — Any person holding a position of appointment,
pursuant to Town Board resolution, who is not an employee as therein
defined; or any person holding a volunteer participation agreement with the
Commissioner of Human Resources for transportation or outreach services,
who is not an employee as herein defined.
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Town, but shall not include a volunteer;
any person not compensated for his services; or an independent contractor.
The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or
judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 24-3. Employees to be defended.
A. Upon compliance by the employee, agency employee or appointed
volunteer with the provisions of § 24-4 of this local law, the Town shall
provide for the defense of the employee, agency employee or appointed
volunteer in the civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court
arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged
in the complaint to have occurred while the employee was acting or in
good faith purporting to act within the scope of his public employment
or duties. The Town shall further provide for the defense of the
employee, agency employee or appointed volunteer in the amount of
§ 23A-12 ISLIP CODE § 24-3
24:270
§ 24-4. Notice to Town; cooperation of employee.
The duties to defend provided in this local law shall be contingent upon
delivery to the Town Attorney of the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five (5) days after
he is served with such document and the full cooperation of the employee,
agency employee or appointed volunteer in the defense of such action or
proceeding and defense of any action or proceeding against the Town based
any judgment or settlement of claim obtained against such employee,
agency employee or appointed volunteer. Such legal defense and
indemnification shall be provided where the employee, agency
employee or appointed volunteer, at the time of such alleged act or
omission, was acting in good faith and within the scope of his
employment, powers and duties. Such defense shall not be provided
where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the
Town.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this local law, the employee,
agency employee or appointed volunteer shall be represented by the
Town Attorney or an attorney retained by the Town for the defense of
the employee, agency employee or appointed volunteer. The Town
Board shall employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the
employee, agency employee or appointed volunteer whenever the Town
Board determines, based upon its investigation and review of the facts
and circumstances of the case, that representation by the Town
Attorney would be inappropriate or a court of competent jurisdiction
determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee,
agency employee or appointed volunteer cannot be represented by the
Town Attorney. Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation expenses shall
be paid by the Town to such attorney employed or retained, from time
to time, during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding, subject to
certification by the Town Supervisor that the employee, agency
employee or appointed volunteer is entitled to representation under the
terms and conditions of this local law. Payment of such fees and
expenses shall be made in the same manner as payment of other claims
and expenses of the Town. Any dispute with respect to representation of
multiple employees, agency employees or appointed volunteers by the
Town Attorney or by an attorney employed or retained for such
purposes or with respect to the amount of the fees or expenses shall be
resolved by the court.
C. Where the employee, agency employee or appointed volunteer delivers
process and a request for a defense to the Town Attorney as required by
§ 24-4 of this local law, the Town Attorney may take the necessary steps,
including the retention of an attorney under the terms and conditions
provided in Subsection B of this section, on behalf of the employee,
agency employee or appointed volunteer to avoid entry of a default
judgment, pending resolution of any question relating to the obligation
of the Town to provide a defense.
§ 24-3 DEFENSE OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND § 24-4
24:271
upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such
delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee, agency employee or
appointed volunteer that the Town provide for his defense pursuant to this
local law, unless the employee, agency employee or appointed volunteer
shall state in writing that a defense is not requested.
§ 24-5. Construal of provisions.
§ 24-6. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 25
HOSPITAL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades, assemblies and carnivals — See Ch.
36.
Peddlers — See Ch. 39.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
A. The benefits of this local law will inure only to the employees, agency
employees and appointed volunteers as defined herein and shall not
enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party nor shall any provision
of this local law be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provisions of
the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. The benefits of this local law shall be extended to an employee of a
negotiating unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant
to the Civil Service Law, Article 14, only if such agreement expressly so
provides.
C. The provisions of this local law shall not be construed to impair, alter,
limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any
policy of insurance.
D. As otherwise specifically provided in this local law, the provisions of this
local law shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any
unit, entity, officer or employee, agency employee or appointed
volunteer of the Town or any right to defense by, in accordance with or
by reason of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common
law.
E. The provisions of this local law shall apply to all actions and
proceedings specified herein which have been commenced, instituted
or brought on or after the effective date of this local law.
§ 24-4 ISLIP CODE § 25-1
25:272
§ 25-1. Hospital zones designated.
The Town Board is hereby authorized to designate areas on highways within
limits of the Town of Islip and outside the limits of any incorporated Village
therein as "hospital zones." In pursuance thereof, the Town Board shall
have the power to erect or cause to be erected on lampposts, or in the
absence of lampposts, on such posts or stanchions or devices as it may
determine, and at such locations as may be determined adequate, on streets
and highways on which may be located a hospital, lying-in asylum or other
institution reserved for the treatment of the sick, a sign or signs displaying
notice that such area is a hospital zone and warning and admonishing
pedestrians and drivers to refrain from making any unnecessary noise
or parking automobiles or other vehicles in such areas adjacent to such
institutions and designated as such zones by the Town Board.
§ 25-2. Unnecessary noises prohibited.
The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise is
prohibited.
§ 25-3. Acts and sounds declared to be loud and disturbing.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this ordinance, but any enumeration
herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while stationary, except as a danger
signal when an approaching vehicle is apparently out of control, or, if in
motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any
such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the
sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable length of
time.
B. The operation of any radio, phonograph or use of any musical
instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any dwelling or institutions reserved for the care of
the sick or infirm.
C. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing any frequent or
long or continual noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of patients
in such institutions.
D. The use of any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle so
out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud, grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
E. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger.
§ 25-1 HOSPITAL ZONES § 25-3
25:273
§ 25-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.) or by imprisonment
for not more than ten (10) days.
Chapter 25A
HOUSEBARGES
§ 25A-1. Legislative intent.
F. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
G. The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m., and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays; except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector.
H. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening or destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
I. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the comfort and repose of the patients in such institutions.
J. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or
display of merchandise by the creation of noise.
K. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes, except upon specific
permit therefor from the Police Department.
A. It has come to the attention of the Town Board that watercraft are being
used for strictly residential purposes on waterways within the Town of
Islip. The proliferation of this type of use is expected to create
significant environmental problems if the proliferation remains
unchecked.
B. The Town Board recognizes that Great South Bay, its inlets and
tributaries, is one of the primary recreation areas on Long Island. It is
used for swimming, fishing and boating by many of the local residents
and visitors. Furthermore, the bay is a major commercial resource,
providing food and employment for the harvesters of fish and shellfish.
It is well known that shellfish taken commercially from Great South Bay
are distributed to all parts of the Eastern seaboard. The Town of Islip
§ 25-3 ISLIP CODE § 25A-1
25:274
§ 25A-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following words are intended to include and
be defined as follows:
HOUSEBARGE — Any vessel or craft used or designed to be used on the
water surface and to provide residential accommodations with sleeping and
toilet facilities, whose volume coefficient is greater than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) cubic feet. Volume coefficient is the ratio of the habitable
space of a vessel measured in cubic feet to the draft of a vessel measured in
feet of depth. Habitable space is any enclosed area used or designed to be
used for a person to sleep, sit or eat.
MARINA — Upland property which is used as a dock or mooring base for
more than one (1) vessel or craft not owned by the marina owner or his
family.
§ 25A-3. Storage or use of housebarges.
The storage or use of housebarges is prohibited.
§ 25A-4. Existing housebarges.
The lawful use of housebarges existing on August 21, 1984, may continue,
subject to the following conditions and specifications:
has expended large sums to develop and protect the harvestable clam
stock.
C. The Town Board acknowledges its duty to protect the health, safety and
welfare of its residents and visitors. The maintenance of high water
quality is vital to the use of Great South Bay for recreational and
commercial purposes. The avoidance of all uses and activities which
could introduce pollution in these waters is of constant concern. The
potential influx of vessels for residential purposes creates a substantial
hazard to water quality on Great South Bay. The residential use of these
vessels is contrary to the established character of Islip Town and will
severely diminish the recreational and commercial use of Great South
Bay.
D. The congregation of housebarges, and marinas catering to their use,
will likely create problems, which include, in addition to water
pollution, trash storage and removal, fire protection, police protection,
emergency energy requirements during power failures, loss of mooring
poles during winter months, drainage and sinking during storms, all
being hazards which the local government must consider and provide
for.
E. The residents of Islip are entitled to have these water resources
protected from potential pollution. It is in their interest to restrict and/
or prohibit long-term residential use on the waterways of the Town of
Islip.
§ 25A-1 HOSPITAL ZONES § 25A-4
25:275
§ 25A-5. Exceptions.
This ordinance shall not apply to commercial manufacturers of housebarges
until overnight use of a housebarge commences.
§ 25A-6. Use of marinas.
§ 25A-7. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation
and shall be punishable as follows: for each conviction, a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.).
§ 25A-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective immediately.
A. Within six (6) months of the enactment of this ordinance, all
housebarges shall be permanently connected to an upland septic
system which complies with all laws and regulations for septic systems.
B. Within six (6) months of the enactment of this ordinance, all
housebarges shall obtain a special permit for housebarges from the
Department of Environmental Control/Bay Management, which permit
shall be granted only upon compliance with Subsection A.
C. The special permit for housebarges may be revoked by the
Commissioner of Environmental Control upon a showing that the
permanent connection for a septic system is not connected.
D. As of August 21, 1989, all special permits for housebarges and all
existing uses of housebarges shall terminate.
E. Any existing use which has been destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion or act of God to the extent of sixty percent (60%) or more of
its fair market value shall be considered to be destroyed. Where more
than forty percent (40%) of the fair market value remains, any existing
use having a special permit for housebarges may be restored to the
same existing use as it existed before such damage.
A. Mooring, docking or storage of a housebarge at a marina is prohibited.
B. Overnight use of vessels on waterways at marinas located north of
latitude 40° 40' is prohibited unless the marina is equipped with
sanitary pumping facilities within five (5) miles of the overnight use and
with toilet facilities within six hundred (600) feet walking distance of
the overnight use. Overnight use of vessels on waterways at marinas
located south of latitude 40° 40' is prohibited unless the marina is
equipped with sanitary pumping facilities and with toilet facilities
within six hundred (600) feet walking distance of the overnight use.
This subsection shall be effective on or after July 1, 1986. [Amended
4-1-86]
§ 25A-4 ISLIP CODE § 25A-8
25:276
Chapter 26
HOUSING: DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair employment practices — See Ch. 17. Housing standards — See Ch. 27.
§ 26-1. Policy.
A. In the Town of Islip, with its population consisting of people of various
races, creeds, colors, familial statuses, sexual orientations, ages,
marital statuses and national origins, there is no greater danger to the
health, morals, safety and welfare of the Town and its inhabitants than
the existence of groups and individuals reflecting prejudice against one
another and antagonism toward each other because of differences of
race, creed, color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age,
marital status, military status or national origin. The Town Board
hereby finds and declares that acts of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry
and discrimination which deny a person the opportunity to sell,
purchase, lease, rent or obtain financing for the purchase or lease of
housing accommodations because of race, creed, color, sex, disability,
familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military status or
national origin threaten the fundamental rights and privileges of the
inhabitants of the Town of Islip and undermine the foundation of a free
and democratic state. The Town Board further declares it to be public
policy of the Town of Islip to eliminate and prevent discrimination and
involuntary segregation based on race, creed, color, sex, disability,
familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military status or
national origin, and to safeguard the right of every person to sell,
purchase, lease, rent or obtain financing for the purchase or lease of
housing accommodations without regard to race, creed, color, sex,
disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status,
military status or national origin. [Amended 2-15-1972; 7-11-1978;
3-6-2012]
B. The Town Board of the Town of Islip further declares it to be public
policy of the Town of Islip to offer assistance in the resettlement of all
persons removed from their places of residence by programs of the
Town of Islip, provided that such removal shall not be for a violation of a
Town of Islip ordinance, law or regulation.
C. In accordance with this policy, it shall be the duty of all Town officers,
officials and employees to exercise any governmental function relating
to the use, sale or occupancy of land, real property or housing
accommodations in such a manner, consistent with law, that all
discrimination be prevented. [Amended 3-6-2012]
§ 25A-8 HOSPITAL ZONES § 26-2
25:277
§ 26-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREED — Shall include all religious beliefs.[Added 3-6-2012]
DISABILITY — A physical, mental or medical impairment resulting from
an anatomical, physiological or neurological condition which prevents the
exercise of a normal bodily function.[Added 7-11-1978]
DISCRIMINATION[Repealed 2-15-1972] —
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any place in which human habitation is
permitted by the Town.
NATIONAL ORIGIN — Includes ancestry and ethnicity.[Amended
3-6-2012]
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, legal representatives and successors. The plural shall include
the singular and vice versa.
STEERING OR CHANNELING OF A PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER — The
use of a word or phrase or action by a real estate broker or salesperson
which is intended to influence the choice of a prospective home or property
purchaser on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, disability, familial status,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, military status or national
origin.[Added 7-11-1978; 3-6-2012]
TOWN ATTORNEY — Shall include the Town Attorney, Deputy Town
Attorney and Assistant Town Attorneys.
TOWN OF ISLIP — Shall include all land in the geographical boundaries of
the Town and any lands held in a proprietary capacity by the Town outside
said geographical limits, but no land in incorporated villages.
§ 26-3. Enforcement.
The Town Attorney is authorized to receive complaints of violations of this
ordinance and to take the necessary action to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Any action taken by him under this ordinance shall not require
resolutions of the Town Board.
§ 26-4. Prohibited acts. [Amended 2-15-1972; 7-11-1978]
A. No person or agent acting on behalf of another shall:
(1) Refuse to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation or any
facilities of any housing accommodation or land in the Town of Islip
to any person or group of persons, or refuse to negotiate for the
sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or land to any
person or group of persons by reason of race, creed, color, sex,
disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status,
military status or national origin of such person or persons, or
§ 26-2 ISLIP CODE § 26-4
25:278
represent that any housing accommodation or land is not available
for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available,
or otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation or any
facilities of any housing accommodation or land from any person or
group of persons because of the race, creed, color, sex, disability,
familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military
status or national origin of such person or persons.
(2) Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color,
sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital
status, military status or national origin in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or service in
connection therewith.
(3) Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any
statement, advertisement or publication, or use any form or
application for the purchase, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation or land, or make any record or inquiry in
connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation or land which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race,
creed, color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age,
marital status, military status or national originor any intent to
make any such limitation, specification or discrimination.
B. No real estate broker, real estate salesperson or employee or agent
thereof or any other individual, corporation, partnership or
organization, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from
which any such person or any of its stockholders or members may
benefit financially, shall: [Amended 3-6-2012]
(1) Engage in the practice of steering or channeling a prospective
home or property purchaser into or away from an area because of
race, creed, color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation,
age, marital status, military status or national origin, whether on
his own initiative or in response to the purchaser's initiative, or
either directly or indirectly discourage the prospective buyer from
purchasing a home in a particular area because of race, creed,
color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital
status, military status or national origin.
(2) Represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition with respect to race, creed, color, sex, disability,
familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military
status or national origin of the owners or occupants in the block,
neighborhood or area in which the real property is located, and
represent, directly or indirectly, that this change will or may result
in undesirable consequences in the block, neighborhood or area in
which the real property is located, including but not limited to the
§ 26-4 HOSPITAL ZONES § 26-4
25:279
lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial
behavior or a decline in the quality of schools or other facilities.
C. No person, bank, trust company, private banker, savings bank,
industrial bank, savings and loan association, credit union, investment
company, mortgage company, insurance company or other financial
institution or lender doing business in the Town of Islip (and, if
incorporated, regardless of whether incorporated under the laws of the
State of New York, the United States or any other jurisdiction), or any
officer, agent or employee thereof to whom application is made for
financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation or
land in the Town of Islip, shall: [Amended 3-6-2012]
(1) Discriminate against any such applicant or applicants because of
the race, creed, color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, age, marital status, military status or national origin of
such applicant or applicants, nor of any member, stockholder,
director, officer or employee of such applicant or applicants, nor of
the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodations or land in the granting, withholding, extending or
renewing or in the fixing of the rates, terms or conditions or any
such financial assistance.
(2) Use any form or application for such financial assistance or make
any record of inquiry in connection with applications for such
financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination because of race, creed,
color, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, age, marital
status, military status or national origin.
D. No person shall aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this ordinance or attempt to do so.
E. No person engaged in any activity to which this ordinance applies shall
retaliate or discriminate against any person because such person has
opposed any practices forbidden under this ordinance or because such
person has filed a complaint or testified or assisted in any proceeding
under this ordinance.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: [Added 3-6-2012]
(1) The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two families
living independently of each other, if the owner resides in one of
such housing accommodations;
(2) To the restriction of the rental of all rooms in a housing
accommodation to individuals of the same sex:
(3) To the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if
such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by
§ 26-4 ISLIP CODE § 26-4
25:280
§ 26-5. Penalties for offenses.
§ 26-6. Posting of notices and injunctions.
the owner of the housing accommodation and the owner resides in
such housing accommodation; or
(4) Solely with respect to age and familial status to the restriction of
the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations exclusively to
persons 62 years of age or older and the spouse of any such person,
or for housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether
housing is intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55
years of age or older, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) At least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one
person who is 55 years of age or older;
(b) The housing facility or community publishes and adheres to
policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent that the
housing accommodation be occupied by persons 55 years of
age or older; and
(c) The housing facility or community complies with rules issued
by the Secretary Housing and Urban Development for
verification of occupancy, which shall:
[1] Provide for verification by reliable surveys and affidavits;
and
[2] Include examples of the types of policies and procedures
relevant to a determination of compliance with the
requirements of Subsection F(4)(b). Such surveys and
affidavits shall be admissible in administrative and judicial
proceedings for the purposes of such verification.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 26-4 shall, for
each and every offense, be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250
or shall be imprisoned not less than five days nor more than 15 days, or
may be both fined and imprisoned.
B. Any person who sells or rents the housing accommodations or land in
question to anyone other than the complainant after notice that a
complaint of discrimination has been filed against such person shall,
upon conviction of a violation under such complaint, be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $250 or shall be imprisoned not less than five
days nor more than 15 days, or may be both fined and imprisoned.
C. Upon conviction of a violation under this ordinance, a violator may,
after application to a court of competent jurisdiction, be ordered to
make available to the complainant the premises involved.
§ 26-4 HOSPITAL ZONES § 26-6
25:281
§ 26-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or provision
of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, word or provision thereof.
§ 26-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect June 1, 1968.
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
HUMAN SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics and Financial Disclosure
Law — See Ch. 14.
Fair employment practices — See Ch. 17.
Residency — See Ch. 17A.
Defense of employees — See Ch. 24.
A. In addition to the sanctions and remedies set forth in § 26-5, the Town
of Islip may apply for an order in a court of competent jurisdiction to
compel compliance with or to restrain any violation of any provision of
§ 26-4.
B. In order to prevent the involvement of innocent third parties in the
rental or sale of housing accommodations or land in the period after a
complaint is filed but before an order or injunction is obtained, the
Town Attorney may post for 15 days a notice on the said housing
premises or land unless the person or persons charged with
discrimination agree in writing not to sell or rent during the pendency
of the action or proceeding against such person or persons. Any person
or persons who remove, cover or deface the posted notice shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $250 or shall be imprisoned not less
than five days nor more than 15 days, or shall be both fined and
imprisoned.
C. In order further to prevent the rental or sale of the housing
accommodations or land in violation of this ordinance, the Town
Attorney or legal representative may seek from a court of competent
jurisdiction a temporary injunction or restraining order to prevent the
disposition of the premises to other than the complainant during the
pendency of the complaint alleging discrimination.
§ 26-6 ISLIP CODE § 28-1
27:282
§ 28-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Islip Human Services Law."
§ 28-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 28-3. Establishment.
§ 28-4. Organization. [Amended 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
§ 28-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this chapter, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Human Services, who shall
be the chief executive officer of the Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Human Services,
which shall perform a major function of Town government.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER — The Deputy Commissioner of the Town of
Islip Department of Human Services, who shall act generally for and in
place of the Commissioner.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Human Services.
The principal executive officer and administrative head of such
Department shall be the Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the
Town Board for the term fixed by law at such salary as may, from time to
time, be fixed by the said Town Board. The Commissioner shall be
appointed on the basis of his/her administrative experience and
qualifications for the duties of such office and such additional standards
as may be required by the Town Board. The Commissioner shall be the
head of the Department, with power and authority to appoint and
remove officers and employees under his/her jurisdiction in accordance
with the Civil Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint a Deputy who shall
generally act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such duties as
are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this
chapter, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same
is required by the Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town
Board and in such form as approved by the Town Attorney.
§ 28-1 (RESERVED) § 28-5
27:283
§ 28-6. through § 28-7. (Reserved)
§ 28-8. Special districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 28-9. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by the Supervisor.
§ 28-10. Fees. [Amended 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Commissioner may establish, subject to Town Board approval, a
schedule of fees to be collected by him for services rendered in connection
with the work of his Department and for which he deems it necessary to
charge and collect a fee therefore.
§ 28-11. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 28-12. Effective date. [Added 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
This chapter, as amended, shall be effective on November 1, 2012.
Chapter 28A
A. The Department of Human Services shall be under the administration,
direction and control of the Commissioner. The Commissioner may, with
the approval of the Town Board, establish, consolidate or abolish any
divisions or subdivisions now existing or hereafter created in the
Department.
B. The Commissioner, acting by and through any existing or hereafternamed
divisions, shall be empowered to perform such other duties and
functions that are prescribed to be performed by him in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board, or lawful directive of the
Supervisor. However, the Commissioner may delegate any of his powers
to or direct any of his duties to be performed by a Deputy Commissioner
or head of a division.
§ 28-5 ISLIP CODE § 28-12
27:284
ICE CREAM TRUCKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers — See Ch. 39.
§ 28A-1. Definitions.
§ 28A-2. Required equipment.
§ 28A-3. Use of special lights and arm.
§ 28A-4. Vending restrictions.
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
COUNTY — The County of Suffolk.
ICE CREAM TRUCKS — Every motor vehicle in which ice cream, ice
milk or other frozen dairy products are carried for the purpose of retail
sale on the streets of the Town of Islip.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, corporations and unincorporated
associations or any other organization.
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
VEND OR VENDING — The offering of ice cream, ice milk or other
frozen dairy products for sale from a motor vehicle on the streets of the
Town of Islip.
B. Word usage. The term "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
A. In addition to other equipment required by law, every ice cream truck
shall be equipped with such safety devices as required by the County.
B. Every ice cream truck and driver thereof shall possess proof of vehicle
inspection by the County and proof of the successful completion of the
County driver safety course.
A. The driver of an ice cream truck stopped on a street for the purpose of
vending shall actuate any special flashing lights and extend such swing
arm as is required by the County.
B. These lights and swing arm shall not be used when an ice cream truck is
in motion nor at any time when stopped for a purpose other than
vending.
A. A person shall not vend on streets where the speed limit exceeds thirty
(30) miles per hour.
§ 28-12 (RESERVED) § 28A-4
27:285
§ 28A-5. Unauthorized riders prohibited.
§ 28A-6. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against any provision of this chapter which is not within the
purview of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) for
each such offense. A peddler found guilty of any such offense may have his
license revoked by the Town Board.
§ 28A-7. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or any
section, provision or part hereof not so adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 28A-8. When effective.
This local law shall take effect when the appropriate certified copies hereof
are filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of the State of New
York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 29
JUNKYARDS AND SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 18.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
B. The driver of an ice cream truck shall not drive in reverse in order to
make or attempt a sale.
C. It shall be lawful to vend only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., except for the period from April 15 through October 15 during
which vending shall be permitted from 10:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m.
[Amended 8-16-2011]
A. The driver of an ice cream truck shall not permit any person under
sixteen (16) years of age nor any unauthorized person to ride in or on
the vehicle.
B. A person shall not ride in or on an ice cream truck unless employed by
its owner or unless authorized in writing to do so by the owner.
§ 28A-4 ISLIP CODE § 29-1
27:286
§ 29-1. Legislative intent.
A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of importance
to the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Islip. It is further declared that the unrestrained accumulation of junk is a
hazard to such health, safety and welfare of citizens of the Town of Islip,
necessitating the regulation and restraint thereof.
§ 29-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Scrapped, discarded or waste objects.
JUNKYARD — A place where junk is stored outdoors. A "junkyard" shall
include a place where motor vehicles or trailers are dismantled and parts
thereof are stored, bought, sold or await future disposal as scrap.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation or
any and all combinations of individuals acting in concert.
SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY — An establishment engaged
primarily in the purchase, processing and shipment of ferrous and/or
nonferrous scrap, the end product of which is the production of raw
material for remelting purposes for steel mills, foundries, smelters,
refineries and similar users.
§ 29-3. License required.
No person shall establish, operate or maintain a junkyard or a scrap metal
processing facility until he has obtained a license to do so from the Town
Clerk.
§ 29-4. Application for license.
To obtain a license to establish, operate or maintain a junkyard or a scrap
metal processing facility, an applicant must submit to the Town Clerk an
application, in proper form, as prescribed by the Town Clerk. If any of the
information supplied should change during the life of the license issued
hereunder, the applicant shall advise the Town Clerk within 10 days of said
change.
§ 29-5. Renewal of licenses; transferability; revocation.
A. A license issued hereunder shall expire June 30 of the year in which it
was granted, and be renewable annually thereafter as of July 1,
provided that all provisions of this chapter and other pertinent law,
regulations and ordinances of the Town of Islip have been complied
with during the license period and the licensee has not been convicted
of larceny or of knowingly receiving stolen goods, or of a violation of
Article 6 of the General Business Law.
§ 29-1 (RESERVED) § 29-5
27:287
§ 29-6. License fees.
The license fee of $250 is to be paid at the time of filing the application.
§ 29-7. Town Board special permit required.
No person shall be issued a license to establish, operate or maintain a
junkyard or scrap metal processing facility until a Town Board special
permit has been granted for such use, pursuant to Town Code § 68-356G or
H.
§ 29-8. Maintenance of junkyard and scrap metal processing
facility.
§ 29-9. Fencing requirement.
Before use, a new junkyard or scrap metal processing facility shall be
surrounded by a fence eight feet in height, composed of chain link with
stockade attached and with a suitable gate which shall be closed and locked
except during the working hours of such junkyard or scrap metal licensing
facility. Such fence shall be erected not less than 50 feet from a public
highway and shall screen the junk from public view. All junk shall be kept
within the fence except as removal shall be necessary for the transportation
of same in the reasonable course of the junkyard or scrap metal processing
facility operation. None of the requirements of this section may be modified
or altered except upon approval by the Planning Board and acceptance by
the Town Board and upon reaching a determination that such modification
or alteration will conform to and be in compliance with the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 29-10. Penalties for offenses.
B. The license is granted personally to the applicant and is not assignable.
A. The license shall be conspicuously posted in the office of the junkyard
or scrap metal processing unit or other appropriate location.
B. No junk shall be burned on the premises in the open, except in
accordance with fire codes or other applicable provisions of law
governing burning with open fires.
C. All junk shall be arranged in an orderly manner so as to permit easy and
clear passage to and through all areas of the junkyard or scrap metal
processing facility.
A. The owner or licensee of any such junkyard or scrap metal processing
facility who commits or permits any acts in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an offense
and be liable for the penalty therefor. Each day such violation shall
continue or be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 29-5 ISLIP CODE § 29-10
27:288
§ 29-11. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the remainder of
this chapter.
§ 29-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and its publication as
prescribed by § 133 of the Town Law.
Chapter 30
LADDERS ON BULKHEADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Be it enacted by the Town Board of the Town
of Islip as follows:
§ 30-1. Definitions and usage.
When used in this local law:
§ 30-2. Requirements.
B. For every violation of any provision of this chapter, the person violating
the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. Definitions.
PERSON — Includes one (1) or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives and successors.
BULKHEAD — Includes a structure of any kind of material constructed
along the "water line" or in the water as a retaining wall between
the water and the uplands and includes all such structures and any
parts thereof used to moor boats or ships of any kind and which are
commonly known as piers or docks.
WATER LINE — Is that level represented by the uppermost part of the
ground or structure in the water, wholly saturated with water.
MEAN LOW-WATER LINE — Is the average height of the water at all
low tides at a given place during the calendar year.
B. Usage. The plural shall include the singular, and vice versa, and the
term "shall" is mandatory.
§ 29-10 LADDERS ON BULKHEADS § 30-2
30:289
§ 30-3. Nonapplicability.
This local law shall not apply to a bulkhead when the water line at the
bulkhead and at every point parallel to the bulkhead for a distance of six (6)
feet from the bulkhead measures two (2) feet or less at mean low water.
§ 30-4. When effective; when compliance required.
This local law shall take effect immediately and all affected parties are given
sixty (60) days to comply therewith.
§ 30-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this local law or fail
to comply therewith or any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of an
offense which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.),
and each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
offense.
A. All persons who own real property in the Town of Islip who have on
their property in the Town of Islip one (1) or more bulkheads of any
description or condition shall place and maintain on the water side of
each said bulkhead, at intervals of every one hundred (100) feet, a
wooden or metal ladder of substantial construction sufficient to support
an adult human being, with rungs not more than sixteen (16) inches
apart extending from two (2) feet below the mean low-water line at the
bulkhead to the top of said bulkhead.
B. At least one (1) such ladder shall be placed and maintained on every
bulkhead, pier or dock existing or to be constructed on each separately
owned parcel of real property in the Town of Islip, notwithstanding the
fact the bulkhead may measure less than one hundred (100) feet from
end to end.
§ 30-2 ISLIP CODE § 30-5
30:290
Chapter 31
LICENSES AND PERMITS: ISSUANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 5.
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
15.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 18.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 29.
Parades, assemblies and carnivals — See Ch.
36.
Peddlers — See Ch. 30.
Licensing plumbers — See Ch. 40.
Racetracks — See Ch. 42.
Shellfish — See Ch. 44.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 49.
Tow trucks — See Ch. 51.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 54.
Trawling and eel dredging — See Ch. 56.
§ 31-1. Issuance by Clerk and Building Inspector.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Islip may issue a license specifying the trade,
occupation or use of premises thereby authorized, and such license shall
become effective from the date thereof and shall continue in force for the
term specified therein. The Building Inspector of the Town of Islip may issue
permits pursuant to Section 138 of the Town Law. The Town Clerk of the
Town of Islip may issue such a license for a period of one (1) year from the
date thereof. The Building Inspector of the Town of Islip may issue a permit
for a period of one (1) year from the date thereof.
§ 31-2. Supersession of statutory provision.
This local law shall supersede Section 137 of the Town Law, being Chapter
634 of the Laws of 1932, an act relating to towns, as amended, insofar as it
is inconsistent with such section.
§ 31-3. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 32
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 21.
§ 30-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS: ISSUANCE § 32-1
31:291
§ 32-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish litter control in the Town and
pursuant to the general laws of the State of New York to adopt basically
uniform and coordinated litter control local legislation throughout the state.
This chapter is intended to place upon all persons within the Town the
duty of contributing to the public cleanliness and appearance of the Town
in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to protect
the economic interests of the people against the health and safety menace
and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places
by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and
commercial and noncommercial handbills.
§ 32-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
container which is durable, rust-resistant and capable of being tightly
sealed. Receptacles used for the storage of garbage shall, in addition
thereto, be nonabsorbent, watertight, easily washable and equipped with
handles and shall not exceed 30 gallons in capacity. Biodegradable bags
shall be deemed authorized private receptacles for the storage and
collection of grass cuttings and leaves.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature, excluding newspapers:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting. theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms
of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident
to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
when information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided
that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the
holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance,
C.
§ 32-1 ISLIP CODE § 32-2
31:292
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Any store, office building or group thereof;
any professional, institutional, mercantile or industrial premises, and all
yard and parking areas thereof; any vacant or unimproved commercial,
business or industrial property.
LITTER — All waste material, including rubbish, which tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare or creates unsightliness .
NEWSPAPER — Any publication or newspaper of general circulation as
defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with the federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer
as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, means and includes any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four
issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, paper, booklet or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter
of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of "commercial
handbill" or "newspaper."
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for a single-family or multiplefamily
dwelling, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building or other structure, including any vacant or
unimproved residential property.
TOWN — The unincorporated areas in the Town of Islip.
exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is
or may be required by any law of this state or under any ordinance of
this City; or
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 32-2 LICENSES AND PERMITS: ISSUANCE § 32-3
31:293
§ 32-3. Littering prohibited.
No person shall dispose of litter in or upon public, private or commercial
property within the Town except in public receptacles, in authorized private
receptacles for collection or in official disposal areas. Persons placing litter
in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such
a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited upon any street,
sidewalk or other public, private or commercial property. No person shall
dispose of handbills upon vehicles without the consent of the owner of the
vehicle.
§ 32-4. Maintenance of residential and commercial property.
Any person owning, occupying or in control of residential or commercial
property shall maintain such property, including the sidewalk and street in
front thereof, free of litter.
§ 32-5. Failure to remove litter; notice; assessment of costs.
A. Authority to remove. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in
control of such land shall fail to remove litter in the Town, including
unregistered motor vehicle(s), vehicle parts and machinery, the Town
shall have the authority as provided for herein to enter onto such land
and clean the same and charge the cost of expense of such action
against the owner and establish a lien in the manner herein provided.
B. Town Board action. Any owner of real property in the Town shall be
required to remove the litter which exists upon his land when directed
to do so by resolution of the Town Board, pursuant to the authority
provided under Town Law § 64(5).
C. Notice to be served. Whenever the Town Board shall adopt a resolution
requiring the owners of land to remove litter which exists thereon, the
Town Board shall specify the time within which such work shall be
completed. Such notice shall set forth, with reasonable certainty, the
location at which the condition exists and the manner in which the
removal work shall be performed. The owners shall be given at least 10
days from the date of the mailing of the notice during which the work
shall be performed, and, in any event, such notice shall grant a
reasonable time giving due consideration to the amount of
accumulation of rubbish or debris and the location thereof. Notice of
the adoption of a resolution requiring the removal work shall be served
upon the owners of the property at which the condition exists, by
certified mail, addressed to the last known address of said owner.
D. Failure to comply. Whenever a notice or notices referred to in § 32-5C of
this chapter have been served and the owner shall neglect or fail to
comply with such notice within the time provided therein, the Town
Board shall authorize the work to be done and shall provide for the cost
thereof to be paid from general Town funds as directed by resolution.
§ 32-3 ISLIP CODE § 32-5
31:294
§ 32-6. Throwing or distributing commercial and noncommercial
handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Town, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; however, it is not unlawful on any sidewalk,
street or other public place within the Town for any person to hand out
or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 32-7. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on
uninhabited or vacant property.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private residence or other private property which is
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 32-8. Distributing handbills on posted property.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private residence or other private
property, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed
on the residence or property in a conspicuous position near the entrance
thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any
manner that the occupants of the residence or property do not desire to
have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left upon such
premises.
§ 32-9. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at
inhabited private residences.
E. Manner of assessment of cost upon real property. In any case where it
shall be necessary for the Town Board to have the work performed due
to the failure of the owner to comply with the Town Board's resolution,
the Town shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or the
services rendered at its direction, by assessment or levy upon the lots
or parcels of land where such work was performed or such services
rendered. All costs actually incurred by the Town upon each lot or
parcel and the charge therefor shall be assessed and collected in the
same manner and in the same time as other ad valorem Town charges.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private residence which is
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such
private residence; provided, however, that in case of an inhabited
private residence which is not posted, as provided in this chapter, such
person, unless requested by anyone upon such residence not to do so,
§ 32-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS: ISSUANCE § 32-9
31:295
§ 32-10. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense against
the chapter, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and
not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days
for each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and
every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and
the penalties prescribed above shall be applicable to each such separate
offense, except that no further penalties shall be imposed for the period
during which any appeal from a conviction of such offense is pending.
§ 32-11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 33
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 33-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that the sale of items used to aid the
storage, use and concealment of and to test the strength or purity of illegal
drugs is a widespread and growing practice which is contrary to the public
interest. Many parent and teacher organizations, such as the New York
State Congress of Parents and Teachers, as well as local Parent-Teacher
Association groups have recognized the problem and have encouraged
and endorsed legislation that would prohibit the sale of drug-related
paraphernalia. Therefore, public safety, health, welfare and morals would
be best served by discontinuing the sale of such items.
may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited
private residence, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to
secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about such
residence or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal
law or regulations, and in no event shall such handbill be placed or
deposited upon the curb, sidewalk, driveway or front, rear or side yard.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to
newspapers (as defined in § 32-2) except that newspapers shall be
placed on private residences or other private property in such manner
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private residences or
other private property.
§ 32-9 ISLIP CODE § 33-2
33:296
§ 33-2. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, conveying, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the State of New York. It
includes but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is
a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
A.
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
B.
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
C.
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
D.
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
E.
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
F.
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from or otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
G.
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
H.
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
I.
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
J.
§ 33-2 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 33-2
33:297
§ 33-3. Evidence to be considered.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
Hypodermic syringes, needles and the other objects used, intended for
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
K.
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting or
otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine or hashish into the human
body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured bowls.
(1)
(2) Water pipes.
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks.
"Roach clips," meaning objects used to hold burning material such
as marijuana cigarettes, that have become too small or too short to
be held in the hand.
(5)
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(7) Chamber pipes.
(8) Carburetor pipes.
(9) Electric pipes.
(10)Air-driven pipes.
(11)Chillums.
(12)Bongs.
(13) Ice pipes or chillers.
L.
Cocaine spoon. A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for
which it is reasonably adopted or designed is to hold or administer
cocaine and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful
uses of a spoon. A "cocaine spoon" may or may not be labeled as a
"cocaine spoon" or "coke spoon."
M.
Marijuana or hashish pipe. A pipe characterized by a bowl which is
so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adopted or
designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful
smoking tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen.
N.
§ 33-2 ISLIP CODE § 33-3
33:298
§ 33-4. Sale and display of drug accessories.
It shall be a violation of this local law for any merchant or other person to
knowingly sell, offer for sale or display any cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe,
hashish pipe or any other drug-related paraphernalia.
§ 33-5. Penalties for offenses.
A person who violates any provision of this local law is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of the owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of
this local law.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he knows, or should
reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate violation of this
local law; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object as the direct violation of this local law should not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
L. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to
the total sales of the business enterprise.
M. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
N. Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 33-3 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 33-6
33:299
§ 33-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this local law shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined
in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy and in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 33-7. When effective.
This local law shall take effect on the 30th day after it shall have become a
law._
Chapter 34
MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades, assemblies and carnivals — See Ch.
36.
§ 34-1. Certain activities prohibited.
All commercial and business activities on Memorial Day or on Independence
Day are hereby prohibited, except that when the same are works of
necessity, they may be performed on those days in their usual and orderly
manner so as not to interfere with the observance of said days.
§ 34-2. Sales prohibited; exceptions. [Amended 5-26-64; 10-5-71;
5-17-77]
All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property on Memorial
Day or on Independence Day is prohibited at any time before the hour of
12:00 noon, except as follows:
A. Articles of food may be sold, served, supplied and delivered at any time
before 10:00 a.m.
B. Meals may be sold to be eaten on the premises where sold at any time of
the day.
C. Caterers may serve meals to their patrons at any time of the day.
D. Prepared tobacco, bread, milk, eggs, ice, soda water, fruit,
confectionary, souvenirs, newspapers, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs,
medicines and surgical instruments may be sold and may be delivered
at any time of the day.
§ 33-6 ISLIP CODE § 34-2
34:300
§ 34-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-26-64; 10-3-7227]
Any persons, association, partnership or corporation violating any
provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 34-4. Effective date.
This ordinance is to take effect and be in force on and after March 2, 1963.
Chapter 35
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Airport, noise allocation — See Ch. 3D.
Noise surcharge on aircraft operations — See
Ch. 3F.
Animals — See Ch. 12.
Hospital zones — See Ch. 25.
§ 35-1. Declaration of policy.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby declares its intent to prevent
unreasonably loud and disturbing noises as they are deemed to be
detrimental to the life, health, welfare and good order of the people of the
Town of Islip. By this enactment the Town Board intends to promote the
health, safety, morale and welfare of the people of the Town of Islip and, in
E. The sale of cut flowers, wreaths and plants to be used for purposes
consistent with observance of Memorial Day or Independence Day.
F. Grocers, delicatessen dealers and bakers may sell, supply, serve and
delivery cooked and prepared foods; and roadside stands selling fresh
vegetables and other farm produce, and bait stores, may sell, supply,
serve and deliver merchandise usually sold by them at any time of the
day.
G. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as permission to
carry on commercial or business activities except as otherwise
regulated by law.
H. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting
the sale of alcoholic beverages by persons, firms or corporations
holding licenses or permits issued under the provisions of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law.
27.Editor's Note: Effective date of this amendment is 10-21-72.
§ 34-2 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 35-1
34:301
the exercise of its police powers in this regard, the Town Board does hereby
enact the following chapter. It is the intention of the Town Board that this
chapter be liberally construed so as to effectuate the purposes described in
this section.
§ 35-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings
indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound pressure level
measured in decibels with a sound level meter set for A-weighting,
abbreviated "dBA."
dBA — The A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured by a general
purpose sound level meter complying with the provisions of the American
National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters (ANSI
SI.4 1971), properly calibrated and operated on the A-weighting network.
NOISE DISTURBANCE —
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — A line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned or controlled
by one person from that owned or controlled by another person, including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
WEEKDAY — Any day Monday through Saturday, which is not a state or
federal legal holiday.
That level of sound which, in each context described in § 35-3, either:
Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal auditory
sensitivities; or
(1)
Is clearly audible outside the residential, real property boundary
from which it originates; or
(2)
Is loud, disturbing, unusual, unreasonable and unnecessary as well
as audible outside the structure or the real property boundary from
which it originates.
(3)
A.
A noise disturbance may be substantiated by either of the following:
Sworn affidavits from two or more residents who are in general
agreement as to the times and durations of the noise and who
reside in separate residences, apartments, condominiums, or any
other place of residence; or
(1)
A noise in excess of the maximum permissible A-weighted sound
levels, as measured by a sound level device, authorized by Noise
Control Table 1.28
(2)
B.
28.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 35-1 ISLIP CODE § 35-3
34:302
§ 35-3. Prohibited noises.
Each of the following is declared to constitute a violation of this section:
A. Electronic devices, including but not limited to radios, phonographs
and television sets. The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated of any television or radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or, at any time, of louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person or persons who
are in the room, vehicle, chamber or area in which such machine or
device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure,
vehicle or area in which it is located so as to create a noise disturbance.
B. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling
device or alarm (except as a danger warning, pursuant to § 375 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York) which results in a
harsh or loud sound or repetitive sounds for any unreasonable or
unnecessary period of time, so as to create a noise disturbance.
C. Shouting and yelling. Shouting, yelling, singing, calling, hooting or
whistling so as to create a noise disturbance.
D. Animals and birds. The keeping of any one or more animals or birds
whose howling, barking, squawking or any other sounds by virtue of
loudness, duration, frequency or intensity, causes public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm; or creates a noise disturbance.
E. Engines. The operation, including the stationary idling, of any engine,
including, but not limited to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle,
motorbike, motorboat, minibike engine, or all-terrain vehicle so as at to
create a noise disturbance.
F. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, or loaded in such a manner so as to create loud,
grating, grinding, rattling or other sounds so as to create a noise
disturbance.
G. Heavy equipment. The operation of any pile driver, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, electric hoist, bulldozer, grinder or other appliance or heavy
equipment, the use of which creates a noise disturbance, except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and except
in cases of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety.
H. Loading and unloading. The loading or unloading of any vehicle, boat,
barge or train or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates
and containers or the loading or unloading of any materials, equipment
or garbage cans so as to create a noise disturbance.
§ 35-3 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 35-3
34:303
I. Construction or repairing of buildings. Any construction, excavation,
demolition, alteration or repair which creates a noise disturbance,
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and
except in cases of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety.
J. Schools, courts, religious institutions, hospitals. The creation of any
noise disturbance on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, religious institution or court while the same is in use, or
adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys
patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed
in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court
street.
K. Hawkers, peddlers, and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood so as to create a noise disturbance.
L. Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of
metal rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and
along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or
in any other manner so as to create a noise disturbance.
M. Domestic equipment. The operation of or permitting to be operated any
power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden devise, leaf or
snowblower, insect control device or domestic equipment so as to
create a noise disturbance, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on Sundays, and except in cases of urgent necessity or in the
interest of public safety.
N. Sound device or apparatus. Operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any sound device or apparatus, including but not
limited to, loudspeakers or speaker systems, or any device for the
production or reproduction of sound, in such a manner so as to create a
noise disturbance.
O. Commercial music. Music originating from or in connection with the
operation of any commercial facility, establishment or enterprise in
such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance.
P. Explosives, firearms and similar devices. The use or firing of explosives,
firearms or similar devices so as to create a noise disturbance, except
as permitted by any other federal, state, county or local law.
Q. Ice cream trucks and vendors. The use of any device affixed to or
contained within an ice cream truck or vendor, which device plays
music of any kind, emits a ringing noise of any kind, or otherwise uses
sound to attract customers while idling at a stop, or any sound which
plays continuously for more than one minute while said ice cream truck
or vendor is in motion.
§ 35-3 ISLIP CODE § 35-4
34:304
§ 35-4. Maximum permissible A-weighted sound pressure levels.
§ 35-5. Noise violation.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person or business entity to
make, continue, allow, permit or cause to be made or cause to be continued
to be made any noise disturbance by any means within the Town of Islip.
§ 35-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or business entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and such violation shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $500 for a first offense, not more than $1,000
for a second offense, and for any offenses thereafter, a fine not less than
$1,500, and for any such offense whatsoever, in addition to a monetary fine
A. In addition to the prohibited noises enumerated in § 35-3 of the within
chapter, for which no measurement of sound is required, no person
shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source of sound
on a particular category of property or any public lands or right-of-way
in such a manner so as to create a sound level that exceeds the
particular sound level limits set forth in Table 129, when measured at or
within the real property boundary line of the receiving property.
B. The following acts are exempt from the A-weighted sound pressure
level limits of Table 1:
(1) Noise from the operation of heavy equipment, including the
operation of any pile driver, pneumatic hammer, derrick, electric
hoist, bulldozer, grinder or other appliance, between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays.
(2) Noise from the construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
on weekdays.
(3) Noise from the operation of domestic equipment, including any
power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden device, leaf or
snowblower, insect control device, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(4) Noise from any religious building when part of a religious
observance or service.
(5) Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices owned and
operated by any public utility, municipal subdivision, fire
department or ambulance corps when used in connection with an
emergency or for testing purposes.
29.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 35-4 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 35-6
34:305
as described herein, said violation could result in imprisonment for a period
not in excess of 15 days.
§ 35-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and its publication as
prescribed by § 133 of the Town Law.
§ 35-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part or provision of
this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Chapter 35A
NUDITY ON PUBLIC BEACHES
§ 35A-1. Title.
This local law shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Nudity — Public
Beaches Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 35A-2. Legislative intent.
A. The public beaches of the Town are a treasured and valued asset
enjoyed not only by the three hundred fifteen thousand (315,000)
citizens of the Town of Islip but additionally by hundreds of thousands
of other metropolitan residents. The vast majority of the people are
families with children. The continued enjoyment of these beaches by
Town residents and visitors is an important and substantial government
interest.
B. The contemporary community standards held by the vast majority of
users of the beach require that proper attire be required. The existence
on the beach of individuals who are nude is upsetting and disturbing to
this general public. The users of the public beaches of Islip find
themselves unwilling observers to this course of conduct and find that
they must be forced to coexist with the practice. They especially take
offense and are disturbed at the exposure of this practice to young,
impressionable children.
C. Additionally, especially on Fire Island, the oceanfront is lined with
residences which are now forced to view this course of conduct. The
Board, therefore, in the interests of the contemporary moral standards
of conduct within the community, feels that nudity on the public
beaches of the Town should be banned.
§ 35-6 ISLIP CODE § 35A-3
34:306
§ 35A-3. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADJACENT WATERS — Those waters in which the nudity of a swimmer
could be recognized by one standing on a public beach in the Town of Islip.
NUDITY — A person's intentional failure to cover, with a fully opaque
covering, that person's own genitals, pubic hairs, rectal areas or female
breasts below a point immediately above the tip of the areola, when on a
public beach.
PUBLIC BEACHES — A place which is open to the common use of the
unorganized public and each of its members; included but not limited in
such definition shall be Town-owned beaches and the oceanfront on Fire
Island.
§ 35A-4. Nudity prohibited.
§ 35A-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating this local law shall be guilty of a violation
and shall be liable for a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.)
and imprisonment for not more than three (3) days, or both.
§ 35A-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this local law shall be
adjudged by any court to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to
the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved.
§ 35A-7. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect when the appropriate certified copies hereof
are filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of the State of New
York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 36
A. Nudity shall not be allowed on any public beach or adjacent waters
within or under the jurisdiction, control or ownership of the Town of
Islip. [Amended 12-16-1980]
B. This prohibition shall not apply where individuals have obtained a
permit from the Town Board to entertain or perform in a play, exhibition
or show, nor shall it apply to children under ten (10) years of age.
C. A person is guilty of exposure when, in a public place as defined by
§ 240 of the Penal Law of the State of New York, he or she urinates or
exposes the private or intimate parts of his or her body, except as
provided herein above. [Added 10-8-1996]
§ 35A-3 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 35A-7
34:307
PARADES, ASSEMBLIES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 5.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Memorial and Independence Days — See Ch.
34.
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Peddlers — See Ch. 39.
Racetracks — See Ch. 42.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
Trespassing — See Ch. 58.
§ 35A-7 ISLIP CODE § 35A-7
34:308
ARTICLE I
Parades, Races and Assemblies
[Adopted 7-12-1938; amended in its entirety 2-12-2013]
§ 36-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given the
meanings set forth herein:
ASSEMBLIES — A preplanned gathering of persons for a common social
purpose in a public place upon Town of Islip facilities.
PARADE — An organized public procession of people moving in an orderly,
regular, or ceremonial manner upon the public right-of-way to mark or
celebrate a special occasion, which may include decorated vehicles or
floats, marching bands, and people on horseback and/or motorcycles, for
which the roadway has been closed to regular traffic.
PERMIT — Due authorization in writing as provided herein which permits a
person to operate a parade, race or assembly at a specified location.
RACE — A public timed event wherein participants compete to complete a
set course and cross a finish line, including marathons, triathlons, walks,
bike-a-thons, regattas and swims. For the purposes of this section, group
walks, jogs and runs organized by running clubs, athletic teams and similar
groups shall not be deemed a race requiring a permit, so long as no
roadways need be closed to facilitate the walk, jog or run.
§ 36-2. Permit required.
No parade, race or assembly shall be permitted upon the highways, streets
and/or waterways of the Town of Islip or upon Town of Islip facilities unless
a permit shall have been obtained from the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip
upon approval of the Town Board after application therefor to said Town
Clerk in writing.
§ 36-3. American flag to be displayed.
All assemblies warranted by law, held in any of the streets, roads or
highways in the Town of Islip, where public discussions are held, shall have
an American flag, the dimensions of which shall be not less than 36 inches
by 60 inches, conspicuously displayed at all times during the holding of such
assemblies.
§ 36-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, organization and/or business entity who violates any provision
of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Such violation
is an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 for each day such
violation continues or by imprisonment for 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 36-1 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-5
34:309
§ 36-5. Form of application for permit.
An application for an assembly, race or parade shall be fully completed and
signed by the person, organization and/or business entity seeking a permit.
The application shall be submitted no less than 45 days prior to the time
of the commencement of such assembly, race or parade or at least 60 days
prior to such commencement where such event involves audience capacity
or attendees in excess of 1,000 persons. The application shall include the
following:
Application For Permit For Parade, Race or Assembly
1. Name of applicant. (If a partnership, association or corporation,
furnish authority of the person signing the application on behalf of
the applicant.)
2. Address to which all replies or notices are authorized to be sent.
3. Specify the highway or street in the Town of Islip to be used by or for
the assembly, race or parade.
4. Specify the time when the assembly, race or parade will convene or
commence.
5. Specify the time when the assembly, race or parade will terminate.
6. Specify the exact purpose of the assembly, race or parade.
7. Specify persons or organizations taking part in the assembly, race or
parade.
8. Specify the symbols, flags or emblems to be displayed or carried.
9. Specify whether an American flag, no less than 36 inches by 60
inches, will be displayed during the course of the assembly or
parade.
10. Specify whether any speeches are to be made during the course of
the parade, race or assembly and, if so, by whom.
11. Specify whether any firearms are to be carried or displayed and, if
so, the type of the same.
12. Specify whether any fireworks or colored fire is to be carried or
displayed in the course of the parade, race or assembly.
13. Specify whether any torches or any inflammable material is to be
carried or displayed in the course of the parade, race or assembly.
14. Specify whether any arrangements have been made for private
policing or disciplining of those engaged in the parade, race or
assembly.
15. Specify whether any exercises or maneuvers are to be made during
the parade, race or assembly and, if so, the nature thereof.
I
We
or
§ 36-5 ISLIP CODE § 36-5
34:310
The _________ solemnly, affirm that all of the answers to the above
questions are true and correct, and unconditionally guarantee the
quiet, lawful and peaceful conduct of the parade, race or assembly
for which the permit is hereby applied.
In the Presence of
TOWN CLERK
§ 36-6. Application fee.
In addition to the requirements of § 36-5, a nonrefundable application fee of
$100 shall be payable to the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application for
a parade or a race. No application fee shall be charged in connection with
an assembly permit. No application fee shall be collected for a permit for
a parade sponsored by a veterans' organization or honoring veterans. Any
race or parade officially co-sponsored by the Town of Islip shall be exempt
from the application fee.
§ 36-5 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-6
34:311

ARTICLE II
Carnivals, Circuses and Outdoor Shows
[Adopted 10-7-198630; amended in its entirety 2-12-2013]
§ 36-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given the
meanings set forth herein:
AMUSEMENT COMPANY — A person or business entity who, for profit,
supplies, provides and/or leases amusement rides, pavilions, tents, games,
stalls and/or other structures or equipment commonly used for an
amusement event, and is retained by an applicant to organize, operate and/
or manage an amusement event.
AMUSEMENT EVENTS — Any form of entertainment open to the public
and generally conducted in the outdoors with the presence of tents, booths,
amusement rides, games of chance and/or temporary structures erected for
such purpose or any combination of the foregoing, including but not limited
to forms of entertainment commonly known as "carnivals," "circuses,"
"fairs," "bazaars" and "outdoor shows."
AMUSEMENT RIDE — A manually operated or mechanically powered
machine, apparatus or device which is used solely for amusement and which
is designed to propel, project or move a person through the air, along
the ground or otherwise, including but not limited to merry-go-rounds,
carousels, Ferris Wheels and rollercoasters.
CARNIVAL — A public event at which various shows, exhibitions or contests
take place.
CIRCUS — A public exhibition or show at which nondomesticated animals
take part.
FAIR — A public event at which goods and/or food are displayed for sale.
The word "fair" shall be deemed to incude the words "bazaar" and "street
festival."
ORGANIZATION — A group having a joint or common interest and
organized for some purpose. An organization shall include a charitable,
religious, membership, hospital or not-for-profit corporation.
PERMIT — Due authorization in writing as provided herein which permits a
person to operate a carnival, circus, fair or amusement event at a specified
location.
§ 36-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preserve the public peace and good order,
to prevent tumultuous assemblages and to assure the health and safety of
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article II, Carnivals. Circuses and
Outdoor Shows, adopted 5-24-1949, as amended 6-15-1982.
§ 36-7 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-8
34:313
the residents of the Town of Islip in regard to the conduct of all amusement
events.
§ 36-9. Permit required; restrictions.
§ 36-10. Number and location of amusement rides restricted.
§ 36-11. Approval required for carnivals, circuses, fairs and
amusement events.
A. It shall be unlawful to erect, operate or maintain any amusement
ride(s), carnival, circus, fair or amusement event without having
secured a permit from the Town Clerk, or to continue to erect, operate
or maintain such event after the expiration or revocation of such
permit.
B. A permit may be issued for a term not to exceed 10 days, and every
permit so issued shall specify the exact term and period of time for
which it shall be valid.
C. No more than six amusement events shall be permitted at the same
location each calendar year.
D. A permit issued as provided herein shall not be transferable. Any holder
of such permit who allows it to be used by any other person or business
entity and any person or business entity who uses such permit shall
each be guilty of a violation of this article.
A. No more than 15 amusement rides shall be operated, maintained and/or
erected per fair, carnival, circus or other amusement event.
B. Each amusement ride shall be located at least 10 feet from the
entranceway of the premises where the amusement event is being held,
and shall be placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere with the free
and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the premises.
C. Each amusement ride shall have an unobstructed zone of at least four
feet along the perimeter of at least three of the linear borders of the
ride, wherein patrons may use, watch or wait to use the ride. In order to
prevent overcrowding and to assure safe passage by the general public,
the unobstructed distance required by this section shall not be
encroached upon by any structure; or be superimposed, in whole or in
part, upon the unobstructed distance required by any other amusement
ride.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at the discretion of the Town Clerk, a
permit may be refused or the number of permitted rides reduced if an
applicant, based upon a review of the site plan and upon the
recommendation of the inspecting Town official, lacks sufficient open
space when amusement rides are in motion to effectuate the purpose of
this article.
§ 36-8 ISLIP CODE § 36-11
34:314
§ 36-12. Restrictions and hours of operation.
§ 36-13. Application for permit.
An application for a carnival, circus, fair or amusement event shall be
fully completed and signed by the person, organization and/or business
entity seeking a permit. The application shall be submitted no less than
45 days prior to the time of the commencement of such carnival, circus,
fair or amusement event or at least 60 days prior to such commencement
where such event involves audience capacity or attendees in excess of
1,000 persons. The application shall include and/or be accompanied by the
following:
A. No permit shall be issued for the operation of any carnival, circus, fair
or amusement event under this article unless the Town Board shall first
have adopted a resolution approving such use.
B. No permit shall be issued for the operation or maintenance of any
carnival, circus, fair or amusement event upon land lying in a residence
zoning district unless the principal use thereon is nonresidential and a
permitted conforming use in the zoning district, or the Town Board shall
first have adopted a resolution approving such use.
C. No permit shall be issued if, in the judgment of the Town Board, the
event will disturb the public peace and good order of the Town or
unreasonably affect the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties or
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of neighboring residents and/or
the community.
D. In the event the Town Board grants approval for the operation of any
carnival, circus, fair or amusement event, such approval may be
granted subject to such conditions as the Town Board may deem
necessary. Any permit issued after approval of the Town Board has been
obtained shall bear on its face such conditions as the Town Board may
have imposed.
A. No sound equipment or public-address system shall be operated or
used after 10:00 p.m. of the days for which the permit is issued and on
Sunday after 9:00 p.m.
B. No amusement ride and/or related equipment shall be operated on
Sunday through Thursday after 10:00 p.m., or after 11:00 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday.
C. Amusement events shall cease to operate and be closed to the public no
later than 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and no later than
11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
D. In the event Sunday falls on the eve of a national holiday, the
prohibitions in Subsections A, B and C shall apply as of 11:00 p.m.
Sunday.
§ 36-11 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-13
34:315
§ 36-14. Insurance and bond requirements.
A. Written proof that all necessary permits and/or approvals required by
the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, New York State
Department of Labor and any other governmental or regulatory agency
having jurisdiction have been obtained.
B. The applicant shall specify whether the number of attendees is
expected to reach 1,000 or more. In the event the number of attendees
is expected to reach 5,000 or more, same shall also be indicated on the
application.
C. The date(s), time(s) and place of the amusement event.
D. A complete description of all activities, games of skill, rides and special
events.
E. A notarized letter signed by the property owner of the premises upon
which the proposed event is to be held stating the nature, extent and
duration of the amusement event and granting permission for the
operation of the amusement event on the property.
F. A certificate of insurance and surety bond pursuant to § 36-14 of this
article.
G. The name, address and phone number of the applicant and of the
amusement company, if one is being utilized to organize, operate and/or
manage an amusement event. In the event an amusement company is
being utilized, then a full and true copy of the contract and/or
agreement entered into between the applicant and the amusement
company must be provided to the Town Clerk. No portion of the
financial aspects of the agreement filed with the Islip Town Clerk shall
be released to third parties in accordance with the provisions of Public
Officers Law § 87(2)(d).
H. An original and four copies of an accurate site plan drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions and specifications of all stationary
and/or temporary structures or enclosures, amusement rides, games of
probability, tents and pavilions. The site plan shall include the
dimensions of all amusement rides when in motion, the area to be
occupied by the proposed amusement rides and the net amount of open
space available when all amusement rides are in operation. All site
plans shall set forth the dimensions of the parcel to be utilized for the
event and the number of acres it comprises.
I. Any other documents required to be provided pursuant to any section of
this article.
J. Such additional information as the Town Clerk may require.
A. Upon filing the application, the applicant must furnish a surety bond
issued by a bonding company or surety company approved by the Town
§ 36-13 ISLIP CODE § 36-14
34:316
§ 36-15. Application fee.
In addition to the requirements of § 36-13, a nonrefundable application fee
of $500 shall be payable to the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application
for a carnival or circus. A nonrefundable application fee of $400 shall be
payable to the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application for a fair. Any
carnival, circus or fair officially co-sponsored by the Town of Islip shall be
exempt from the applicable application fee.
§ 36-16. Registration of professionals and charities.
Clerk, or cash or certified check, in the sum of $2,000 to the Town Clerk
to ensure that the applicant will clean the area and put the property
in order at the conclusion of the carnival, circus, fair or amusement
event. If the applicant fails to clean and restore the amusement area,
or if damage is done to public or private property as a result of said
amusement event, the Town Clerk may apply the bond, cash or check
to the cost of cleanup or restoration and may recover from the
organization such additional costs as may be incurred.
B. All amusements must procure public liability insurance issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business within the State of New
York of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury per person,
$2,000,000 for bodily injury per accident, and $1,000,000 for damage
to property per accident.
C. All insurance shall include the Town of Islip as a named insured and be
noncancelable without 10 days' prior written notice to the Town Clerk.
D. The applicant must submit proof of insurance to the Town Clerk no less
than 10 business days prior to the time of the commencement of such
carnival, circus, fair or amusement event. Failure to submit proof of
insurance shall be cause for immediate suspension of the permit by the
Town Clerk.
E. The Town Board may require an applicant to supply additional
insurance coverage, if available, where the minimum amounts stated
herein are insufficient in the opinion of the Town Board, after
considering the size, duration and hazard presented by the proposed
amusement event.
A. Every professional fund-raiser, commercial coventurer, professional
solicitor and charitable organization, as each is defined by Article 7-A of
the Executive Law of New York State, organizing, controlling or
otherwise involved in conducting an amusement event shall include
with an application for such event, proof of valid registration with the
Secretary of State as such fund-raiser, coventurer, solicitor or
organization.
§ 36-14 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-16
34:317
§ 36-17. Restrictions and revocation.
§ 36-18. Proof of inspection; change in site plan.
B. With each application, a professional fund-raiser or commercial
coventurer shall also submit proof that a surety bond, naming him as
obligor, is on file with the Secretary of State.
A. No permit for an amusement event shall be issued, and any outstanding
permit may be revoked if the Town Board determines that such
amusement event includes any activity which, in the judgment of the
Town Board, will disturb the order and peace of the Town or will
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Town of
Islip.
B. Any violation of this article or of any other ordinance, law or statute in
connection with the operation or maintenance of carnivals, circuses,
fairs or amusement events, or any violation of the conditions of the
permit or a false statement made in the application, shall be cause for
immediate denial or suspension of the permit by the Town Clerk.
A. Prior to opening an amusement event to the public, the permit holder
shall file proof with the Town Clerk that his mechanical rides have been
inspected and found satisfactory by the New York State Department of
Labor in compliance with § 870-a of the Labor Law.
B. All tents, rides, buildings, structures, pavilions and electrical wiring
equipment shall be in place and operational for purposes of inspection
by Town officials no later than 12:00 noon of the last business day
immediately prior to the scheduled opening of said carnival, circus, fair
or amusement event. In the event changes to the site plan have been
made between the time of application and the date of inspection by
Town officials, for which the Town Clerk has not been notified or
provided with an amended site plan incorporating the changes, a
penalty of $250 shall be immediately due and payable by the
amusement company or, if an amusement company has not been
retained, the applicant. No inspection shall be complete and a permit
shall not be issued until such penalty is paid and an amended site plan
is filed with the Town Clerk.
C. No person is permitted to effectuate a change in the location, number
and size of any tent, amusement ride, building, structure, pavilion or
electrical wiring equipment after an inspection by Town officials has
taken place without the prior written consent of the Town Clerk. All
such requests for changes shall be submitted in an amended application
with a new site plan incorporating the proposed changes.
§ 36-16 ISLIP CODE § 36-19
34:318
§ 36-19. Display of permit.
A permit pursuant to this article must be conspicuously displayed during the
operation of said amusements and be available for inspection by any person
demanding such inspection.
§ 36-20. Assembly, dismantling and/or removal of equipment.
Amusement rides, equipment and structures used for the carnival, circus,
fair or amusement event shall not be assembled, dismantled and/or removed
after 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and no later than 11:00 p.m.
on Friday and Saturday. All amusement rides, equipment, tents, pavilions
and other structures erected or used for the amusement event shall be
dismantled and removed from the premises where the event took place
within three days of the expiration of the permit.
§ 36-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall erect, operate or maintain any amusement event
without first having obtained a permit or who shall own the land on which
such amusement event is located shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
Such violation is an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for
each day such violation continues or by imprisonment for 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 36-22. Effective date.
This article shall take effect October 26, 1986.
§ 36-19 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36-22
34:319
Chapter 36A
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
DEPARTMENT
§ 36A-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs Department."
§ 36A-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 36A-3. Department established.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs, who shall be the chief executive officer of the
Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Parks, Recreation
and Cultural Affairs and shall perform a major function of Town
government.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONERS — The Deputy Commissioners of the Town
of Islip Department of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs, who shall
act generally for and in place of the Commissioner.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Parks, Recreation
and Cultural Affairs. The principal executive officer and administrative
head of such Department shall be the Commissioner, who shall be
appointed by the Town Board for the term fixed by law at such salary as
may, from time to time, be fixed by the said Town Board. The
Commissioner shall be appointed on the basis of his administrative
experience and qualifications for the duties of such office, and such
additional standards as may be required by the Town Board. The
Commissioner shall be the head of the Department with the power and
authority to appoint and remove employees under his jurisdiction in
accordance with the Civil Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint three Deputy
Commissioners, who shall generally act for and in his behalf and who
shall perform such duties as are vested in and imposed upon that office
by the provisions of this local law, by statute or by other lawful
authority. In addition, the Deputy Commissioner(s) may serve as head of
the divisions of this Department.
§ 36-22 ISLIP CODE § 36A-3
34:320
§ 36A-4. Organization. [Amended 3-28-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
§ 36A-5. General powers and duties. [Amended 3-28-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006]
C. The Commissioner is also empowered herein to appoint an executive
assistant for such administrative functions as may be assigned and to
advise and aid the Commissioner in the planning and coordination of
projects and policies of the Department.
A. The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall be divided into the following divisions:
(1) Division of Parks.
(2) Division of Recreation.
(3) Division of Cultural Affairs and Senior Citizens Services.
[Amended 8-14-2012 by L.L. No. 6-201231]
A. The powers and duties of such divisions therein shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Commissioner, and each of
said divisions shall be supervised by a Deputy Commissioner. The
Commissioner may, with the approval of the Town Board, establish,
consolidate or abolish any divisions or subdivisions now existing or
hereafter created in the Department.
B. Powers and duties of individual divisions.
(1) Division of Parks. Its powers and duties are to operate and maintain
Town and special district parks, pools, skating rinks, rifle range,
golf course and other recreational facilities.
(2) Division of Recreation. Its powers and duties are to administer,
manage and supervise the planning, coordination and development
of social, recreational, and therapeutic recreational programs and
projects for and on behalf of the residents of the Town of Islip on its
own initiative or in cooperation with other municipalities and
private citizens, associations and organizations. [Amended
5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
(3) Division of Cultural Affairs and Senior Citizens Services. Its powers
and duties are to administer, manage and supervise the planning,
coordination and development of cultural, performing arts, and
creative arts programs and projects for and on behalf of the
residents of the Town of Islip. This division shall also administer,
31.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection B(4), Division of Senior
Citizens Services, which immediately followed, added 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012.
§ 36A-3 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36A-5
34:321
§ 36A-6. Power of Town Supervisor.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 36A-7. Fees. [Amended 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012; 8-14-2012 by
L.L. No. 6-2012]
The Commissioner may establish, subject to Town Board approval, a
schedule of fees to be collected by him for services rendered in connection
with the work of his Department and for which he deems it necessary to
charge and collect a fee therefore.
§ 36A-8. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
manage and provide for programs, projects, and plans for senior
persons residing in the Town of Islip related to: [Amended
5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012; 8-14-2012 by L.L. No. 6-201232]
(a) The interests and special needs of senior persons residing in
the Town of Islip;
(b) Social, cultural, and recreational interests of senior persons
residing in the Town of Islip;
(c) Encouraging the greater participation of seniors residing in
the Town of Islip in society; and
(d) Allowing seniors residing in the Town of Islip to join and
associate with other persons, groups, municipalities and
subdivisions in similar or related efforts.
C. The Commissioner, acting by and through any of the said existing or
hereafter named divisions, shall be empowered to perform such other
duties and functions that are prescribed to be performed by him in any
law, ordinance or resolution of the Town Board, or lawful directive of
the Supervisor. However, the Commissioner may delegate any of his
powers to or direct any of his duties to be performed to a Deputy
Commissioner as head of a division.
32.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection B(4), regarding the Division
of Senior Citizens Services, which immediately followed, added 5-8-2012 by L.L. No.
3-2012.
§ 36A-5 ISLIP CODE § 36A-9
34:322
§ 36A-9. When effective. [Amended 5-8-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
This chapter, as amended, shall be effective on November 1, 2012.
Chapter 37
PARKS, SWIMMING POOLS, MARINAS, BOATS AND
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 4.
Dogs — See Ch. 12, Art. I.
Solid waste — See Ch. 21.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Littering — See Ch. 32.
Shellfish — See Ch. 44.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
Trawling and eel dredging — See Ch. 56.
Trespassing — See Ch. 58.
Vehicular uses on Great South Beach — See
Ch. 61.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
§ 36A-9 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 36A-9
34:323

ARTICLE I
Parks, Beaches, Swimming Pools
§ 37-1. Title. [Amended 7-1-1975]
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance
Regulating Parks, Swimming Pools, Marinas, Boats, Waterways and
Recreation Facilities in the Town of Islip."
§ 37-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 6-7-1994]
BOAT — Includes every description of watercraft or other contrivance
used on the water or capable of being used as a means of
transportation.[Amended 2-14-1967; 7-1-1975]
BOAT TRAILER — A non-self-propelled vehicle designed to be pulled by
a self-propelled vehicle and generally used for the transporting of boats
or other watercraft.[Added 4-25-2017]
CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Islip.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs.[Added 7-1-1975]
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Parks, Recreation and Cultural
Affairs.33[Added 7-1-1975]
MARINA — Those portions of the incorporated area of the Town of Islip
that shall be designated by resolution of the Town Board as being Town
marinas.[Amended 2-14-1967]
MOTORBOAT — Includes any vessel propelled in whole or in part by an
engine or motor, whether inboard or outboard.
OWNER — Includes the person under whose name a vessel was last
registered with the appropriate licensing authority, if requiring
registration, and in any other case, the last known owner.[Amended
4-15-1969]
PARK OR PARKS — Includes all parks, playgrounds, athletic fields,
recreation areas, swimming pools, beaches, boardwalks and other
areas under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs and such other places as shall
be specifically designated by the Town Board of the Town of Islip and
such other rights and appurtenances as the Town Board shall utilize,
whether the same be now or hereafter owned or acquired by the Town
of Islip in fee or otherwise, including all land under and spaces above
the surface of the ground and including all waters and land under
water, where applicable.[Amended 7-1-1975]
33.Editor's Note: The definitions of “director” and “manager,” which immediately followed
this definition, were repealed 7-1-1975.
§ 37-1 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-2
34:325
§ 37-3. Use of parks and recreation facilities; fees. [Amended
7-1-1975; 3-27-2007; 8-11-2009]
The use of Town parks and recreation facilities under this article shall be
at no cost, other than the additional fees set for the use of Town pools, to
residents and/or owners of taxable real property in the Town who present an
official photo identification card, which shall be issued by the Department
of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs, upon entering a Town park or
recreation facility under this article. The Town Board shall, pursuant to
§ 37-16 of this Code, set a schedule of fees for the use of Town parks
and recreational facilities under this article for residents and/or owners of
taxable property in the Town who wish to use those facilities but failed
to obtain an official photo identification card issued by the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs, and a separate schedule of fees for
the use of those facilities by nonresidents, which will be at a higher rate
than that for residents and/or owners of taxable property in the Town.
§ 37-4. Minors.
No person under 12 years of age shall be admitted to any park unless
accompanied by an adult who shall assume full responsibility for his safety
and conduct.
§ 37-5. Hours of operation; rules of use. [Amended 7-1-1975;
5-5-1981]
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, any unincorporated
association, a corporation or any other entity.[Amended 7-1-1975]
RESIDENT — A person who maintains a residence in the Town of
Islip.[Amended 7-1-1975]
TOWN — The Town of Islip.[Added 7-1-1975]
B. Word usage. The term "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
[Added 7-1-1975]
A. All parks shall be open to the public from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
beginning Memorial Day through Labor Day each year, and from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., beginning the day after Labor Day through the day
before Memorial Day each year. In addition to the aforementioned
hours, those parks not enumerated in § 58-3C of this Code shall be open
solely to persons participating in activities sponsored, approved or
permitted by the Commissioner or his authorized agent during the
period such activities are being conducted. No person may enter or
remain in a park when it is closed. [Amended 4-1-1986, effective
4-20-1986]
B. Rules of use. The Commissioner may adopt and post regulations
regarding the use of any park, which regulations must be obeyed by
every person using the facility.
§ 37-2 ISLIP CODE § 37-6
34:326
§ 37-6. Permits. [Amended 7-1-1975]
A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be
performed in strict accordance with the terms and conditions of said permit.
Any violation by its holder of any term or condition shall constitute grounds
for revocation by the Town Board or its duly authorized representative.
Applications for permits to hold large picnics, special activities or the like
shall be made to the Town Clerk. All other applications, such as the use of a
ballfield or the like, shall be made to the Department.
§ 37-7. Payment of charges.
No person shall make use of or gain admittance to or attempt to use or gain
admittance to the facilities of a park for the use of which a charge is made
by the Town Board unless he shall pay the charge or fee as fixed by the Town
Board.
§ 37-8. Loss, damage and theft. [Amended 7-1-1975]
The Town will not be responsible for loss, damage or theft to cars and their
contents, to private property nor to contents of lockers or other containers.
Such loss, whether inside of buildings or on the grounds of the park, shall
be the patron's responsibility.
§ 37-9. Bathing.
§ 37-10. Swimming pool areas. [Amended 7-1-1975]
Use of Town pools shall be restricted to residents and/or owners of taxable
real property in the Town. Use of park district pools shall be restricted to
residents and/or owners of taxable real property within the park district,
except that all persons entering any pool within a park district will be
required to present an official identification to the attendant in charge
upon entering the pool area. The Town Board may, where permitted by law
and upon appropriate terms and conditions, allow residents of the Town
other than residents and/or owners of taxable real property within the park
district to use park district pools.
§ 37-11. Swimming pools: official identification; replacement fee for
lost identification.
A. No persons shall bathe, wade or swim in any waters of any park except
at such times and places and in such proper attire as the Town Board
may designate. Such designated bathing areas shall be kept free from
any form of water equipment or other floating objects or other form of
device that may cause inconvenience or discomfort to bathers, except
such equipment as is intended for the protection of life.
B. No person shall dress or undress in the park except in such bathing
houses or places as may be maintained and designated for such use.
§ 37-6 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-11
34:327
§ 37-12. Town pools, park district pools, pool areas: regulations.
A. Any person who desires to use the facilities of any pool located within a
park district of the Town shall first file with the Department a written
application, upon forms to be furnished therefor, containing the
following information: [Amended 7-1-1975]
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's telephone number, if the applicant has a telephone.
(3) If the applicant is a married person, the first name of applicant's
husband or wife and the first name of all children in applicant's
family, together with the age of each child so named.
B. If the Department shall find, from the statements contained in the
application for an official identification, that the applicant is entitled to
use the facilities of the pool area applied for, the Department shall issue
said application and official identification, otherwise such application
shall be denied. [Amended 7-1-1975]
C. A fee of $1 will be charged for the replacement of lost identification.
A. No person under 12 years of age shall be admitted to the pool area
unless accompanied by an adult who shall assume full responsibility for
his or her safety and conduct.
B. No person shall be permitted to enter the pool if, in the opinion of the
lifeguard in charge, conditions therein are unsafe for bathing or
swimming. Bathing or swimming shall be considered safe only during
the hours when a lifeguard is on duty. Such hours shall be posted within
the pool area. Swimming or bathing outside such hours is prohibited.
C. No person shall be admitted in the pool except attired in bathing
costume. Shoes must be removed before entering the pool area.
D. [Repealed 7-12-1971]
E. All bathers must take a soap and warm-water shower before entering
the pool.
F. The Commissioner may designate those areas wherein smoking is
prohibited for reasons of public safety. Smoking in the areas so
designated is prohibited. [Amended 7-1-1975]
G. The Commissioner may designate those areas where, in the interest of
public safety, diving is not permitted. Diving within those areas so
designated is prohibited. Diving shall be permitted only from diving
boards. No more than one person shall be permitted to be on any diving
board at one time. Divers must not bounce the diving board
unnecessarily. Divers using diving boards shall leave the pool by pool
ladders. [Amended 7-1-1975]
§ 37-11 ISLIP CODE § 37-12
34:328
§ 37-13. Swimming pools: revocation of official identification.
Any false statement contained in the application for an official identification
or any violation of any of the rules and regulations governing the use of the
pool area or any alteration made to the official identification shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the official identification by the Town Board or a
duly authorized representative. If an official identification shall be revoked,
there shall be no refund of the fee paid.
§ 37-14. Denial or revocation of official identification: application to
Town Board. [Amended 7-1-1975]
Any applicant who shall have been denied an official identification under
this article, or any applicant who shall have had an official identification
revoked, may apply to the Town Board for review of the action of the
Department or its representative as herein provided.
H. Papers, cartons and other types of litter and refuse shall not be left or
thrown in the pool or pool area. These items shall be deposited in the
receptacle provided for that purpose.
I. All individuals or persons using the facilities of any Town pool or park
district pool or any pool area shall abide by all the rules and regulations
covering the use of Town parks.
J. The following are noted as strictly prohibited in the pool area and
violation shall constitute an offense against the ordinance: ball-playing
in any form; roller-skating; dressing or undressing; toys; plat
equipment, flotation devices; glasses; basket parties and indoor picnics;
bottles, containers or any glassware; food, beverages, candy, chewing
gum; pushing, running, ducking or boisterous conduct; dogs or any
other animals; solicitation of alms or contributions; advertising or sale
of merchandise. Swim fins, masks and snorkels may be permitted by
authorization of the Commissioner. [Amended 7-12-1971; 7-1-1975]
K. The Commissioner may designate the hours when, in the interest of the
public safety, the pools may be opened and closed. The pools shall be
opened and closed at the time and hour so designated. The opening and
closing time shall be posted in the pool area for the convenience of the
public. [Amended 7-1-1975]
L. The Commissioner may designate the maximum number of persons
permitted in pools, consistent with public safety. There shall be no
persons admitted in excess of the maximum number so designated. The
maximum number permitted in the pool shall be posted in the pool area
for the convenience of the public. [Amended 7-1-1975]
M. The Town Board of the Town of Islip may, from time to time, adopt such
rules and regulations governing the use of Town pools and park district
pools as are found to be in the public interest and necessary for the
safety, welfare and protection of the public.
§ 37-12 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-14
34:329
§ 37-15. Fireworks prohibited. [Added 5-5-198134]
Except as authorized pursuant to Chapter 18, Article XIII thereof, no person
shall offer, sell, furnish, possess, use or cause to explode any fireworks
in a park. "Fireworks" are defined to include those materials set forth in
§ 270.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York, as amended.
§ 37-16. Fees.
The Town Board shall, by resolution, adopt such schedule of fees as shall
be necessary pursuant to this ordinance, and such fees shall be the fees as
required under the ordinance until the same shall be amended, modified or
repealed by a subsequent resolution of the Town Board.
§ 37-17. Picnics and outings. [Amended 7-1-1975]
A. Such application to the Town Board shall be in writing, signed and
verified by the applicant, and shall state the ground or grounds on
which the applicant claims that the determination of the Department
was erroneous.
B. Such application shall be filed with the Clerk by the applicant within 20
days after notice of denial of the application or within 20 days after
notice of any revocation of the official identification has been mailed to
the applicant or delivered in person.
C. Upon the filing of such application, the Town Board shall hold a hearing
thereon on a date and at a place and hour designated by the Town
Board and on written notice to the applicant. [Amended 5-5-1981]
D. At such hearing, the Town Board shall consider the applicant's
application upon the record before the Department in connection with
the Department's consideration thereof and, in its discretion, may
receive new or additional evidence in support thereof or in opposition
thereto.
E. The Town Board, after such hearing, may affirm the action of the
Department or direct the Department to issue an official identification
pursuant to this ordinance, or may grant such other and further relief
as seems proper.
A. The Commissioner shall designate the area to be occupied, and his
assistants shall regulate the use of recreation facilities under the
supervision of the Town Board so as to prevent congestion and shall
distribute patrons of the park over the park area in order to ensure the
maximum use of the park area and in behalf of the comfort of said
patrons. A special permit from the Town Board shall first be obtained
for all organized picnics and outings.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 37-15, Hearings
§ 37-14 ISLIP CODE § 37-17
34:330
§ 37-18. Fishing. [Amended 7-1-1975]
Fishing is prohibited in any park in the Town during the bathing season
unless specifically authorized by the Department and posted.
§ 37-19. Fire.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire anywhere within the
park except in fireplaces as might be provided therefor or by special
permission of the Town Board. Any fire shall be continuously under the
care and direction of a competent person over 18 years of age from the
time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No fire shall be built within 10
feet of any tree or building or beneath the branches of any trees or in any
underbrush. No persons shall throw away or discard any lighted match,
cigar or cigarette within, on or against any building, structure, boat, car,
vehicle or enclosure or under any tree or in underbrush or grass unless it
be to deposit the same in a suitable container provided for the reception
thereof.
§ 37-20. Games. [Amended 7-1-1975]
No person shall throw or use any type of ball, bean bag or other objects
or play any ball games except in such places designated for such use,
nor engage in toy aviation, kite-flying or model-boating except in places
designated for such use. The Commissioner shall designate such places and
post the same for the convenience of the public.
§ 37-21. Camping and sleeping.
§ 37-22. Animals.
No persons owning or being custodian of any animal shall cause or permit
such animal to enter the park.
B. No persons shall erect any structure, stand or platform, hold any
meetings, perform any ceremony, make a speech or address, exhibit any
performance or form any parade or procession in any park in the Town
without specific permission from the Town Board therefor.
A. No person shall tent or camp or erect or maintain a tent, shelter or
camp in any park unless the Town Board shall specifically designate a
place or area therefor and the same is posted.
B. No person shall sleep on any beach between the hours of sunset and
sunrise. For the purpose of this subsection, "beach" shall be defined as
all real property in or adjacent to the Town of Islip along the shore of
the Atlantic Ocean lying between the low water mark as a southerly
boundary and the base of the dunes as the northerly boundary. [Added
10-5-1982]
§ 37-17 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-23
34:331
§ 37-23. Alms, contributions and advertising.
No person shall, in any park, solicit alms or contributions for any purpose.
No person shall post, distribute, cast or leave about any bills, placards,
tickets, handbills, circulars or advertisements or any other matter for
advertising purposes.
§ 37-24. Refuse and garbage.
No persons shall take into, carry through, leave in, throw, lay, drop or
discharge into or on the park any tin cans, bottles, refuse, garbage, rubbish
or waste. Papers, cartons or any other type of litter shall be placed in
receptacles provided for that purpose.
§ 37-25. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places
prohibited; exception. [Amended 8-1-1978; 4-15-1980; 7-5-1983;
3-6-1984]
No person shall consume, ingest or take internally any alcoholic beverage
or carry or have in his possession an open container containing any amount
of such beverage with intent to consume, ingest or take the beverage
internally upon any sidewalk, road, street or highway owned or controlled
by the Town of Islip or upon any other public property of said Town of Islip,
including any public hall, park or other public place. This ordinance shall
not apply where alcoholic beverages are licensed to be served or where the
Town Board or Supervisor has, in writing, given specific permission to serve
or consume said alcoholic beverages or within a Town marina if consumed
upon a boat tied up at its properly licensed space.
§ 37-26. Protection of property. [Amended 7-1-1975]
No persons shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raze, destroy
or tamper with any drive, path or walk; take up, remove or carry away
trees, shrubs, turf or any material or substance; or remove or destroy any
structure, building or any appurtenances connected with the park or any
other property or equipment, real or personal, owned by the Town or under
the jurisdiction and control of the Town Board of the Town.
§ 37-27. Traffic control. [Amended 7-1-1975; 11-20-1984]
All ordinances of the Town regarding traffic and motor vehicles shall form
or constitute a part of this ordinance. However, such additional directions
for traffic and motor vehicles as may be posted on signs shall be regarded
as part of this ordinance for traffic control in parking areas, and all persons
shall comply with the directions thereon. In no event, however, shall any
person operate a motor vehicle in a park, public parking area or any other
public property in which motor vehicles are permitted at a speed greater
than 15 miles per hour, nor at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the circumstances, nor drive in a manner which interferes
with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, renders dangerous for passage or in any
§ 37-23 ISLIP CODE § 37-27
34:332
way renders a number of persons insecure in life or the use of park or other
public property.
§ 37-28. Conduct of patrons.
Every person shall conduct himself in an orderly manner and shall endeavor
to cause no discomfort or inconvenience to any other person.
§ 37-27 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-28
34:333

ARTICLE II
Marinas
§ 37-29. Violations. [Amended 4-15-1969; 4-15-1975]
§ 37-30. Slips and dock space. [Amended 4-15-1969; 6-7-1994]
Slips and dock space shall be assigned to permittees hereunder by the
Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee and
the same shall be available to residents of the Town of Islip as hereafter
provided.
§ 37-31. (Reserved)35
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor, moor, dock, tie or
otherwise confine a boat or to permit or allow any boat to be anchored,
moored, docked, tied or otherwise confined in or at a marina without a
valid permit. A permit shall not be required where an existing Town of
Islip contract allows access to or use of certain Town marina facilities.
[Amended 6-7-1994]
B. Any boat anchored, moored, tied or otherwise confined in or at a marina
without a valid permit may be removed to a suitable place by the Town
at the owner's expense.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a boat launching ramp of the
Town of Islip without a valid ramp permit. [Added 1-3-1984]
D. It shall be unlawful to display a decal (permit) assigned to another
person, boat or trailer. [Added 6-7-1994]
E. It shall be unlawful for any public vessel, as defined in the Navigation
Law of the State of New York, to load or unload passengers, freight or
cargo at any Town marina, except in accordance with the express
written permission of the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs or designee. The said Commissioner or designee may
set forth such rules, regulations or procedures for such loading or
unloading as said Commissioner or designee shall deem appropriate.
[Added 6-7-1994]
F. Any person violating a provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of
a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $450 for each violation. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Service of notice of such
violation shall be given by affixing a copy thereof to the boat in a
conspicuous place. [Added 6-7-1994]
G. It shall be unlawful for any unattended boat trailer to be permitted in
any marina, park or other Town facility. Such trailers shall be removed
by the Town at the owner’s expense. [Added 4-25-2017]
§ 37-29 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-32
34:335
§ 37-32. Application for permit; issuance, expiration. [Amended
2-14-1967; 4-15-1969; 2-17-1970; 12-5-1972; 11-13-1973; 7-6-1976;
12-19-1978; 12-21-1982; 1-3-1984; 6-7-1994]
A. Seasonal permit. Any resident who is the owner of a private pleasure
boat shall be entitled to make application for a permit to tie, moor or
dock a boat to the dockage facilities at a marina. Such permit shall be
issued in the order in which the applications are received and assigned
to a specific berth by the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs or designee. From time to time, extenuating
circumstances may arise where the next available berth cannot be
occupied by the next applicant. In that case, the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee may pass over the next
available applicant and assign the berth to the next applicant on the list
whose boat would be able to be accommodated in that particular berth.
In addition, the applicant who has a boat with living quarters shall
certify on the application that the boat is either a sailing vessel or
mechanically propelled.
(1) Application. Such application shall be on the form furnished by the
Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs and shall
set forth the State of New York registration number, if any, the
name of the boat, the manufacturer's name, the overall length and
beam of such boat for which the permit is applied, the date of such
application and the name and address of the owner. A valid original
boat registration and two proofs of residency shall accompany the
application. All three items must be currently dated and in the
exact name and address as the boat owner renting the slip.
(2) Expiration. Such permit shall be valid from March 15 of each year
and shall expire on November 15 of the year for which it is issued.
All boats must be removed from the marinas by this date. Renewal
applications and permits for subsequent years shall be available on
and after November 1 of each year. In the event that such permit is
not renewed by November 30 of that year, the permit shall be
available to the next applicant in the order in which the
applications for such permits are received. [Amended 9-29-2009]
(3) Identification. Any holder of a permit must attach the permit
identification to the boat as herein provided, and failure to do so
shall be prima facie evidence that no permit is held by the owner of
such boat.
B. Ramp permit. Any resident who is the owner of a boat may obtain a
permit to use the boat launching ramps at marinas or parks.
(1) Requirements. A valid original boat registration is required. Two
additional proofs of residency are also required (i.e., trailer
registration, drivers license, tax or utility bills). All three items
35.Editor's Note: Former § 37-31, Areas for mooring, was repealed 6-7-1994.
§ 37-32 ISLIP CODE § 37-32
34:336
§ 37-33. Public vessels. [Amended 4-15-1969; 4-15-1975; 6-7-1994]
§ 37-34. Removal of boats. [Amended 2-14-1967; 4-15-1975]
must be currently dated and in the exact name and address of the
boat owner.
(2) Expiration. Such permit shall be issued on and after March 1 of
each year and shall expire on the last day of February of the
following year.
(3) Identification.
(a) Any holder of a ramp permit must attach the permit to the left
front of the boat trailer. Any trailer parked without a permit is
subject to a parking violation.
(b) If a boat trailer is not used in transporting the boat, the permit
shall be placed at the left front of the vehicle being used to
transport the boat.
A. This section shall apply to public vessels as defined in the Navigation
Law of the State of New York.
B. All sections of this chapter shall apply to public vessels, except that the
owner of a public vessel need not be a resident of the Town.
C. Public vessels shall anchor, moor, dock or tie up to Town marinas only
as specified in a permit issued by the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee, or upon separate contract
authorized by the Town Board.
D. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
shall grant a permit only to public vessels registered with the New York
State Department of Motor Vehicles and/or documented by the United
States Coast Guard.
E. Permits for public vessels shall be valid from January 1 of each year and
shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued.
F. Applications for permits for public vessels shall be on the form issued
by the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or
designee, requiring the applicant to supply such information as the said
Commissioner shall deem appropriate.
G. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
may require that the owner of a public vessel obtain such insurance as
the said Commissioner or designee shall deem appropriate.
A. A permit to dock a boat at a marina shall constitute authorization by the
Town Board, its agents, servants or employees to remove such boat
from the marina to a suitable place, at the expense of the owner, in the
event that it becomes necessary to move such boat because of the
§ 37-32 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-34
34:337
§ 37-35. Acceptance of permit. [Amended 4-15-1975]
Acceptance of a permit shall constitute an agreement that the permit holder
will hold the Town of Islip and its authorized representatives completely
blameless for any liability in connection with the operation, docking, tying,
mooring, removal or disposal of his boat.
§ 37-36. Display of permit. [Amended 2-14-1967; 4-15-1975;
3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 6-2013]
Every permit issued hereunder shall be accompanied by a decal or other
authorized identification which shall bear the number of the permit and the
year of issuance of such permit. Such identification shall be firmly affixed to
the windshield or other conspicuous place in such a manner that the same
shall be easily read and distinguishable. Any boat without a valid permit
so displayed may be removed by the Town at the owner’s expense. Any
person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $150 for each
violation. Service of notice of such violation shall be given by affixing a copy
thereof to the boat in a conspicuous place.
§ 37-37. Minors. [Amended 6-7-1994]
No permits hereunder shall be issued to persons under 18 years of age.
No person under 12 years of age shall be admitted to a marina unless
accompanied by an adult who shall assume full responsibility for his safety
and conduct.
§ 37-38. Nontransferability of permit. [Amended 6-7-1994]
A permit granted by the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural
Affairs or designee pursuant to this ordinance shall not be assigned or
transferred. Persons holding the permit may not sublease the space
assigned to the holder of such permit or allow any other person to dock,
moor or otherwise use such space, and the same may be used only by the
boat for which the permit is issued.
§ 37-39. Rejection of application. [Amended 4-15-1969; 11-13-1973,
effective 12-1-1973; 6-7-1994]
expiration of the permit or for such other grounds or reasons as are set
forth in this ordinance. [Amended 6-7-1994]
B. All boats removed pursuant to this article shall be handled, sold or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with Chapter 60. Abandoned and
Impounded Property, of this Code.
A. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
may reject any application for any type of boat for any reason which
may be determined to jeopardize the safety of other permit holders and
their boats docked in a marina.
§ 37-34 ISLIP CODE § 37-39
34:338
§ 37-40. Rules and regulations. [Amended 2-14-1967; 4-18-1967;
12-1-1970; 8-7-1973; 11-13-1973; effective 12-1-1973; 4-6-1982,
effective 4-25-1982; 5-20-1986, effective 6-8-1986; 6-7-1994]
Persons using the docking facilities of a marina shall at all times obey any
reasonable request of persons designated by the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs to be in charge of such facility.
B. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
shall reject any application to tie, moor or dock a boat which has living
quarters but is neither a sailing vessel nor mechanically propelled.
A. No person shall place or store any articles on the dock or pier nor
deface, mark, damage or wreck any structure, attach any wood, metal
or other material to the dock facilities, the dock piling or wharf
belonging to, or under control of, the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs, nor shall any person or persons be
permitted to damage or deface, mark or destroy or attach anything to
said dockage installation as aforesaid, without approval in writing from
the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee.
B. No person shall lift, drag, launch or otherwise cause any boat to be
dragged, lifted, launched, passed upon or otherwise taken across the
dock, bulkhead, pilings or other dockage facilities, wharf, catwalk or
dockage installation surrounding or installed at a marina except as
hereinafter provided. Launching of watercraft through the ramp facility
provided at a marina will be under the sole direction of the owner or
responsible representative of the owner without risk or liability in any
manner to the Town of Islip.
C. No owner or other person in charge of any boat, vessel or other
watercraft shall empty, clean out, pump out or otherwise discharge
water or waste material from the bilge or toilets into the waters at a
marina.
D. Loitering, trespassing in boats, unauthorized climbing and boarding,
damaging or interfering with boats docked, stored or moored in a
marina is prohibited.
E. No boat, vessel or other watercraft shall take on gasoline or other fuel
while its engines are running at a Town-owned or Town-operated
marina. No boat, vessel or other watercraft shall take on gasoline or
other fuel unless such boat, vessel or watercraft is in compliance with
all applicable County, state and federal laws and regulations and
moored at an approved fueling station or is refueling by the use of a
United States Coast Guard or Underwriters approved fuel container.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of any Coast
Guard or Underwriters approved fuel tank in the fueling of any boat,
vessel or other watercraft, provided that the engines are not running.
§ 37-39 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-40
34:339
F. Duly authorized representatives of the Town shall have the right to
board any boat for the purpose of securing it or preventing the boat
from bumping into, scraping or otherwise colliding with other boats
moored in the marina.
G. Owners of boats are required to supply, install and maintain their own
lines for mooring, tying and securing their boats properly.
H. Only one boat shall be permitted to moor per boat slip. Tenders,
including rowboats, floats or any such small craft tied to a larger boat,
are not permitted in the marina except when firmly secured to the
upper deck or the swim platform or placed in the davits of the larger
boat.
I. Emergency repairs only are permitted on boats moored at a marina. No
boat carpentry or painting of any kind is permitted. Owners of boats
holding permits to dock or moor their boats at a marina shall be
responsible for the appearance and cleanliness of the boat, pilings and
bulkhead in front of and adjacent to the berth or dock space assigned to
such owner.
J. All persons operating motor vehicles within a marina area shall obey
the ordinances regarding traffic of motor vehicles. All persons shall
comply with the directions of attendants at marinas.
K. No persons shall bathe, wade or swim in any waters in the marina.
L. The Town of Islip shall not be responsible for the loss, damage, theft,
destruction or other injury to any boat, vessel or watercraft, including
equipment, fixtures and contents of any boat, vessel or watercraft for
which a permit has been issued or otherwise, whether the boat is tied
to, launched from or attached to any installations provided by the Town
of Islip, and the use of the dockage installations at a marina shall be the
sole responsibility of the owner or persons holding the permit.
M. The Town of Islip shall not be responsible for any personal injury, loss of
life or damage to property of any person in connection with the use of
the marina.
N. No person owning or in charge of any animal shall cause or permit such
animal to enter a marina unless the same shall be carried or shall be on
a leash for the purpose of taking said animal upon a boat.
O. No persons shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose at a
marina. No persons shall post, distribute, cast or leave about any bills,
placards, tickets, handbills, circulars or advertisements or any other
material for advertising purposes.
P. No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy or
tamper with any drive, path or walk; take up remove or carry away
trees, shrubs or turf or any material or substance; or remove or destroy
any structure, building or any appurtenances connected with a marina
§ 37-40 ISLIP CODE § 37-40
34:340
§ 37-41. Additional rules and regulations. [Amended 6-7-1994]
The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee has
the right to enact additional rules and regulations with respect to the use of
the marina. Any permit hereafter issued shall be issued subject to the holder
thereof conforming to the rules and regulations now in force and effect or
that thereafter may be adopted.
§ 37-42. Rates. [Amended 7-17-1979, effective 8-4-1979; 6-7-1994]
The Town Board shall from time to time, by resolution designate the rates
to be charged for the use of dock space and other facilities of the marina.
§ 37-43. Signs. [Amended 6-7-1994]
The Town or Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or
designee shall cause to be erected suitable signs prohibiting bathing,
trespassing, boarding and interfering with boats in a marina.
§ 37-44. Opening and closing. [Amended 4-6-1982, effective
4-25-1982; 6-7-1994]
A marina shall be opened and closed at the time and hour designated by
the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee.
Opening and closing time for various facilities shall be posted for the
convenience of the public.
or other property or equipment, real or personal, owned by the Town of
Islip or under the jurisdiction and control of the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs.
Q. No boat, vessel or other watercraft moored at the Atlantique Beach
Marina may be left unattended for more than 12 consecutive hours or
overnight. [Amended 3-27-2007]
R. No person shall occupy any boat during any of the hours from 12:00
midnight to sunrise for more than 10 consecutive days or 20 days total
in any month the permit is in effect. This provision shall not apply to the
Atlantique Marina. [Amended 3-27-2007]
S. No boat shall be permitted to moor at the Atlantique Marina for more
than 12 consecutive days, and boats must sail out for at least 72 hours
before returning. The twelve-day period shall include any period when
the boat has left the marina for less than 72 hours. [Amended
3-27-2007]
T. The use of a barbecue, hibachi or any type of open-flame portable
cooking equipment, when placed on or within 25 feet of or affixed to any
dock, pier, boat or vessel shall be prohibited. Use of a flame device for
whatever purpose shall not be permitted unless such device is
contained with a permanently mounted receptacle specifically designed
for a marine purpose.
§ 37-40 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-45
34:341
§ 37-45. Revocation of permits. [Amended 4-15-1969; 11-13-1973;
effective 12-1-1973; 6-7-1994]
The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee has
the right to inspect or cause to be inspected any boat anchored, moored,
docked, tied or otherwise confined in or at any Town marina or any boat
using a Town launching ramp. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs designee reserves the right to revoke any permit issued to
any such boat if:
§ 37-46. Notice of revocation. [Amended 2-14-1967; 11-13-1973;
4-15-1975; 6-7-1994]
The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
shall notify the permit holder of an impending revocation of permit at least
10 days before the effective date of such revocation. Such notice shall be by
regular mail to the address supplied by the permit holder when said holder
applied for the permit or to a changed address subsequently supplied by
the permit holder. The permit holder may then forward a written request
that the revocation be abandoned based upon the permit holder's cure of
the violation of the applicable Code provision. The Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee shall have the discretionary
power to abandon or delay the revocation. If the Commissioner of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee does not abandon or delay
a scheduled revocation, the permit shall be revoked as of the scheduled
date. When a permit is revoked, the holder of such permit must remove
the boat from the dockage facilities on or before the scheduled revocation
date. Failure to remove the boat within the prescribed period of time will
constitute authority for the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural
Affairs or designee to remove the boat to a suitable place at the owner's
A. The boat is in violation of United States Coast Guard and/or New York
State regulations;
B. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
determines that such boat may endanger other boats, persons or
facilities in the vicinity of such boat;
C. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
determines that it is hazardous or dangerous to moor, dock or tie such
boat to the facilities of the marina;
D. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
determines that such boat is being used for any unlawful purpose;
E. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
determines that such boat, with living quarters, is not being operated as
a sailing vessel or motorboat; or
F. The Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee
determines that the owners, operators or person using such boat have
failed to obey a provision of this Article II.
§ 37-45 ISLIP CODE § 37-46
34:342
expense. The acceptance of the permit to moor or dock the boat at dockage
facilities at a marina shall constitute full authority and authorization of
the Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs or designee,
servants or employees to remove such boat without any liability on the part
of the Town its agents, servants or employees.
§ 37-46 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-46
34:343

ARTICLE III
Navigation Regulations
[Amended 6-11-1979 by L.L. No. 8-1979]
§ 37-47. Legislative intent. [Added 7-5-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby declares its intent to promote
safety on the waterways within the Town. This article is enacted pursuant
to Town Law § 130, Subdivision 17, which authorizes the Town to enact
regulations of vessels, and Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, which authorizes
the Town to supersede said Town Law. Pursuant to these laws, the Town
Board intends this article to apply without limitation to all waterways within
or bounding the Town.
§ 37-48. (Reserved)
§ 37-49. (Reserved)
§ 37-50. Title and applicability.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Navigation Law" and
applies to all navigable tidewaters and other navigable waters bordering
on and lying within the boundaries of the Town of Islip, except when the
provisions thereof are in conflict with the laws or ordinances of the State
of New York, the United States or municipal corporation having jurisdiction
thereof.
§ 37-51. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following terms, phrases and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein; words used in the singular are deemed to
include the plural.
DOCK — A wharf or portion of a wharf extending along the shoreline
and generally connected with the uplands throughout its length.
FLOATING OBJECTS — Any anchored marker, platform, raft or other
floating contrivance which is not a vessel and includes, but is not
limited to, bathing beach markers, speed zone markers, information
markers, swimming or diving floats, mooring buoys, fishing buoys and
ski jumps.
HARBOR AREAS — All navigable creeks, rivers, canals, etc., which
flow or open into the Great South Bay, including but not limited to the
areas described in the harbor map contained in the appendix to this
ordinance36 and listed as follows:
36.Editor's Note: A copy of the harbor map is on file and available for inspection by the public
in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 37-47 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-51
34:345
Sampawams Creek White Oak Creek
Skookwans Creek Quintuck Creek
Willetts Creek Connetquot River
Okenok Brick Kiln Creek
True's Creek Ludlow's and Indian Creek
Thompson's Creek Green's Creek
Appletree Neck Brown's Creek (River)
Lawrence Creek Lotus Lake — Brown's River
Watchogue Creek Snedecor Creek
Penataquit Creek Homan's Creek
Bay Shore Marina Basin Namkee Creek
Awixa Creek Barrett Beach
Orowoc Creek Atlantique Beach
Champlin Creek
MOTOR BOAT — Any mechanically propelled vessel.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Waterways used or susceptible of being used
in their natural or ordinary condition as highways for commerce over
which trade and travel are or may be conducted in customary modes of
trade and travel on water.
OWNER — Includes the person whose name or vessel was last
registered under Article 48 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law requiring registration, or as indicated by a valid marine document
registration issued by the US Coast Guard, or the last known person
with possession, custody, command, or charged with the care and
responsibility for the vessel or craft.[Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
PERMANENT MARINE STRUCTURE — Any object which is secured to
underwater land, including, but not limited to, bulkheads, jetties, docks,
solid-fill and fixed piers, floating objects secured by outer pilings, and
boat or jet-ski lifts.[Added 5-10-2011]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation
or any and all combinations of individuals acting in concert.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel which uses an inboard motor
powering a water-jet pump as its primary source of motive power
and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing
or kneeling on or being towed behind the vessel rather than in the
conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel.[Added
8-12-2008]
PIER — A wharf or portion of a wharf extending from the shoreline with
water on three sides.
§ 37-51 ISLIP CODE § 37-51
34:346
§ 37-52. (Reserved)37
§ 37-53. Construction in or on navigable waters.
It shall be unlawful to construct, in the navigable waters within or bordering
the Town of Islip, any wharf, dock, pier, jetty or other type of structure
without first obtaining a permit therefor under the provisions of the Islip
Town Code and the New York State Conservation Law and applicable United
States laws, rules and regulations.
§ 37-53.1. Encroachment of marine structures on Town-owned
property. [Added 5-28-2008; amended 5-10-2011]
Construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of the following permanent
marine structures that lie within and/or physically touch the stream bed,
canal bed, or bay bottom owned by the Town of Islip but used privately
by the owner of the upland property without benefit of a lease shall be
permitted as follows with reference to the fees listed in § 37-53.2:
SPECIALTY PROP-CRAFT — A vessel which uses an outboard motor or
propeller-driven motor pump as the primary source of motive power
and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing
or kneeling on or being towed behind the vessel rather than in the
conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel.[Added
8-12-2008]
TIDEWATERS — Waters, whether salt or fresh, wherever the ebb and
flow of the tide is felt, including but not limited to coves, bays, rivers,
canals and bays.
UNDERWAY — Any vessel that is floating and not moored, at anchor,
or made fast to the shore, pier, wharf, dock, or is aground.[Added
7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
VESSEL — The term "vessel" shall be every description of watercraft
or artificial contrivance which is used or capable of being used as
a means of transport or for commercial purposes, whether or not
capable of self-propulsion, and includes but is not limited to boats,
sailboats, motorboats, barges, scow dredges, rafts or other buoyant
devices permitting free flotation.[Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
WATERS — All surface water, whether salt or fresh, within or bordering
the Town of Islip, including tidewaters and navigable waters.
WHARF — Any structure built or maintained for the purpose of
providing a berthing place for vessels.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 37-52, Enforcement, was repealed 4-14-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009.
§ 37-51 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-53.1
34:347
§ 37-53.2. Mitigation fees for encroachment of marine structures
on Town-owned property. [Added 5-28-2008; amended 5-10-2011]
Construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of any of the structures listed
in § 37-53.1 of this article shall be subject to a fee to be paid prior to
the issuance of the permit. Fee title to the encroached-upon land remains
the property of the Town of Islip, and no rights, other than the right to
permissibly encroach upon said lands owned by the Town of Islip, are
provided to the upland owner, which rights may be revoked at any time for
any reason. Said fee shall accompany a signed statement of agreement and
be paid in addition to any application processing fee and in the following
amounts:
A. The one-time replacement of existing bulkheading or the one-time
resheathing of bulkheading within 18 inches waterward of the existing
bulkhead.
B. Mooring poles or piles that do not create additional boat slips or
mooring areas in violation of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 68) or
which cause a hazard to navigation in violation of § 37-55B of this
chapter.
C. Reconstruction or maintenance of fixed piers, docks, and other existing
structures that encroach upon a stream bed, canal bed, or bay bottom
that can prove prior Town approval or demonstrate legal
nonconforming status and which do not cause a hazard to navigation in
violation of § 37-55B of this chapter. Under no circumstance shall an
encroachment be permitted in a canal or waterway where the
encroachment occupies greater than 1/4 the width of the waterway. For
the purposes of this and the following section, "Town approval" shall
mean Town Board, Planning Board, or Zoning Board of Appeals
approval or a wetlands and watercourses permit processed by the
Department of Planning which includes documentation or other proof
that structures are entailed by said approval. If the Department of
Planning is able to procure aerial evidence showing the existence or
nonexistence of structures prior to the date that a permit was first
required to construct (April 6, 1973), for the purposes of these sections
this evidence shall also be considered a determinant in identifying the
structures as "existing."
D. New construction of fixed piers, docks, and other structures that
encroach upon a stream bed, canal bed, or bay bottom which do not
cause a hazard to navigation in violation of § 37-55B of this chapter and
which do not exceed beyond a water depth of four feet below the lowwater
mark as measured at average tide. Under no circumstance shall
an encroachment be permitted in a canal or waterway where the
encroachment occupies greater than 1/4 the width of the waterway.
A. Bulkheads.
§ 37-53.1 ISLIP CODE § 37-53.2
34:348
§ 37-53.3. Assessment of marine structures on Town-owned
property. [Added 5-28-2008]
The Assessor shall have the authority to assess any marine structure
existing on Town-owned property as part of the upland owner's tax bill.
§ 37-54. Regulating disposal of sewage; littering of waterways.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
(1) Bulkheading: For resheathing and reconstruction within 18 inches,
$20 per square foot for up to and including 50 square feet of
proposed encroaching boards/bulkhead; $4 per square foot for
subsequent square footage. A survey and scaled site plan detailing
overhead width and length of encroachment shall be submitted as
part of the requisite permit application.
(2) For in-place replacements, $3 per linear foot for up to and
including 100 linear feet of encroaching bulkhead; $1 per linear
foot for subsequent linear footage.
(3) An additional fee of $1,000 shall be assessed in conjunction with
the required permit if the distance between the property line and
the existing bulkhead already exceeds four feet.
(4) Bulkhead fees are to be assessed once, and no more than one
encroachment shall be permitted per bulkhead; all future work
must be in place. Encroachment shall be determined by either a
licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, or the Department of
Planning staff.
B. Mooring poles: No fee.
C. Docks and lifts; other structures.
(1) Existing docks: $5 per square foot for up to and including 100
square feet of encroachment as determined by either a licensed
land surveyor, professional engineer, or the Department of
Planning staff; $1 per square foot for subsequent square footage.
Fee is to be assessed once per duration of the permit as defined in
§ 67-19.
(2) Lift affixed to and supported solely by an existing structure listed
above: $250 per lift.
(3) Any structure or combination of structures not listed herein:
subject to a fee as determined by the Commissioner of Planning.
D. New structures: Double the resultant fee calculable for the
corresponding existing structure in Subsection C above.
A. As used in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
§ 37-53.2 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-54
34:349
LITTER — Any bottles, glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper,
garbage, rubbish, trash, or similar refuse.
MARINA — Any installation which provides any accommodations or
facilities for watercraft, including mooring, docking, storing, leasing,
sale, or servicing of watercraft, located adjacent to waters of the state.
MARINE HOLDING TANK — Any container aboard any vessel that is
designed and used for the purpose of collecting and storing treated or
untreated sewage from marine toilets.
MARINE TOILET — Any toilet on or within any watercraft, except those
that have been permanently sealed and made inoperative.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association,
or other entity.
PUMPOUT FACILITY — Any device, portable or permanent, capable of
removing sewage from a marine holding tank.
SEWAGE — All human body wastes.
WATERCRAFT — Any contrivance used or capable of being used for
navigation upon water, whether or not capable of self-propulsion,
except passenger or cargo-carrying vessels subject to the quarantine
regulations of the United States Public Health Service adopted
pursuant to Title 42 of the United States Code.
WATERS OF THE TOWN — All of the waterways, or bodies of water
located within the Town of Islip on which watercraft may be used or
operated.
B. Disposal to water or on contiguous land prohibited.
(1) No person, whether engaged in commerce or otherwise, shall
place, throw, deposit, or discharge, or cause to be placed, thrown,
deposited, or discharged into the waters of the Town, from any
watercraft, marina or mooring, any sewage, or other liquid or solid
materials which render the water unsightly, noxious or otherwise
unwholesome so as to be detrimental to the public health or
welfare or to the enjoyment of the water for recreational purposes.
(2) No person, whether engaged in commerce or otherwise, shall
place, throw, deposit or discharge, or cause to be placed, thrown,
deposited, or discharged, any litter into the waters of the Town or
upon any public lands contiguous to and within 100 feet of such
waters or upon any private lands contiguous to and within 100 feet
of such waters unless such lands are owned by such person or
unless such person enters or remains with the permission of the
owner of record or his representative or agent.
C. Marine toilets and containers of sewage.
§ 37-54 ISLIP CODE § 37-54
34:350
(1) No marine toilet on any watercraft used or operated upon waters of
the Town shall be operated so as to discharge any untreated
sewage into said waters directly or indirectly.
(2) No person owning or operating a watercraft with a marine toilet
shall use, or permit the use of, such toilet on the waters of the Town
unless the toilet is equipped with facilities that will adequately
treat, hold, incinerate or otherwise handle sewage in a manner that
is capable of preventing water pollution, as required by this
section.
(3) Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, no container of
sewage shall be placed, left, discharged or caused to be placed, left
or discharged in or bordering any waters of the Town by any person
at any time.
D. Marine toilet pollution control devices.
(1) Every marine toilet on watercraft used or operated upon the waters
of the Town shall be equipped with a pollution control device, either
for the treatment or holding of sewage, in operating condition, of a
type approved by the State Health Department, in conformance
with applicable public health standards and rules and regulations;
and approved by the department in conformance with the boating
safety standards and rules and regulations adopted by the
department. Pollution control devices shall be securely affixed to
the interior discharge opening of marine toilets, and all sewage
passing into or through such toilets shall pass solely through such
treatment facilities.
(2) Sewage passing through a marine toilet equipped with a
chlorinator or chemical treatment facility shall be deemed
untreated unless the effluent meets standards established by the
State Commissioner of Health.
(3) The disinfecting agent used in the facility shall be of a kind which,
when discharged as a part of the effluent, is not toxic to humans,
fish or wildlife.
(4) The active ingredient in deodorizers used in marine toilets may
only consist of formaldehyde, enzymes, bacterial cultures or any
other ingredient which would not interfere with the operation of
sewage treatment plants. No zinc or other heavy metal or phenol
may be used in any marine toilet.
E. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Any person who violates Subsection B(2) of this section shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished with a
fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment of not more than 60
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however,
that in the event any person violates this section more than twice
§ 37-54 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-54
34:351
§ 37-55. Mooring and docking.
during the same calendar year and is convicted of more than two
such violations, the third and each subsequent violation shall be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(2) Any person who violates any other provision of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished with a fine of not more than $100, or by imprisonment of
not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A. No vessel shall be anchored or moored in any channel except at the
edges thereof and in no case closer than 100 feet to channel markers or
so as to interfere with the full use of the channel by others.
B. No vessel(s), structure(s), and/or floating object(s) is/are to be made
fast to any dock, pier or wharf, rafted or otherwise made fast to any
other vessel or anchored or otherwise secured to any underwater land
in any harbor area within the Town of Islip in such a manner as to
obstruct the free and unimpeded navigation over such waterways. No
vessel(s), structure(s), and/or floating object(s) is/are to be docked,
moored or otherwise secured to any dock, pier or wharf within the
harbor areas of the Town of Islip where it/they would occupy more than
1/4 the width of the harbor area (creek, canal or river) as measured
along a perpendicular line from the dock, wharf or shoreline to which
the vessel(s), structure(s), and/or floating object(s) is/are secured to the
opposite or parallel shoreline or wharf. Portions of a vessel, structure,
or floating object within a boat slip on private property created by the
legal alteration of the natural shoreline and/or canal will not count
towards the occupation of a harbor area. Where, in the opinion of the
Harbor Master or other member of the Division of Harbor Police, a
vessel or floating object interferes with navigation in the harbor area,
the Harbor Master or other member of the Division of Harbor Police
shall issue a violation notice specifying that said vessel shall be moved
or made fast so as not to interfere with navigation. The time for
compliance with an order under this section is 48 hours unless for good
cause the Harbor Master or other member of the Division of Harbor
Police shall specify a lesser time. Failure to comply with a notice
pursuant to this section shall be deemed a violation under this
ordinance. [Amended 5-28-2008; 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009;
1-15-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
C. Regulation of Town-owned wharfs, docks and piers. The Harbor Master
shall have the authority to adopt regulations setting aside and
designating areas of Town-owned docks, not covered under Article II of
this ordinance, for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers
and cargo and to prohibit the use of Town wharfs, docks and piers or
areas thereof for docking of vessels and loading and unloading of
passengers and cargo, in order to limit congestion, hazardous traffic
patterns and to achieve maximum benefit of these areas for the
residents of the Town of Islip. In furtherance of this section, the Harbor
§ 37-54 ISLIP CODE § 37-55
34:352
Master may also adopt regulations setting the time and conditions for
the use of Town-owned wharfs, docks and piers.
D. Connetquot River. [Added 2-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
(1) No person shall place any mooring in the Connetquot River. This
subsection shall not apply to any uplandowner with riparian rights
installing a mooring within 100 feet of the high-water mark. See
§ 67-11, Uses subject to permit.
(2) No person shall anchor in the Connetquot River for more than 72
hours. Interruption of this time limit shall only occur upon absence
from the Connetquot River for an entire calendar day. This
subsection shall not apply to participants in regattas complying
with § 37-60.
(3) No person shall leave any vessel at anchor in the Connetquot River
unattended for more than 12 hours. This subsection shall not apply
to participants in regattas complying with § 37-60.
E. Town of Islip docks, piers, bulkheads and wharfs. [Added 4-13-2010
by L.L. No. 4-2010]
(1) No bulkhead, dock, pier or wharf owned by or under the control of
the Town of Islip shall be used by any person for bathing, swimming
or diving in the waters adjacent thereto. Bathing, wading or
swimming are permitted in areas so designated in accordance with
§ 37-9.
(2) It shall be unlawful to anchor, moor, dock tie up to or otherwise
fasten a boat at any bulkhead, dock, pier or wharf owned by,
maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip, except
in the case of an emergency requiring repairs to the vessel or the
motor therein or in the case of a medical emergency.
(3) Any person violating a provision of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $450 for each violation. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Service of notice of such violation shall be given by affixing a copy
thereof to the boat in a conspicuous place.
F. Dock at Fair Harbor Dock District. No boat shall anchor, moor, dock tie
up to or be otherwise fastened to the dock at Fair Harbor, except as
follows: [Added 4-13-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
(1) Boats may load or unload passengers/freight/cargo at the space
provided for that purpose and so marked. Mooring tying or
fastening a vessel to the dock for this purpose shall not exceed a
period of 15 minutes. This subsection shall not apply to public
vessels which must comply with § 37-33.
§ 37-55 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-55
34:353
§ 37-56. Hazards to navigation.
(2) Only emergency vessels may anchor, moor, dock, tie up to or
otherwise fasten a boat at the space provided for that purpose and
so marked.
(3) It shall be unlawful to anchor, moor, dock, tie up to or otherwise
fasten a boat between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a. m.
(4) Any person violating a provision of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $450 for each violation. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. Service of notice of such violation shall be given by
affixing a copy thereof to the boat in a conspicuous place.
A. Sunken or derelict vessels. Any vessel or floating or submerged object
which becomes a menace to navigation or unseaworthy or sinks,
grounds or otherwise becomes incapable of navigation shall
immediately be removed or restored to navigable condition by the
owner or operator thereof at his own expense.
B. Obstructions. Any tree, bush or boat davit that obstructs or endangers
navigation of vessels on the waterways shall immediately be corrected
or removed by the owner of the property on which the obstruction
exists. [Added 2-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
C. Removal by Division of Harbor Police. In the event that a vessel or
obstruction described in § 37-56A or B above is not immediately
removed or restored to navigable condition, the Division of Harbor
Police shall notify the owner, either by certified mail or personally, of
the condition of the vessel, floating object or obstruction. The owner
shall have 72 hours after receipt of notification to remove or restore the
vessel, floating object or obstruction unless the Division of Harbor
Police shall determine that the vessel, floating object or obstruction is
an immediate hazard, in which case said Division may either
immediately remove it or specify a lesser time for the owner to comply.
In the event that the owner shall fail to remove a vessel, floating object
or obstruction described in this section after notification or the Division
of Harbor Police shall be unable to locate the owner, then it shall be the
duty of the Division of Harbor Police to remove, restore, or cause to be
removed or restored, the vessel, floating object or obstruction. The
removal or restoration by the Division of Harbor Police shall be at the
sole expense of the owner, and the Town of Islip shall be entitled to
recover the expenses under this section from the owner by any lawful
means. In the event that any vessel, floating object or obstruction
contains no indication of ownership, it shall be immediately corrected,
removed, or caused to be removed, by the Division of Harbor Police.
[Amended 2-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
§ 37-55 ISLIP CODE § 37-57
34:354
§ 37-57. Lights to be displayed. [Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
A. Vessels classified. For the application of this section, vessels shall be
divided into classes as follows:
(1) Class A: less than 16 feet in length.
(2) Class 1: 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length.
(3) Class 2: 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length.
(4) Class 3: 40 feet or over and not more than 65 feet in length.
(5) Class 4: Over 65 feet in length.
(6) Class 5: rowboats and canoes.
B. Every vessel in all weathers from sunset to sunrise shall carry and
exhibit and, if carried, shall also exhibit from sunrise to sunset in
restricted visibility, and may exhibit in all other circumstances when it
is deemed necessary, the following lights when underway, and during
such times no other lights which may be mistaken for those prescribed
shall be exhibited. For the purposes of this section, the term "restricted
visibility" shall mean any condition in which visibility is restricted by
fog, mist, falling snow, heavy rainstorms, sandstorms, or any other
similar causes.
(1) Every vessel of Classes A and 1 shall carry the following lights:
(a) A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon.
(b) A combined lantern in the fore part of the vessel and lower
than the white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to
port, so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two
points abaft the beam on their respective sides.
(2) Every vessel of Classes 2 and 3 shall carry the following lights:
(a) A bright white light in the fore part of the vessel as near the
stem as practicable, so constructed as to show an unbroken
light over an arc of the horizon of 20 points of the compass, so
fixed as to throw the light 10 points on each side of the vessel;
namely, from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on
either side.
(b) A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon and
higher than the white light forward.
(c) On the starboard side, a green light so constructed as to show
an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the
compass, so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two
points abaft the beam on the starboard side. On the port side, a
red light so constructed as to show an unbroken light over an
§ 37-57 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-57
34:355
arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass, so fixed as to
throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam
on the port side. The side lights shall be fitted with inboard
screens of sufficient height so set as to prevent these lights
from being seen across the bow.
(3) Every vessel of Class 4 shall carry the following lights:
(a) On or in front of the foremast, or, if a vessel without a foremast,
then in the fore part of the vessel, a bright white light so
constructed as to show an unbroken light over an arc of the
horizon of 20 points of the compass, so fixed as to throw light
10 points on each side of the vessel, namely from right ahead
to two points abaft the beam on either side, and of such
character as to be visible at a distance of at least five miles.
(b) An additional aft white light carried at an elevation at least 15
feet above the light at the head of the vessel and to show all
around the horizon.
(c) On the starboard side, a green light so constructed as to show
an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the
compass, so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two
points abaft the beam on the starboard side. On the port side, a
red light so constructed as to show an unbroken light over an
arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass, so fixed as to
throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam
on the port side. The side lights shall be fitted with inboard
screens of sufficient height so set as to prevent these lights
from being seen across the bow.
(4) Rowboats and canoes, whether under oars or sail, shall have ready
at hand a lantern showing a white light which shall be temporarily
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(5) Vessels of Classes A and 1 when propelled by sail alone shall carry
the combined lantern, but not the white light aft, prescribed by this
section. Vessels of Classes 2 and 3, when so propelled, shall carry
the colored side lights, suitably screened, but not the white lights,
prescribed by this section. Vessels of all classes, when so propelled,
shall carry, ready at hand, a lantern or flashlight showing a white
light which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to avert collision.
(6) When propelled by sail and machinery, any vessel shall carry the
lights required by this section for a vessel propelled by machinery
only.
(7) Any vessel may carry and exhibit the lights required by the federal
regulations for preventing collisions at sea, 1948, Act of October
11, 1951, as amended, in lieu of the lights required by this section.
§ 37-57 ISLIP CODE § 37-57
34:356
§ 37-57.1. Equipment. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
(8) A mechanically propelled vessel when towing another vessel shall,
in addition to her side lights, carry two bright white lights in a
vertical line one over the other, not less than three feet apart.
(9) A vessel under 150 feet in length when at anchor shall carry
forward, where it can best be seen, but at a height not exceeding 20
feet above the hull, a white light in a lantern so constructed as to
show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light visible all around the
horizon at a distance of at least one mile; provided that the
Commissioner may, after investigation, by rule, regulation, or
order, designate such areas as he may deem proper as "special
anchorage areas"; such special anchorage areas may from time to
time be changed, or abolished, if after investigation the
Commissioner shall deem such change or abolishment in the
interest of navigation; provided, further, that vessels not more than
65 feet in length when at anchor in any such special anchorage
area shall not be required to carry or exhibit the white light
required by this subsection. A vessel of 150 feet or upward in
length, when at anchor, shall carry in the forward part of the vessel,
at a height of not less than 20 feet and not exceeding 40 feet above
the hull, one such light, and at or near the stern of the vessel, and
at such a height that it shall be not less than 15 feet lower than the
forward light, another such light.
(10) Every white light prescribed by this section shall be of such
character as to be visible at a distance of at least two miles except
as otherwise provided. Every colored light prescribed by this
section shall be of such character as to be visible at a distance of at
least one mile except as otherwise provided. The word "visible" in
this section, when applied to lights, shall mean visible on a dark
night with clear atmosphere.
(11) A revolving blue light may only be carried or exhibited on
enforcement vessels owned or operated by the State of New York or
a political subdivision thereof.
(12) Should the federal government adopt vessel light requirements
different from those contained in this section, the head of the
Division of Harbor Police shall be authorized to adopt rules and
regulations superseding the vessel light requirements of this
section to achieve consistency with federal standards.
C. A violation of any provision of this section, or of a rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this section, shall constitute a violation punishable
by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $250.
A. Equipment required herein shall be carried on every vessel except as
otherwise provided, while underway, or at anchor with any person
aboard, while on the navigable waters of the Town of Islip. Should the
§ 37-57 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-57.1
34:357
federal government adopt vessel equipment requirements different
from those contained in this section, the Harbor Master shall be
authorized to adopt rules and regulations superseding the vessel
equipment requirements of this section to achieve consistency with
federal standards.
(1) Personal flotation devices.
(a) Every pleasure vessel and every rowboat and canoe shall have
at least one wearable personal flotation device for each person
on board, which shall be of a type approved by the United
States Coast Guard and shall be in good condition.
(b) Pleasure vessels 16 feet and greater in length shall carry at
least one Type IV throwable personal flotation device which
shall be of a type approved by the United States Coast Guard
and shall be in good condition.
(c) Every operator or person in charge or control of a pleasure
vessel, rowboat or canoe, as described in Subsection A(1)(a)
and (b) of this subsection, shall be responsible for compliance
with the provisions of this subsection.
(d) No person shall operate a vessel of Class A, 1, 2 or 3 as
classified and defined in § 37-57A or a rowboat or canoe, nor
shall the owner of such vessel while on board such vessel
knowingly permit its operation, unless each person on such
vessel under the age of 12 is wearing a securely fastened
United States Coast Guard approved wearable personal
flotation device of an appropriate size when said vessel is
underway. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
any person on such vessel under the age of 12 who is within a
fully enclosed cabin.
(2) Whistle. Every mechanically propelled vessel shall be provided
with an efficient whistle. The word "whistle" shall mean any soundproducing
mechanical appliance, except sirens, capable of
producing a blast of two seconds or more in duration and of such
strength as to be heard plainly for a distance of at least 1/2 mile in
still weather. A siren whistle may only be attached to a vessel
operated by a police department, fire department or public utility
company, and used only on emergency calls. On vessels less than
39 feet in length, a mouth whistle capable of producing a blast of
two seconds or more in duration, which can be heard for at least 1/
2 mile, may be used.
(3) Anchors. Every mechanically propelled vessel shall carry an anchor
and cable of sufficient weight and strength to provide a safe
anchorage for such vessel. It shall be the duty of the master of such
vessel to exercise reasonable care and caution and maritime skill in
everything relating to the safe anchorage of his vessel.
§ 37-57.1 ISLIP CODE § 37-57.1
34:358
(4) Carburetor backfire flame arresters. The carburetor of every
gasoline engine installed in a mechanically propelled vessel after
April 25, 1940, except outboard motors, shall be fitted with a
United States Coast Guard approved device for arresting backfire.
(5) Classification of fire extinguishers. Hand-portable fire
extinguishers capable of extinguishing gasoline oil or grease fires
shall be classified as prescribed and approved by the
Commissioner.
(6) Fire extinguishers required.
(a) Every mechanically propelled vessel as classified and defined
by § 37-57A, except outboard motor boats less than 26 feet in
length, of open construction, shall carry United States Coast
Guard approved fire extinguishers in accordance with the
following:
[1] Class A motor boats shall carry one B-1 fire extinguisher.
[2] Class 1 motor boats shall carry one B-1 fire extinguisher.
[3] Class 2 motor boats shall carry two B-1 fire extinguishers.
[4] Class 3 motor boats shall carry three B-1 fire
extinguishers.
[5] Class 4 motor boats shall carry fire extinguishers and
other fire-fighting equipment as required by the federal
navigation law and rules and regulations made by the
United States Coast Guard for uninspected vessels.
(b) One Class B-2 fire extinguisher may be substituted for two
Class B-1 fire extinguishers.
(c) When the engine compartment of the motor boat is equipped
with a fixed fire-extinguishing system of a United States Coast
Guard approved type, one less Class B-1 fire extinguisher is
required.
(d) No fire extinguishers of the toxic vaporizing liquid type,
including those containing carbon tetrachloride and
chlorobromomethane extinguishing agents, shall be approved
by the Commissioner.
(7) Visual distress signals. Every vessel of 16 feet or more, regardless
of the distance of the vessel from shore, shall carry, to be displayed
and used whenever such vessel is in need of assistance, the number
and type of visual distress signals that are required by the United
States Coast Guard for operation on waters under federal
jurisdiction. Such devices shall be in serviceable condition and
readily accessible on board the vessel and the service life, if
marked upon the device, shall not have expired. The provisions of
§ 37-57.1 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-57.1
34:359
§ 37-57.2. Noise levels on pleasure vessels. [Added 7-14-2009 by
L.L. No. 5-2009]
this subsection shall not apply to open sailboats under 26 feet in
length that are not equipped with mechanical power or vessels
participating in an organized marine event for which a permit
has been granted by the State Parks Commissioner pursuant to
Navigation Law § 34, or by the United States Coast Guard. All
vessels shall carry visual distress signals suitable for night use
between sunset and sunrise. At all times, the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to vessels engaged in commerce and
having a valid marine document issued by the United States or a
foreign government.
(8) Ventilation. All mechanically propelled vessels, the construction or
decking over of which is commenced after April 25, 1940, and
which uses fuel having a flash point of 110° F. or less, shall have at
least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the
purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every
engine and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any
inflammable or explosive gases. Such mechanically propelled
vessels so constructed as to have the greater portion of the bilges
under the engine and fuel tanks open and exposed to the natural
atmosphere at all times need not be required to be fitted with such
ventilators.
(9) Bell. Motor boats of greater than 39 feet in length shall carry a bell.
B. Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section, or of a rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this section, shall constitute a violation
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $250.
C. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vessels
competing in duly authorized regattas and trials preceding such
regattas.
A. No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any
pleasure vessel in or upon the waters of the Town of Islip in such a
manner as to exceed a noise level of 90 dB(A) when subjected to a
stationary sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
B. No person shall operate a pleasure vessel on the waters of the Town of
Islip in such a manner as to exceed a noise level of 75 dB(A) measured
as specified in SAE J1970; provided that such measurement shall not
preclude a stationary sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
C. No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any
pleasure vessel in or upon the waters of the Town of Islip that is
equipped with an altered muffler or a muffler cutout, bypass or
otherwise reduce or eliminate the effectiveness of any muffler or
muffler system installed in accordance with this section.
§ 37-57.1 ISLIP CODE § 37-57.2
34:360
D. No person shall remove, alter or otherwise modify in any way a muffler
or muffler system in a manner which will prevent it from being operated
in accordance with this section.
E. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to pleasure vessels
designed, manufactured and sold for the sole purpose of competing
in racing events and for no other purpose. Any such exemption or
exception shall be so documented in any and every sale agreement
and shall be formally acknowledged by signature on the part of
both the buyer and the seller, and copies of said agreement shall be
maintained by both parties. A copy shall be kept on board whenever
the pleasure vessel is operated. Any pleasure vessel sold under this
exemption may only be operated on the waters of this Town in
accordance with this section.
(2) The provisions of this section shall also not apply to:
(a) Pleasure vessels which are competing in or participating for a
definite race over a given course held under the auspices of
any bona fide club or racing association between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and sunset, which has been approved pursuant to
§ 37-60 of this Code and/or § 34 of the New York State
Navigation Law, and all provisions of such section have been
complied with or pursuant to authorization by the commandant
of the United States Coast Guard.
(b) An authorized agent of the federal, state or municipal
government when operating a pleasure vessel necessary to
carry out his or her official duty of enforcement, search and
rescue, fire-fighting or research programs.
(c) A pleasure vessel being operated by a boat or marine engine
manufacturer for the purposes of testing and/or development.
(d) A pleasure vessel manufactured prior to 1965.
F. Any officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this section who has
reason to believe that a pleasure vessel is not in compliance with the
noise levels established in this section may direct the operator of such
pleasure vessel to submit the pleasure vessel to an on-site test to
measure noise level, with the officer on board if such officer chooses,
and the operator shall comply with such request. If such pleasure vessel
exceeds the decibel levels established in this section, the officer may
direct the operator to take immediate and reasonable measures to
correct the violation, including returning the pleasure vessel to a
mooring and keeping the pleasure vessel at such mooring until the
violation is corrected or ceases.
G. Any officer who conducts pleasure vessel sound level tests as provided
in this section shall be qualified in pleasure vessel noise testing by the
§ 37-57.2 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-57.2
34:361
§ 37-57.3. Pilot rules. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
Department of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation. Such
qualifications shall include but may not be limited to the selection of
the measurement site, and the calibration and use of noise testing
equipment.
H. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $50
for the first offense and not exceeding $250 for a second or
subsequent offense. However, the court shall waive any fine for
which a person who violates the provisions of this section would be
liable if such person supplies the court with proof within 30 days of
the issuance of the summons that he purchased his pleasure vessel
prior to the effective date of this section, that the pleasure vessel's
muffler was not altered or made inoperable so as to result in a
violation of the provisions of this section, and that the pleasure
vessel has been repaired, altered or modified so as to be in
compliance with the provisions of this section; provided, however,
that such waiver of fine shall not apply to a second or subsequent
conviction under this section.
(2) Any person who alters or makes inoperable an effective muffler
system so that such system is no longer in compliance with this
section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $250.
A. The following rules shall be observed on all mechanically propelled
vessels on the navigable waters of the Town of Islip.
(1) Signals. The signals for passing, by the blowing of the whistle, shall
at all times be given by the master as defined in the New York State
Navigation Law.
(a) One distinct blast of the whistle shall mean: "I direct my course
to starboard"; except when two vessels are approaching each
other at right angles or obliquely, when it shall signify the
intention of the vessel which is to starboard of the other to hold
course and speed.
(b) Two distinct blasts of the whistle shall mean: "I direct my
course to port."
(c) Three distinct blasts of the whistle shall mean: "My engines are
going at full speed astern."
(d) Four distinct blasts of the whistle shall mean: "I am in distress
and need your assistance."
§ 37-57.2 ISLIP CODE § 37-57.3
34:362
(e) Five or more distinct blasts of the whistle shall constitute the
"danger signal."
(f) It shall be forbidden to use what has become technically known
among pilots as "cross-signals"; that is, answering one whistle
with two, or two whistles with one.
(g) When a vessel is underway in a fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy
rain storm, it shall be the duty of the master to cause a long
blast of the whistle to be sounded at intervals not exceeding
one minute. When towing other vessels, the long blast of the
whistle shall be followed by two short blasts. Such vessel shall
proceed at a moderate speed and with caution, having careful
regard to the existing circumstances and conditions.
(h) The master of a vessel, when at anchor during a fog, mist,
falling snow or heavy rain storm, shall, at intervals of not more
than one minute, ring a bell rapidly or sound other warning
signals for about five seconds.
(2) Positions.
(a) When vessels are approaching each other "head and head,"
that is, end on or nearly so, it shall be the duty of each to pass
on the port side of the other, and either vessel shall give, as a
signal of her intention, one distinct blast on her whistle, which
the other vessel shall answer promptly with one similar blast of
her whistle.
(b) When vessels are approaching each other and the courses of
such vessels are so far to the starboard of each other as not to
be considered to be meeting head on or nearly so, either vessel
shall immediately give two distinct blasts of her whistle, which
the other shall answer promptly with two similar blasts of her
whistle, and they shall pass on the starboard side of each other.
(c) When vessels are approaching each other at "right angles or
obliquely" so as to involve risk of collision, the vessel which has
the other on her own port side shall hold her course and speed,
and shall so signify with one distinct blast of her whistle; and
the vessel which has the other on her own starboard side shall
keep out of the way of the other by directing her course to
starboard so as to cross the stern of the other vessel, or, if
necessary to do so, shall slacken her speed, or stop or reverse.
(d) When vessels are running in the same direction and the vessel
which is astern shall desire to pass on the starboard side of the
vessel ahead, she shall give one distinct blast of her whistle as
the signal of such desire, and if the vessel ahead answers with
one similar blast of her whistle, she shall pass to the starboard;
or if the vessel astern shall desire to pass on the port side of
the vessel ahead, she shall give two distinct blasts of her
§ 37-57.3 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-57.3
34:363
whistle as a signal of such desire, and, if the vessel ahead
answers with two similar blasts of the whistle, she shall pass
to the port; but if the vessel ahead does not think it safe for
the vessel astern to pass at that point, she shall immediately
signify the same by giving five or more rapid blasts of her
whistle (the danger signal), and under no circumstances shall
the vessel astern attempt to pass the vessel ahead until such
time as she has reached a point where it can be safely done,
when said vessel ahead shall signify her willingness by blowing
the proper signal, which shall be answered by the vessel
astern. Neither vessel shall in any case attempt to cross the
bow or to crowd upon the course of the other vessel.
(e) If, when vessels are approaching each other head and head,
that is, end on or nearly so, [as per Subsection A(2)(a) and (b)]
or crossing each other's courses, [as per Subsection A(1)(c)],
or desire to pass each other [as per Subsection A(1)(d)], either
vessel fails to understand the course or intention of the other,
from any cause, the vessel so in doubt shall immediately signify
the same by giving five or more rapid blasts of her whistle (the
danger signal), and both vessels shall immediately slow their
speed, or stop or reverse, as required to avoid collision, until
proper signals have been given, answered and understood, or
until the vessels have passed each other.
(f) When a mechanically propelled vessel shall meet a sailing
vessel proceeding in such direction as to involve risk of
collision, the sailing vessel shall have the right of way. It shall
be incumbent on the master of the sailing vessel to keep a
vigilant lookout and change her course, if necessary, to avoid
any danger.
(g) In narrow channels, every vessel shall, when it is safe and
practicable, keep to that side of the fairway or mid-channel
which lies on the starboard side of such vessel.
(3) Aid in distress. It shall be the duty of every master or pilot of any
vessel to render such assistance as he can possibly give to any
other vessel coming under his observation and being in distress on
account of accident, collision or otherwise.
B. Construing rules. In obeying and construing these rules, due regard
shall be had to all dangers of navigation and collision, and to any special
circumstances which may render a departure from the above rules
necessary in order to avoid immediate danger.
C. Application. The rules of this section shall apply to all vessels, public
and pleasure, propelled by machinery on the navigable waters of the
Town of Islip.
§ 37-57.3 ISLIP CODE § 37-57.3
34:364
§ 37-58. Searchlights; Lake Ronkonkoma; registration.
§ 37-59. Speed and reckless operation.
D. Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section, or of a rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this section, shall constitute a violation
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $250.
A. Searchlights. No person operating a boat shall use search-lights in such
a manner as to annoy or disturb other persons or boats.
B. Lake Ronkonkoma. No motorboats or propeller-driven vessels shall be
operated upon Lake Ronkonkoma. No automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,
tractors, trailers, snowmobiles or any other all-terrain motor-driven or
propeller-driven or motorized vehicle or device shall be operated upon
Lake Ronkonkoma. [Amended 12-17-1985]
C. Every motorboat operated on the navigable waters lying within or
bordering the boundaries of the Town shall be registered and
numbered, pursuant to the requirements of Article 48 of the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law. No person shall operate or give
permission for the operation of any motorboat on the navigable waters
of the Town unless it is so registered and numbered, pursuant to Article
48, and the identification number of said vessel is in full force and effect
and displayed, pursuant to Article 48 of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
A. Navigation and speed; conduct of occupants.
(1) Every operator of a vessel shall at all times navigate the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at such rate of speed as not to
unreasonably interfere with the free and proper use of the
navigable waters of the Town or unreasonably endanger any vessel,
person or property. [Amended 12-18-1984]
(2) No occupant of a mechanically powered/motorized vessel while
underway shall sit, stand, or walk on any area not designed for that
movement except when immediately necessary for safe and
reasonable navigation or operation. The vessel operator shall not
permit any person to ride on the bow, foredeck, transom, gunwales
of the vessel or watercraft when that person’s legs are hanging
over the side or in any position that would endanger that person
while the vessel is underway. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
B. No vessel other than the tending vessel shall be operated within 100
feet of a red flag with a diagonal white bar which, when displayed on
the water or from a boat, indicates underwater diving or a designated
course for racing shells, but no such flag shall be placed so as to deny
access or use of any boathouse, wharf, harbor, bay, channel or navigable
waterway.
§ 37-57.3 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-59
34:365
§ 37-59.1. Excessive speed. [Added 7-5-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
C. No boat or vessel shall be operated in any harbor or any areas where
there is a congestion of boats, either underway or at anchor, at a speed
in excess of four miles per hour; provided, however, that the Town
Board by resolution may, from time to time and for periods of time
stated in such resolution, suspend the enforcement of this section with
respect to any portion or portions of the Town waterways and designate
speeds for such areas by the location of speed rafts or other suitable
markings.
D. No person operating a boat shall throw up a dangerous wake when
approaching or passing another boat nor operate a boat at a speed
which shall cause a wake which is liable to endanger the safety of any
person or cause damage to property. [Amended 12-18-1984]
E. Operation of vessel near bathers. No boats or vessels propelled other
than by hand shall cruise or be operated within 100 feet of any lifelines
or bathing float or, if there are no lifelines or bathing floats, then within
150 feet of any public or semipublic beach regularly used for bathing or
swimming; nor shall such boat or vessel cruise or be operated in excess
of four miles per hour within 50 feet of any person bathing or
swimming, except at inlets or where a channel approaches the
shoreline closer than the distances hereinabove set forth.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a vessel while actually
competing in a regatta or boat race authorized under § 37-60 of this
article.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MOTORBOAT — Includes any vessel propelled on water in whole or
part by an engine or motor, whether inboard or outboard.
OWNER or OPERATOR — Any person or persons, including an
individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership, owning,
operating, chartering or renting a motorboat.
B. Speed limit. Unless otherwise lawfully posted, no person who is the
owner or operator of a motorboat shall allow the same to be operated in
excess of 45 miles per hour within the waters of this Town. This section
shall not apply to regattas authorized pursuant to § 37-60.
C. Penalties for offenses. Every person convicted of a violation of this
section shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment; for a conviction of a second violation,
both of which were committed within a period of six months, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; and, upon a conviction of a third or subsequent violation,
§ 37-59 ISLIP CODE § 37-59.1
34:366
§ 37-60. Regattas; aquatic events. [Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
The Town Board may authorize the holding of regattas or boat races and
other aquatic events in any navigable waters of the Town of Islip. Whenever
a regatta, boat race or aquatic event is proposed to be held on such waters,
the sponsoring person shall, at least four weeks prior to the event, file an
application with the Town Clerk. The application shall set forth the nature
of the event, the approximate number of participants, the time and the
approximate location. The application will be presented by the Clerk to
the Division of Harbor Police upon receipt thereof. The Division of Harbor
Police and other agencies of the Town which the head of the Division of
Harbor Police deems appropriate will review the application for safety and
compliance with this Code, and upon the head of the Division of Harbor
Police’s approval, the application will be brought before the Town Board
for its approval or denial. Sailboat regattas or races sponsored by yacht
clubs and sailing or racing associations located within the Town of Islip
are exempt from the requirements of this section, provided that the United
States Coast Guard requirements for such events are fully complied with.
§ 37-61. Waterskiing and surfboarding.
all of which were committed within a period of six months, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
D. Policing. The Division of Harbor Police of the Town and any police
officer or peace officer of the State of New York, or the County of
Suffolk are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this section,
and every person in charge of a boat navigating or using the waterways
of the Town shall at all times obey the lawful orders of the members of
the Division of Harbor Police, and any police officer or peace officer of
the State of New York, or the County of Suffolk, and such officers shall
have the right to stop any boat navigating or using the waterways of the
Town for the purposes of enforcing this section. [Amended 7-14-2009
by L.L. No. 5-2009]
A. No person shall operate a vessel on the navigable waters of the Town
for towing a person on water skis, a surfboard or similar device unless
there is in such vessel a person, other than the operator, of at least 10
years of age, in a position to observe the progress of the person being
towed.
B. No person shall be towed on water skis, a surfboard, or similar device
or use or operate a vessel to tow a person thereon on the navigable
waters of the Town during the period from sunset to one hour after
sunrise; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to a paid performer engaged in a professional exhibition.
C. Location and speed.
§ 37-59.1 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-61
34:367
§ 37-62. Boat operators. [Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
(1) No person shall be towed on water skis, a surfboard or similar
device or use or operate a boat or vessel to tow a person thereon in
any channel or within 150 feet of any public or semipublic bathing
beach or public dock or within 50 feet of any swimmer or bather or
boat anchored or moving; nor shall any person engaged in such
activities come within 500 feet of the shoreline unless solely for the
purpose of commencing or ending the ride.
(2) No person shall operate a vessel or tow a person on waterskis,
surfboard, aquaplane or similar device or manipulate any
waterskis, aquaplane, or similar device at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and without due
regard, caution, or circumspection to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
D. No person shall be towed on water skis, a surfboard or similar device
without wearing a personal flotation device as specified in § 37-57.1 of
this article. [Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
E. No person shall operate a vessel to tow a person on waterskis,
surfboard, aquaplane or similar device or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device in a reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger, or which is likely to endanger life or limb, injure a person, or
damage property of any person. [Amended 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall operate a mechanically
propelled vessel on the navigable waters of the Town unless:
(1) The operator is accompanied therein by a person who is 18 years of
age or older; or
(2) The operator is 10 years of age or older and is the holder of a
boating safety certificate issued to him by the Commissioner of the
Office of Parks and Recreation of the State of New York, pursuant
to § 78 of the New York State Navigation Law, or by the United
States Power Squadrons or the United States Coast Guard
Auxiliary.
B. The failure of a person specified in Subsection A(2) of this section to
exhibit a boating safety certificate upon demand to any peace officer or
other officer having authority to enforce the provisions of this local law
shall be presumptive evidence that such person is not the holder of such
certificate.
C. No person who is the owner of a motorboat shall knowingly authorize or
permit the operation thereof on the navigable waters of the Town
unless:
(1) The operator is 18 years of age or older;
§ 37-61 ISLIP CODE § 37-62
34:368
§ 37-63. Regulation of personal watercrafts and specialty propcrafts.
[Added 8-12-200838]
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this article, the following
shall apply to the operation of personal watercraft and specialty prop-craft:
(2) The operator is accompanied therein by a person 18 years of age or
older; or
(3) The operator is 10 years of age or older and is the holder of a
boating safety certificate issued to him by the Commissioner of the
Office of Parks and Recreation of the State of New York, the United
States Power Squadrons or the United States Coast Guard
Auxiliary.
D. No person shall operate a vessel on the navigable waters of the Town
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or
opiums.
E. The provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not apply
while the operator is actually preparing for or competing in a regatta or
boat race authorized under § 37-60 of this article.
F. No person operating a vessel upon the navigable waters of the Town of
Islip shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer or peace officer acting pursuant to his or her special
duties. Failure or refusal to comply with such lawful order shall be a
violation.
G. The provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not apply
while the operator is actually preparing for or competing in a regatta or
boat race authorized under § 37-60 of this article.
A. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
unless each person riding on or towed behind such vessel is wearing a
securely fastened life jacket (Type I, II, III or V) approved by the United
States Coast Guard, except that a Type III inflatable PFD life jacket
shall not be worn on a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft.
B. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
unless such vessel is equipped and fitted with a United States Coast
Guard approved device for arresting carburetor backfire.
C. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
unless such vessel is equipped with:
(1) At least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the
purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every
engine and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any
inflammable or explosive gases; provided, however, that if the
38.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former § 37-63 as § 37-64. Former § 37-64,
a reserved section, was deleted.
§ 37-62 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-63
34:369
personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft is so constructed as to
have the greater portion of the bilges under the engine and the fuel
tank(s) open and exposed to the natural atmosphere at all times, it
need not be fitted with such ventilators; and
(2) An efficient sound-producing mechanical appliance, except sirens,
capable of producing a blast of two seconds or more in duration
and of such strength as to be heard plainly for a distance of at least
1/2 mile in still weather; and
(3) A fluorescent-orange distress flag, which shall be a minimum of one
foot square, or other appropriate United States Coast Guard
approved visual distress signal.
D. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
unless such vessel is equipped with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch
and such lanyard-type engine cutoff switch is attached to his or her
person, clothing or a personal flotation device as is appropriate for the
specific vessel.
E. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
between sunset and sunrise or in periods of restricted visibility.
F. Restricted areas.
(1) No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty propcraft:
(a) Within 500 feet of a shoreline, a lifeline or bathing float, and/or
a bather or swimmer, except during transit to and from the
shoreline or ramp area, and then only at five miles per hour, or
at any applicable more restrictive speed regulation and/or
restriction, and no closer than 50 feet to a bather, swimmer or
other person in the water; and
(b) In bodies of water where the opposing shoreline is less than
500 feet from a shoreline; and
(c) In excess of the applicable speed regulations and/or
restrictions.
(2) "Transit" shall mean the safest direct route to or from the shoreline
or to or from the launching site of the personal watercraft or
specialty prop-craft.
(3) Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
the launching of such vessels from designated launching sites or
private beaches with the property owner's consent.
G. Every personal watercraft and specialty prop-craft shall at all times be
operated in a reasonable and prudent manner. Maneuvers which
unreasonably or unnecessarily endanger life, limb or property,
including but not limited to weaving through congested vessel traffic, or
§ 37-63 ISLIP CODE § 37-63
34:370
§ 37-64. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon approval of the New York
State Conservation Commissioner.
jumping the wake of another vessel unreasonably or unnecessarily
close to such other vessel or when visibility around such other vessel
is obstructed, or sudden turning, stopping and rapidly accelerating, or
swerving at the last possible moment to avoid collision, shall constitute
reckless operation of a vessel.
H. Registration numbers on personal watercraft and specialty prop-craft
shall be visible at all times and shall be in accordance with all
applicable federal and state regulations.
I. PWC. No person shall operate a personal watercraft or specialty propcraft
upon the navigable waters of the Town of Islip unless the operator
is the holder of, or is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age who
is the holder of, a boating safety certificate issued to him by the
Commissioner of the Office of Parks and Recreation of the State of New
York, the United States Power Squadrons or the United States Coast
Guard Auxiliary, or other state or government, as a result of completing
a course approved by the Commissioner of the Office of Parks and
Recreation of the State of New York. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No.
5-2009]
J. No person who is the owner of a personal watercraft or specialty propcraft
shall knowingly authorize or permit the operation thereof on the
navigable waters of the Town of Islip unless the operator is the holder
of, or is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age who is the holder
of, a boating safety certificate issued to him by the Commissioner of the
Office of Parks and Recreation of the State of New York, the United
States Power Squadrons or the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary, or
other state or government, as a result of completing a course approved
by the Commissioner of the Office of Parks and Recreation of the State
of New York. [Added 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
§ 37-63 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-64
34:371

ARTICLE IV
Offenses
§ 37-65. Penalties for offenses not specified. [Amended 4-15-1969;
2-16-1971; 9-18-1973; 7-14-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
The violation of any provisions of this ordinance or the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder, for which no penalty is designated within that section of
this ordinance or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, shall be an
offense against this ordinance which shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $250, nor more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
15 days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and by the
revocation of any permit hereunder held by any person found guilty of such
violation.
§ 37-65 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-65
34:373

ARTICLE V
Severability and When Effective
§ 37-66. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, section, paragraph or provision of this ordinance or
any rule or regulation hereunder shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder of this ordinance but shall be confined in its operation to
the clause, sentence, section, paragraph or provision or rule or regulation
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 37-67. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
§ 37-66 MEMORIAL AND INDEPENDENCE DAYS § 37-67
34:375
Chapter 38
(RESERVED)
Chapter 39
PEDDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Noise — See Ch. 35.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 40A.
Sales of personal property — See Ch. 43.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 47A.
Trespassing — See Ch. 58.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 39-1. Findings and intent.
§ 39-1.1. Definitions.
A. The Town Board finds that the proliferation of stationary roadside
peddlers, if not properly regulated, runs counter to the public policy of
the Town of Islip and is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Islip and to the safe flow of
vehicular traffic on highways in the Town of Islip. However, the Town
Board also recognizes that the stationary peddling of food products, if
properly regulated, serves an important public purpose.
B. It is necessary and proper, pursuant to the powers granted unto the
Town of Islip by virtue of Town Law § 136, to regulate the practice of
peddling. This chapter is enacted pursuant to Town Law § 136, and
although the use of a stationary, peddler's license is restricted to
certain use districts, this is not intended to be an exercise of the Town's
zoning power, and therefore no vested rights accrue with regard to the
land indicated on the license.
C. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate peddling, including mobile and
stationary peddling. [Amended 2-9-2016
A. The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter
unless otherwise expressly defined herein. Words in the singular shall
include the plural, and vice versa. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 37-67 ISLIP CODE § 39-1.1
38:376
§ 39-2. License required.
HAMLET — The term "hamlet" shall include the following: Bay Shore,
Bayport, Bohemia, Brentwood, Central Islip, East Islip, Great River,
Hauppauge, Holbrook, Islip, Islip Terrace, Oakdale, Ronkonkoma,
Sayville and West Islip.
HELPER — Any person assisting a peddler to peddle.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Property within one of the following districts:
General Service D, Business 1, Business 2, Business 3, Industrial 1,
Industrial 2, and the Industrial Corridor District, upon which there is an
existing building or buildings for which a certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
MERCHANDISE — Commodities or goods that are bought or sold,
including but not limited to flowers, toys, and furniture.[Added
3-4-2014]
MOBILE PEDDLER'S LICENSE — The license issued to a peddler who
goes by vehicle from place to place or street to street selling, or offering
for sale ice cream, other frozen dairy products, candy, chips and soda.
PEDDLE — Selling or offering for sale food products, including but not
limited to ice cream, other frozen dairy products, shaved ice, candy,
chips, beverages, or other merchandise from a vehicle, wagon,
pushcart, or other conveyance or from a stand or a table or from a
sidewalk, street or curb.[Amended 3-4-2014; 2-9-2016]
PEDDLER — Any person engaged in peddling.
PERSON — An individual, business, partnership, association, firm,
company, corporation or organization of any kind.
STATIONARY PEDDLER'S LICENSE — The license issued to a peddler
who, while remaining at a stationary location, sells or offers for sale
food products from a vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within the Town of Islip
without first having obtained either a mobile or stationary peddler's
license from the Town Clerk as provided herein, except as provided for
in § 39-5C(2) and (3) of this chapter. [Amended 2-9-2016]
B. Helper's license.
(1) It shall be unlawful to assist a peddler within the Town of Islip
without first having obtained a helper's license from the Town
Clerk as provided herein unless the peddler is operating as per an
exemption as provided for in § 39-5C(2) and (3) of this chapter.
[Amended 2-9-2016]
(2) A person possessing a valid helper's license shall be permitted to
engage in peddling only in the presence of a licensed peddler.
§ 39-1.1 (RESERVED) § 39-2
38:377
§ 39-2.1. Stationary peddler's license.
C. Each licensee shall carry on his person the license issued by the Town
Clerk at all times that the licensee is engaged in his business and shall
exhibit it to any person or persons upon request.
A. Any person possessing a valid stationary peddler's license shall be
permitted to sell food products from a vehicle while remaining
stationary subject to the restrictions set forth herein.
B. The number of stationary peddler's licenses issued hereunder shall be
limited to a total of 30 with a maximum of two per hamlet.
C. Permitted locations.
(1) A stationary peddler shall only be permitted to peddle on the
improved property, as defined herein, which is indicated on the
license issued to the licensee.
(2) A stationary peddler, licensed hereunder, shall be prohibited from
peddling:
(a) Within a one-thousand-foot radius of any other stationary
peddler licensed hereunder;
(b) Within any residential zone of the Town of Islip; or
(c) On any site prohibited by § 39-9 of this chapter.
D. Permitted hours of operation.
(1) A stationary peddler shall only peddle between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(2) The vehicle used by the peddler may not remain on the subject
property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the
licensee is the owner of the property.
E. In addition to the requirements set forth § 39-3 of this chapter,
applicants for a stationary peddler's license shall provide the Town
Clerk with:
(1) A description of the improved property upon which the licensee
wishes to locate his vehicle, including:
(a) The location of the site and adjacent roadway(s);
(b) A site plan showing ingress, egress and parking on the
proposed site; and
(c) The location where the stationary licensee will park his vehicle
on the improved property.
§ 39-2 ISLIP CODE § 39-2.1
38:378
§ 39-2.2. Mobile peddler's license.
(2) The name, telephone number, and written consent of the property
owner of the location at which the stationary licensee is to be
situated.
(3) Proof of motor vehicle insurance in an amount no less than
$100,000 for personal injury and property damage suffered by any
person as a result of the peddlers use of the property.
(4) Proof of a valid New York State motor vehicle registration and
proof of a valid New York State inspection for the vehicle to be used
by the stationary licensee.
(5) Proof of a New York State sales tax identification number.
F. Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall forward that
portion of the application pertaining to the proposed site to the
Planning Department. The Town Clerk shall only issue a license,
pursuant to this section, after a determination has been made by the
Planning Department that the proposed site:
(1) Has sufficient parking and ingress and egress;
(a) In determining whether the proposed site has sufficient
parking, the Planning Department shall consider, but is not
limited to, the following criteria;
[1] The existing use(s) on the proposed site;
[2] The overall area of parking surface currently available on
the proposed site;
[3] The physical dimensions of the overall site and the
physical dimensions of the parking lot; and
[4] The degree of the existing parking relaxation at the
proposed site, if any.
(2) Causes no parking, traffic, and/or other-public safety concerns;
(3) Will not serve as a detriment to the character and well-being of the
surrounding neighborhood; and
(4) Does not lie within one of the prohibited locations set forth in
§ 39-2.1C(2) above.
G. The granting of a permit under this section is limited to one per
applicant, whether an individual or corporate entity.
A. Any person possessing a valid mobile peddler's license shall be
permitted to sell ice cream, other frozen dairy products, candy, chips
and soda while moving from place to place or from street to street in a
vehicle.
§ 39-2.1 (RESERVED) § 39-2.2
38:379
§ 39-3. Application requirements.
Applicants for a mobile or stationary peddler's license or a helper's license
or a renewal thereof shall file with the Town Clerk a verified application, in
B. No person possessing a mobile peddler's license shall permit his or her
vehicle to remain stationary for the purpose of peddling except while
sales are actually being conducted unless it is during the permitted
time and at the permitted location of an amusement event, carnival,
circus, or fair as those terms are defined in Islip Town Code Chapter 36,
entitled "Parades, Assemblies and Carnivals," for which a permit was
granted by the Town of Islip, said person has received the express
written permission of the applicant for said permit, and peddling at that
location is not otherwise prohibited by § 39-9 below or any other
provision of the Islip Town Code. [Amended 2-9-2016]
C. Prohibited locations.
(1) A mobile peddler shall not peddle on any street where the speed
limit exceeds 30 miles per hour.
(2) A mobile peddler shall not stop to sell food products on any
prohibited location enumerated in § 39-9.
D. Permitted hours of operation. A mobile peddler shall only peddle
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except from the period
of April 15 through October 15 during which a mobile peddler shall be
permitted to peddle from 10:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m.
E. Required equipment. Every mobile peddler shall be equipped with such
safety devices as required by Suffolk County.
F. In addition to the requirements set forth in § 39-3 of this chapter,
applicants for a mobile peddler's license shall provide the Town Clerk
with:
(1) Proof of a valid New York State driver's license issued to the mobile
licensee;
(2) Proof of a valid New York State Motor vehicle registration and
inspection for the vehicle to be used by the mobile licensee;
(3) Proof of motor vehicle liability insurance in an amount no less than
$100,000 per incident and/or accident;
(4) Proof of successful completion of the Suffolk County Traffic Safety
Course; and
(5) Proof of a New York State sales tax identification number.
G. Every mobile peddler licensed hereunder shall comply with the
provisions set forth in Islip Town Code Chapter 28A, entitled "Ice
Cream Trucks."
§ 39-2.2 ISLIP CODE § 39-3
38:380
duplicate, upon a form supplied by the Town Clerk, which shall contain the
following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Applicant's place of residence for the past five years.
C. Applicant's business or employer for the past five years.
D. Applicant's age, height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, place of
birth and citizenship.
E. Three copies of a photograph of the applicant taken within 30 days of
the application and measuring 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches.
F. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, except with
relation to illegal parking, and if so, in what court, when, where and
upon what charge and the sentence of the court.
G. (Reserved)
H. Whether the applicant has been previously licensed in any occupation
and, if so, when, where and for what period, and if such previous license
was ever revoked, the date of revocation and the reason therefor.
I. If employed by the owner of a licensed vehicle, the name and address of
such employer, together, with credentials establishing the relationship.
J. (Reserved)
K. If the applicant is a corporation or association, the name and address
and title of the officer upon whom process or other legal notice may be
served.
L. (Reserved)
M. The applicant shall submit a valid permit issued by the Suffolk County
Health Department, or any other applicable agency, indicating
compliance with the provisions of the Suffolk County Public Health local
law.
N. In the event that any other license or permit shall be required by any
other governmental agency in connection with the applicant's business,
the same shall be produced by the applicant, and the Town Clerk shall
duly note the same.
O. (Reserved)
P. Fingerprints. When the application form has been completed, the
applicant shall submit himself to be electronically fingerprinted at Long
Island MacArthur Airport. Such fingerprints shall be compared against
those prints on file with the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Service (DCJS) Record Review Program. The Town Clerk shall secure
§ 39-3 (RESERVED) § 39-3
38:381
§ 39-4. (Reserved)
§ 39-5. Fees and exemptions.
from the applicant the fee required by the DCJS in the form of a check
or money order made payable to the Town of Islip. Applicants shall
comply with the application requirements of the DCJS Record Review
Program, which requires at least one form of valid photo identification.
Valid photo identification shall include a United States passport; a
permanent resident card; a driver's license or photo ID card (issued
by United States state or territory); or, for a noncitizen, an alien
registration receipt card.
Q. (Reserved)
A. License fees shall be as follows:
(1) Mobile peddler's license: $150 per year.
(2) Stationary peddler's license: $500 per year.
(3) Helper's license: $50 per year per helper.
B. Basis of fees. The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a
calendar-year basis, and no annual fee shall be prorated or rebated.
C. Exemptions.
(1) The following shall be exempt from the payment of fees:
(a) Any honorably discharged veteran of the armed services of the
United States who has obtained a veteran's license from the
Suffolk County Clerk to hawk, peddle, vend or solicit trade. If
such veteran uses a vehicle in his trade, the Town Clerk shall
issue, at no fee to the veteran, decals similar to that prescribed
in § 39-6, with the addition of the word "veteran" on the decal.
Such decal will and shall be issued only if the vehicle is
registered in the name of and operated by the veteran. If the
veteran operates more than one vehicle in his trade, then each
vehicle in excess of one shall be licensed upon payment of the
proper fee as prescribed in § 39-5A above.
(2) The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(a) Persons maintaining a regular scheduled delivery route for the
delivery of goods which had been previously ordered.
(b) Persons peddling farm produce, raised or produced by them,
and who are regulated by § 81 of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York.
(c) Persons selling personal property who are otherwise in
compliance with the requirements of all other provisions of the
§ 39-3 ISLIP CODE § 39-5
38:382
§ 39-6. Decals.
§ 39-7. Nontransferability.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter will be used or
displayed at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was
issued.
§ 39-8. Compliance with other Code provisions.
Every licensee hereunder shall comply with all other provisions of the Islip
Town Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 35, entitled "Noise."
§ 39-9. Peddling in streets and adjoining property: permitted and
prohibited locations.
Islip Town Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 43,
entitled "Sales of Personal Property." [Added 2-9-2016]
(3) The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter
except for § 39-g: [Added 2-9-2016]
(a) Persons peddling from a wagon, pushcart, or other
nonmotorized conveyance or from a stand or table during the
permitted time and at the permitted location of a parade, race,
amusement event, carnival, circus, or fair as those terms are
defined in Islip Town Code Chapter 36, entitled "Parades,
Assemblies, and Carnivals," for which a permit was granted by
the Town of Islip and who have received the express written
permission of the applicant for said permit.
A. The Town Clerk shall issue one decal for every license issued pursuant
to this chapter.
B. Depending on the type of license issued under this chapter, the decal
shall either bear the words "Mobile Peddler" or "Stationary Peddler,"
the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license
in figures plainly discernible. The decal shall be attached to the vehicle
used by the licensee.
C. The decal shall be placed only on the vehicle which is indicated on the
peddler's license. The decal shall be placed on the selling side of the
vehicle in view of the public.
D. If a decal is lost or stolen, such shall be reported by the licensee to the
Town Clerk within ten days and be replaced by the Town Clerk at a fee
of $5 per replacement decal.
A. In the interest of public safety and due to traffic hazards caused by
stopping of motor vehicles, no peddler, licensed hereunder, shall
conduct business or suffer or permit his vehicle to remain stationary for
§ 39-5 (RESERVED) § 39-9
38:383
§ 39-10. (Reserved)
§ 39-11. Size, placement and removal of vehicles used by peddlers.
§ 39-12. Use of signs and displays. [Amended 2-9-2016]
§ 39-13. Revocation of license.
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Town Clerk of the Town of Islip after notice an opportunity
to be heard for any reason, including, but not limited to the following:
the purpose of peddling along any portion of a state highway or within
500 feet of an entrance or exit ramp of any such highway.
B. No peddler shall peddle his wares at or within a one-thousand-foot
radius of any Town of Islip park or other Town of Islip recreation facility
in which the Town of Islip contracts with a concessionaire, unless
specifically licensed by the Town of Islip Town Board.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within 200 feet of any
property on which a church or school is located unless a letter of
consent is obtained from said church or school giving the stationary
peddler permission to peddle at the proposed location.
A. No vehicle which exceeds 25 feet in length shall be used by any peddler.
B. The vehicles used by licensed stationary peddlers shall be placed only
on the parking area of the premises on which they wish to locate and
not in the driveway, aisles or walkways.
A. All signs used for any purpose by peddlers, including those signs which
are painted on or attached to his or her vehicle, are subject to the
regulations of the sign ordinances.39 Portable or freestanding signs are
prohibited.
B. Only umbrellas which are mounted to a vehicle are permitted.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the use of outdoor seating
in connection with any stationary peddler.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on his business as peddler.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Zoning, Art. XXIX, Signs.
§ 39-9 ISLIP CODE § 39-13
38:384
§ 39-14. (Reserved)
§ 39-15. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the
31st day December in the year when issued.
§ 39-16. Peddling merchandise. [Added 3-4-2014; amended
2-9-2016]
It is a violation of this chapter to peddle merchandise as defined in § 39.1.1,
whether the offender has a license to peddle food items issued by the Islip
Town Clerk or not, except as provided for in § 39-5C(2) and (3) of this
chapter.
§ 39-17. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of an offense, which shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000, or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 39-18. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining section, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that
this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
Chapter 39A
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 39A-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Department of Planning
and Development Law."
E. Conducting the business of peddling in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
F. Upon the recommendation of the Suffolk County Department of Health
that the sale of food or food products or other edibles is being
conducted under unsanitary conditions or that there is violation of law,
regulation, code or ordinance cited by the Suffolk County Department
of Health.
§ 39-13 (RESERVED) § 39A-2
38:385
§ 39A-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 39A-3. Department established.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Planning and Development,
Chief Executive officer of the Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Planning and
Development, which shall perform a major function of Town
government.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER(S) — The Deputy Commissioner(s) of the
Town of Islip Department of Planning and Development, who shall act
generally for and in place of the Commissioner.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Planning and
Development. The principal executive officer and administrative head
of such Department shall be the Commissioner of Planning and
Development who shall be appointed by the Town Board for the term
fixed by law at such a salary as may from time to time be fixed by said
Town Board. The Commissioner of Planning and Development shall be
appointed on the basis of his administrative experience and
qualifications for the duties of such office and such additional standards
as may be required by the Town Board. He shall be the executive
secretary of any advisory board or commission assigned to his
jurisdiction by the Town Board. The Commissioner shall be the head of
the Department with power and authority to appoint and remove
officers and employees under his jurisdiction in accordance with Civil
Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint two Deputy
Commissioners who shall generally act for and in his behalf and who
shall perform such duties as are vested in and imposed upon that office
by the provisions of this local law, by statute or other lawful authority.
There may be designated a Deputy Commissioner of Planning who shall
have administrative jurisdiction of the Divisions of Planning and
Economic Development. There may also be designated a Deputy
Commissioner of Development who shall have administrative
jurisdiction of the Divisions of Building and Engineering. Both Deputy
Commissioners shall report directly to the Commissioner of Planning
and Development. In the absence of the Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioner of Planning shall act as the chief executive officer of the
Department. In the absence of the Commissioner and Deputy
Commissioner of Planning, the Deputy Commissioner of Development
shall act as the chief executive officer of the Department. The
Commissioner shall be authorized to modify the divisions assignments
§ 39A-2 ISLIP CODE § 39A-3
38:386
§ 39A-4. Organization.
§ 39A-5. Powers and duties.
and the responsibilities of the Deputy Commissioners as he shall deem
necessary. [Amended 1-15-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
C. The Commissioner or his deputy(s) may also serve as a division head
within the Department.
A. The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall be divided into the following Divisions:
(1) Division of Building.
(2) Division of Economic Development.
(3) Division of Engineering and Contracts.
(4) 40Division of Planning.
A. The powers and duties of such Divisions shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Commissioner, and each of
said Divisions shall be supervised by a division head who shall be
designated as division director. [Amended 6-8-2010]
B. The Commissioner may, with the approval of the Town Board, establish,
consolidate or abolish any Divisions now existing or hereafter created
in said Department and establish, consolidate or abolish any bureau or
subdivisions now existing or hereafter created in any such Division.
C. The powers and duties of individual Divisions shall be as follows:
(1) Division of Building. Its powers and duties are to administer,
supervise, manage, coordinate and enforce the zoning laws and
applicable local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town
of Islip, the applicable building codes, state and/or local and
applicable laws of the State of New York, as legally required
throughout the properties of the Town of Islip, to review, evaluate,
judge and advise on applications related thereto. The Chief
Building Inspector shall be the director of the Building Division.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
(2) Division of Economic Development. Its powers and duties are to
administer, develop, manage, implement and promote industrial
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Division of Land Management, was repealed
1-15-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013. This local law also provided for the redesignation of former
Subsection B(5) as B(4).
§ 39A-3 (RESERVED) § 39A-5
38:387
and business programs serving the interests and welfare of the
people of the Town of Islip.
(3) Division of Engineering and Contracts. Its powers and duties are to
perform the duties of Town Engineer and to have general charge
and supervision of the engineering design of all highways, roads,
streets, sidewalks, bridges, municipal parking areas, drains and
drainage structures of the Town or any of its special districts and to
have general charge and supervision of the engineering design and
construction of Town buildings, parks, grounds and other
structures or improvements in the nature of public works as the
Town or any of its special districts may construct. The division head
of the Division of Engineering and Contracts will be the Town
Engineer for the Town of Islip, who shall be appointed by the Town
Board for the term fixed by law, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Planning and Development. [Amended
5-28-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
(4) 41Division of Planning. Its powers and duties are to prepare and
update the Town of Islip Comprehensive Plan, carry out any plans
and programs, including capital programming, and initiate
developmental policy recommendations for the Town Board. In
addition, the Division will perform the duties, studies and
supervision as delegated by the Town Board in order to provide for
the orderly growth of the Town and to achieve the highest and most
efficient available levels of services for its residents. This Division
also serves the staff of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals and other boards of commissions assigned to it by the
Town Board, as established under Town Law and will prepare
studies, reports and programs, as the Planning Board may require.
D. The Commissioner, acting by and through any of said existing or
hereafter-named divisions, shall be empowered to perform such other
duties and functions that are prescribed by him in any law, ordinance or
resolution of the Town Board or lawful directive of any Supervisor.
However, the Commissioner may delegate any of his duties to be
performed by a Division Director or an administrative assistant.
E. Furthermore, the Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered,
subject to the prior approval of the Town Board, except that such prior
approval will not be required in cases of emergency, to retain and
employ private engineers, architects and consultants, or firms
practicing such profession, for the purposes of:
(1) Preparing designs, plans and estimates of structures or projects of
any type and character.
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), Division of Land Management, was repealed
1-15-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013. This local law also provided for the redesignation of former
Subsection C(5) as B(4).
§ 39A-5 ISLIP CODE § 39A-5
38:388
§ 39A-6. Special districts and projects.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such project and paid from the funds duly
appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 39A-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor, contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
(2) Rendering assistance and advise in connection with any project,
whether defined or proposed and under the supervision of the
Department of Planning and Development.
(3) Performing such other and necessary services as the Commissioner
may deem necessary in the administration of the Department.
F. Power to erect screening devices.
(1) The Commissioner shall have the power and authority, with the
express approval of the Town Board, to erect, replace, repair and
maintain fences, trees, plantings, shrubbery or other screening on
private property located within the Town of Islip. However, prior to
taking such action, the Commissioner must determine that the
following conditions and procedures have been met:
(a) The owner of the private property has been required by
stipulation or covenant of the Town Board, Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals or by a provision of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Islip to erect such screening on his
property.
(b) The owner has failed to comply with the requirements of said
Board or the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) The Town Board has passed a resolution authorizing the
Commissioner to take such appropriate action.
(d) More than 30 days have expired since the owner of the private
property has been served with notice of such pending action
along with a copy of the resolution of the Town Board
authorizing such action. Such notice and resolution shall be
sent to the owner by registered mail.
(2) Upon taking such appropriate action, the Commissioner shall notify
the Town Assessor of the cost of such activity. Any expense incurred
by the Town in erecting, replacing or maintaining such fences,
trees, plantings, shrubbery or other form of screening in or on
behalf of such owner shall be assessed by the Town against the land
on which such screening is located.
§ 39A-5 (RESERVED) § 39A-7
38:389
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 39A-8. Fees.
The Commissioner may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him
for:
§ 39A-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
jurisdiction shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or any
section, provision or part thereof not so adjusted invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 39A-10. When effective.
This local law shall be effective 20 days after the appropriate certified
copies are filed with the Secretary of State of New York.
Chapter 40
PLUMBERS: LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 54.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. 64.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
§ 40-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future; words in the plural number include the singular number; and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. The filing in his office or Department of any map or written instrument
required to be so filed.
B. The preparation of any copy of a map or written instrument filed in his
office or Department.
C. Certifying any such map or written instrument.
D. Any other service rendered in connection with the work of his
Department and for which he deems it necessary to charge and to
collect a fee therefor.
§ 39A-7 ISLIP CODE § 40-1
38:390
BUSINESS — Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used
therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either
directly or indirectly.
LICENSE or LICENSEE — Includes, respectively, the words "permit" or
"permittee," or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or
ordinance.
PERSON — Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations;
or any officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or
for any other persons under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PLUMBER — A person engaged, by contract or otherwise, in any other
capacity than an employee of a duly licensed master plumber, in the work of
installing, setting up or putting together any plumbing fixtures.
PLUMBING — The profession, art or trade of, and all work done and all
materials used in and for:
§ 40-2. Applicability.
Introducing, maintaining and extending a supply of water through a
pipe or pipes or any appurtenances thereof in a building, premises or
establishment.
A.
Installing, connecting or repairing any system of drainage whereby foul
waste, cooling water, rain or surplus water, gas odor, vapor or fluid is
discharged or proposed to be discharged through a pipe or pipes from
any building, lot, premises or establishment into any main public sewer,
drain, pit, box, filter bed, leaching well, septic tank or other receptacle.
[Amended 11-6-1969]
B.
Ventilating any building sewer or fixture or appurtenance connected
therewith.
C.
Connecting any building, lot, premises or establishment with any
service pipe, building sewer, water pipe, main, public or private sewer
or underground structure; and performing all classes of work generally
done by plumbers.
D.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to
install, repair, alter or modify any plumbing or heating system or
fixtures, or to conduct a business of plumbing within the Town of Islip,
without a plumber's license being first procured and kept in effect
pursuant to this chapter. [Amended 11-6-1969]
B. A plumber's license shall be issued by the Islip Town Plumbers'
Examining Board to any individual natural person who has made
§ 40-1 (RESERVED) § 40-2
38:391
§ 40-3. Procedure for licensing.
Applicants for a plumbing license shall:
application to and been examined by said Board and has been found to
be duly qualified. [Amended 8-3-1976]
C. No other business form included in the definition of the word "person"
in § 40-1 hereof shall be qualified to engage in plumbing unless one or
more shareholders, partners or other beneficial owners thereof shall be
the holder of a Town of Islip plumber's license and actually own shares,
have an interest in or be a beneficial owner of, as the case may be, such
business form, amounting to no less than 51% thereof.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the plumbing business
by using, directly or indirectly, a license issued to any other person.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license to use or permit the
use of such license, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any
unlicensed person.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent as a plumber, master
plumber or plumbing contractor, on signs, cards, stationery, vehicles, in
advertising or in any other manner, by the use of the word "plumber" or
"plumbing" or any words of similar import or meaning, unless he has
complied with this chapter and holds a license issued pursuant thereto.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a vehicle in the Town of Islip in
connection with plumbing unless the exterior of such vehicle shall have
clearly exhibited on it the license number of a license issued pursuant
to this chapter and the name and address of the licensee.
A. Submit on a form provided for such purpose an application for a
plumber's license to the Islip Town Plumbers' Examining Board. The
application shall include such information which the Board believes
reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter.
[Amended 8-3-1976]
B. Pay a filing fee, as established by the Commissioner of Planning and
Development or his/her designee, which amount is not refundable.
[Amended 8-3-1976; 1-2-197942; 6-7-2016]
C. Submit two recent photographs of the applicant, measuring
approximately 1 1/2 square inches, taken within the past 30 days.
D. Submit satisfactory proof that he has been a journeyman plumber with
at least seven years' experience and that there is no uncorrected
violation existing against his prior work. [Amended 6-7-2016]
E. Submit to examination by the Plumbers' Examining Board as
hereinafter provided.
42.Editor's Note: The effective date of this chapter is 4-21-1979.
§ 40-2 ISLIP CODE § 40-3
38:392
§ 40-4. Plumbers' Examining Board.
§ 40-5. Examination of applicants. [Amended 11-6-1969]
Except as hereinafter provided, an applicant will be examined by answering
questions, written, oral and practical, to ascertain whether the applicant
has sufficient knowledge and technical ability to perform or supervise the
installation, alteration, modification and repair of plumbing and heating
equipment. Within 60 days after the enactment of this chapter, the
Plumbers' Examining Board may waive the written part of the examination
of the applicant whose knowledge and technical ability are established to
the satisfaction of the Board.
§ 40-6. Issuance and renewal of license. [Amended 11-6-1969;
8-25-1970; 11-19-1974; 8-3-1976; 1-2-1979; 12-26-198044]
F. An applicant who has been found to be duly qualified by the Plumbers'
Examining Board shall pay a licensing fee as established by the
Commissioner of Planning and Development or his/her designee.
[Amended 10-24-1967; 8-3-1976; 1-2-197943; 6-7-2016]
G. Submit proof of the required liability insurance pursuant to § 40-8.
[Added 6-7-2016]
A. A Plumbers' Examining Board is hereby established, consisting of seven
members appointed by the Town Board, one of whom shall be
designated by the Town Board as Chairman. The terms of members
shall be at the discretion of the Town Board. The service of any member
may be terminated for good and sufficient cause by the Town Board at
any time. In the event of a vacancy, the Town Board shall make an
appointment for the unexpired balance of the term involved. A member
shall continue to serve until the expiration of the term or until such time
as the Town Board appoints a successor. Members shall receive such
compensation as may be determined by the Town Board. [Amended
11-6-1969]
B. The Plumbers' Examining Board shall pass upon the qualifications of an
applicant, and prepare, conduct and grade the examination of each
applicant after receiving an application in proper form. The Board shall
meet monthly or as often as is deemed necessary in the opinion of the
Chairman or a majority of the Board.
A. An applicant who has not held a plumbing license for at least one year
continuously prior to the date of the application for the license but who
has been found to be duly qualified by the Plumbers' Examining Board
shall be certified and issued a new plumber's license upon payment by
the applicant of the licensing fee. A new license issued hereunder shall
remain in force and effect, unless suspended or revoked, for a minimum
43.Editor's Note: The effective date of this chapter is 4-21-1979.
44.Editor's Note: The effective date of this chapter is 1-3-1981.
§ 40-3 (RESERVED) § 40-6
38:393
§ 40-7. (Reserved)45
§ 40-8. Public liability and property damage insurance. [Added
8-3-197646; amended 11-18-2008; 6-7-2016]
Every plumbing license holder shall file with the Building Division of the
Town of Islip (Plumbers' Examining Board) a certificate of liability insurance
covering her or himself or the corporation or company operating under such
plumbing license, in the amounts of public liability, $1,000,000 for each
person, $1,000,000 for each accident, and property damage, $1,000,000
for each accident, providing coverage for liability arising out of plumbing
operations conducted in the Town of Islip. Said policy shall remain in full
force and effect throughout the period for which said plumbing license
holder shall be licensed. Said certificate of insurance shall contain a clause
stating that, in the event the policy which it certifies shall be canceled, 10
days' notice thereof shall be given, by registered or certified mail, to the
Plumbers' Examining Board of the Town of Islip.
§ 40-9. Applications for plumbing permits. [Added 8-3-197647]
of 12 months and a maximum of 36 months from the date of issuance at
the discretion of the Building Director.
B. Renewal. Upon expiration of a license, a renewal license shall be
issued, upon application and payment of the license fee, where the
plumber has held a plumbing license continuously for a least one year
prior to the date of the application for the renewal license. The period of
renewal licenses shall be as follows:
(1) Renewal permits issued prior to January 1, 1983, shall be valid for a
minimum of 12 months and a maximum of 36 months from the date
of issuance at the discretion of the Building Director.
(2) Renewal permits issued after January 1, 1983, shall be valid for 24
months from the date of issuance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to change, alter or modify sanitary
wastes, vents or potable water supply lines, including new construction,
modifications or alterations to a dwelling, unless all necessary permits
are first obtained. Such required permits shall be issued to a Town of
Islip licensed plumber only, and all work allowed by virtue of such
permits must be performed by the licensed plumber to whom the
permits are issued or under his supervision.
45.Editor's Note: Former § 40-7, Bond, was repealed 11-18-2008.
46.Editor's Note: This chapter provided that former § 40-8 be redesignated as § 40-10, as
amended.
47.Editor's Note: This chapter provided that former § 40-9 be redesignated as § 40-11.
§ 40-6 ISLIP CODE § 40-9
38:394
§ 40-10. Reciprocity.48 [Amended 8-3-1976]
§ 40-11. Hearings.49
B. All new construction requiring a plumbing permit may be performed by
a Town of Islip licensed plumber only after obtaining all required
permits.
A. The Plumbers' Examining Board of the Town of Islip may, after
determining that a municipality maintains a standard of licensing
plumbers equivalent to that maintained in the Town of Islip, enter into a
written reciprocal agreement with such municipality wherein each
party shall waive examination of a plumber holding a license and
certificate of competency from the other party, but such agreement
shall not have any effect on any fees charged by the Plumbers'
Examining Board of the Town of Islip.
B. When any applicant for a Town of Islip plumbing license maintains
either his residence or principal place of business in a municipality by
which he is licensed and certified competent, and such municipality has
entered into a reciprocal agreement with the Plumbers' Examining
Board of the Town of Islip, then the examination required in § 40-5
hereof shall be waived.
C. Such applicant shall furnish a photostatic copy of his certificate of
competency, together with a letter of good standing issued by such
municipality, setting forth the fact that such applicant does maintain
either his principal place of business or residence within such
municipality.
D. Such applicant shall receive a card or registration only. A resident of
the Town of Islip having his principal place of business in the Town of
Islip, who holds a master plumber's license from a municipality which
shall have entered into a reciprocal agreement with the Plumbers'
Examining Board of the Town of Islip, may be licensed with the
examination waived, but the fee paid shall be the same as for those
requiring examination by the Plumbers' Examining Board. No
certificate of competency shall be issued to any applicant unless he has
been examined by the Plumbers' Examining Board of the Town of Islip.
E. Such individual natural person shall be certified by the Town of Islip
Plumbers' Examining Board pursuant to § 40-6 herein and, upon filing
an application for a license and payment of the necessary fees,
application and license, and posting of a bond, shall be issued a
plumber's license without examination. Such license shall be effective
only during the period when the other municipality maintains its
common agreement with the Town of Islip.
48.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-5; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
49.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-9; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
§ 40-9 (RESERVED) § 40-11
38:395
§ 40-12. Suspension or revocation.50
A plumber's license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the
Town Board if the licensee thereof shall have violated any provision of the
Town of Islip Plumbing Code51 or any other ordinance, law or code related
to the performance of licensee duties as a plumber.
§ 40-13. Limited licenses.52 [Added 11-6-1969]
A. The Plumbers' Examining Board shall not recommend the suspension or
revocation of a license granted herein to the Town Board without
holding a hearing thereon.
B. The licensee shall receive at least 10 days' notice, stating the name and
address of the licensee concerned and the subject matter of the
hearing, by mailing a copy thereof to the licensee concerned at the last
address shown upon the most recent application of such licensee.
C. Upon such hearing, the licensee involved shall be entitled to be
represented by legal counsel and to present such competent and
material testimony or other evidence in his own behalf as may be
relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
D. The Plumbers' Examining Board shall, for such purpose, keep a record
of the testimony.
E. All witnesses shall be sworn and examined under oath.
F. Within a reasonable time after said hearing, the Plumbers' Examining
Board shall issue written findings and render a written opinion, which
shall be submitted to the Town Board, together with its written
recommendation. The licensee shall receive a copy of the findings,
opinion and recommendation.
A. Types of limited licenses.
(1) Air conditioning and refrigeration. The license permits only the
installation of all air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment and
water connections to these units only.
(2) Heating. The license permits the installation of furnaces, burners,
boilers and radiation oil tanks of gas supply and all component
parts and piping, including water piping within a radius of six feet
of boiler.
50.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-10; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
51.Editor's Note: By resolution adopted 5-26-1953, the Town Board accepted the applicability
of the State Building Construction Code, which includes as a part thereof the State
Building Construction Code applicable to plumbing.
52.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-15; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
§ 40-11 ISLIP CODE § 40-13
38:396
§ 40-14. Penalties for offenses.54 [Amended 1-6-1987; 8-11-2009]
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense which shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 and for each subsequent
offense by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 or by
imprisonment for a period of not less than 30 days, or by both fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 40-15. Liability.55
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from nor lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
plumbing and heating devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or
damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the
Town be deemed to have assumed such liability by reason of any license
issued.
§ 40-16. Abatement.56
The imposition of the penalties herein provided shall not preclude the Town
Attorney from instituting any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a continued
violation, or to prevent any further illegal acts or use of any such premises.
(3) Well drillers. The license permits only the drilling of the well, piping
into pneumatic tanks and hooking up water pumps and tanks and
does not permit any water piping within the building.
(4) Electric sewer cleaning. The license permits only the cleaning of
waste lines and removal of sections of same in order to complete
service. This does not permit any alteration of any existing
drainage system.
(5) Gas tank installers. The license permits the installation of storage
tanks for gasoline and similar liquids, both above and below the
ground.
(6) Sprinkler system installers. The license includes lawn sprinklers
and fire-protection sprinklers. [Added 8-25-1970]
(7) Swimming pool installers. The license includes both in-ground and
aboveground pools. [Added 8-25-1970]
B. Fees. The fee for filing and the license and examination shall be as
established by the Town Board. [Amended 5-19-1970; 1-2-197953]
53.Editor's Note: The effective date of this ordinance is 4-21-1979.
54.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-11; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
55.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-12; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
56.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-13; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
§ 40-13 (RESERVED) § 40-17
38:397
§ 40-17. Effective date.57
This chapter is to take effect on and after July 1, 1967.
Chapter 40A
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 40A-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby finds that buildings and places
used for illegal activities within the Town of Islip have a devastating effect
on the surrounding community and that these public nuisances exist in
occupied and vacant buildings and on occupied and vacant developed and
undeveloped real estate; and that these public nuisances present a
substantial risk to the health and safety of the surrounding community while
interfering with the community's interest in the quality of life as well as
their interest in the value of their property.
Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to create a standardized procedure
for securing legal and equitable remedies; to strengthen existing laws so as
to effectively prevent buildings, residences, premises and real estate within
the Town of Islip from being used in such a way as to constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 40A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
CONVICTION — Applied in accordance with the provisions of Subdivision
13 of § 1.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law.[Added 12-1-2009 by L.L. No.
12-2009]
OWNER — Any person, individual, association, entity or corporation in
whose name the affected real estate is recorded with the Suffolk County
Clerk. The person or entit(y)(ies) in whose name the real estate affected
by the action or special proceeding is recorded in the Office of the County
Clerk shall be presumed to be the owner thereof.[Added 12-1-2009 by
L.L. No. 12-2009]
PERSON — Includes persons, firms, partnerships, corporations and any
other entity.[Added 12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
PROHIBITED CONDUCT — [Amended 4-22-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003;
12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
A conviction for an act in violation of any of the following parts of the
New York State Penal Law, as modified or amended:
(1) Article 220 (Controlled substances).
A.
57.Editor's Note: Formerly § 40-14; renumbered by ordinance adopted 8-3-1976.
§ 40-17 ISLIP CODE § 40A-2
38:398
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any building, residence, premises, structure, place
or lot, developed or undeveloped, where an owner or agent has been
given written notice that a conviction for an act of prohibited conduct as
defined herein has taken place at said location and within two years of that
conviction there is an additional conviction at that location for prohibited
conduct for which the owner or agent is again notified in writing.[Added
12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 40A-3. Prohibitions. [Added 12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-200958]
It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or its agent, the occupant or
person in charge of any building, residence, premises, structure, place or
lot, developed or undeveloped, to allow, cause, own, lease, permit, facilitate
or maintain the creation or occurrence of a public nuisance.
§ 40A-4. Notice of prohibited conduct. [Amended 12-1-2009 by L.L.
No. 12-2009]
(2) Article 221 (Offenses involving marijuana).
(3) Article 230 (Prostitution offenses).
(4) Article 225 (Gambling offenses).
Article 165 (other offenses relating to theft) as follows: §§ 165.09,
165.10, 165.40, 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54.
(5)
Article 270 (other offenses relating to public safety) as follows:
§ 270.00.
(6)
Any criminal conduct which creates or results in the maintaining of a
condition which endangers the safety, health or welfare of the public
or that creates or results in the maintenance of any premises or place
where persons gather for the purpose of engaging in criminal conduct.
B.
Any intentional conduct or occurrence that is a willful violation of §§ 65,
65-a, 82, 123 or 126 of the New York Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
and § 260.20 of the New York Penal Law, Prohibited Sales, Prohibited
Participation, Unlawful Purchase, Sale or Consumption of Wine, Liquor
or Beer, as modified or amended.
C.
The use, occupancy and/or maintenance of any building, residence,
premises, structure, place or lot, developed or undeveloped, including
an accessory apartment or an apartment(s) in violation of the Town
Code and/or the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (with New
York State modifications), where such unlawful use of real property
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public, including the
occupants thereof.
D.
58.Editor’s Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 40A-3 through 40A-5 as §§ 40A-4
through 40A-6, respectively.
§ 40A-2 (RESERVED) § 40A-4
38:399
§ 40A-5. Enforcement. [Added 12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 40A-6. Order for action.
A. Notice that a conviction has been entered for an act of prohibited
conduct at a location shall be served by personal service upon the
owner or person in charge of the affected building or structure; or if no
such person can be reasonably found, by mailing said owner such notice
by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address as shown by the records of the Town Assessor; and by securely
affixing a copy of such notice upon the door of the affected building or
structure.
B. The notice must contain a statement of the date or dates upon which
prohibited conduct took place on the property, the nature of the
prohibited conduct, the date of conviction for the offense charged, a
copy of this chapter and a warning that if a second conviction for
prohibited conduct, as defined in § 40A-2 of this chapter has taken place
within two years of the first conviction, the Town may seek action
pursuant to § 40A-5 of this chapter.
A. Upon each conviction for an act of prohibited conduct, the Suffolk
County Police Department or Town of Islip Code Enforcement may issue
a summons to the owner or person in charge of said premises as a
violation of § 40A-6 of this chapter.
B. Upon notification by the Suffolk County Police Department that a first
conviction for an act of prohibited conduct has occurred, the Office of
the Town Attorney may send the property owner a notice pursuant to
the requirements of § 40A-4 of this chapter. Upon a second conviction
for an act of prohibited conduct occurring within two years of the first
conviction, a second notice as described in § 40A-4 may be sent to the
property owner which must also include a notification of the public
hearing to be held pursuant to § 40A-6 of this chapter.
C. The Office of the Town Attorney will then issue a report, in writing,
which shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Dates, times and general nature of the arrests and offenses which
occurred at the property; and
(2) Date, and time of the convictions for the offenses which occurred at
the property; and
(3) Copies of the first and second notices sent to the property owner as
defined in this chapter.
(4) Any relevant information as to the history of this property
pertaining to the sale and/or consumption of narcotics, etc.
A. The Town Board at said public hearing or an emergency public hearing
as authorized by the Town Law of the State of New York shall consider
§ 40A-4 ISLIP CODE § 40A-6
38:400
such report of prohibited conduct as well as any other information it
deems relevant in determining if the location is to be deemed a public
nuisance as defined in § 40A-2 of this chapter.
B. If the Town Board decides said location is in fact a public nuisance, it
may immediately authorize the Town Attorney to bring and maintain a
civil action or special proceeding in the name of the Town in a court of
competent jurisdiction for equitable and legal relief, including but not
limited to a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction, a
permanent injunction, a landlord-tenant proceeding, and other
equitable remedies as well as civil penalties (fines), including the
recovery of the costs of the action, litigation expenses, board-up and
site cleanup, and reasonable attorneys fees. [Amended 12-1-2009 by
L.L. No. 12-2009]
C. If the property is found to be vacant and unsecured, the Town Board
may immediately authorize the Commissioner of the Department of
Planning and Development to board up said location, for said location to
remain boarded up until such time as the Town Board deems the
location safe and no longer a public nuisance and assess such costs as a
special assessment to the property owner. [Added 12-1-2009 by L.L.
No. 12-2009]
D. The Town Attorney may apply to the court to appoint a temporary
receiver to manage, operate and bring the building, residence,
premises, structure, place or lot into compliance with the Islip Town
Code during the pendency of any action or proceeding. The temporary
receiver shall have such powers as provided for in Article 64 of the New
York State Civil Practice Law and Rules, including but not limited to
collecting and holding all rents from tenants, making or authorizing
other persons to make necessary repairs or to maintain the building,
residence, premises, structure, place or lot, and hiring security or other
personnel necessary to maintain the building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot safely. The temporary receiver shall keep a
written account itemizing receipts and expenditures, and describing
the building, residence, premises, structure, place or lot and naming
the depository of receivership funds, which shall be open to inspection
by any person having an apparent interest in the property. [Added
12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
E. Any person who enters or remains in any structure, building or
premises, which has been boarded up pursuant to Subsection C of this
section during the period prescribed by Subsection C, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, a fine of not less than
$2,500 nor more than $7,500 must be imposed and a term of
imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year may be imposed, or
both. Knowledge that the structure, building or premises, had been
boarded up pursuant to Subsection C of this section is not an element of
this violation, and said violation shall be one of strict liability. [Added
12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 40A-6 (RESERVED) § 40A-7
38:401
§ 40A-7. Presumptions. [Added 12-1-2009 by L.L. No. 12-200959]
§ 40A-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-1-2009 by L.L. No.
12-2009]
Any violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000
for each offense and/or up to 30 days' imprisonment.
§ 40A-9. Severability.
Chapter 40B
PUBLIC SAFETY ENFORCEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 40B-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Establishment of a Department of
Public Safety Enforcement."
§ 40B-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that two convictions for prohibited
conduct occurring within 12 months of each other have caused a public
nuisance to exist. This presumption shall be effective for any
combination of two convictions.
B. Presumption of agency. Whenever there is evidence that a person was
the manager, operator, supervisor or, in any other way, in charge of the
premises at the time a public nuisance exists because prohibited
conduct is being conducted, maintained or permitted, such evidence
shall be presumptive that he or she was an agent of the property owner.
A. The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, word or part of this chapter shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
word or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered. The invalidity of any word, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall not affect the
validity of any other part of this chapter which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
B. If any portion of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any other
provision of any other local law or ordinance of the Code of the Town of
Islip, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
59.Editor’s Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 40A-6 and 40A-7 as §§ 40A-8 and
40A-9, respectively.
§ 40A-7 ISLIP CODE § 40B-2
38:402
§ 40B-3. Establishment.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this chapter, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHIEF DEPUTY COMMISSIONER — The Chief Deputy Commissioner
of the Town of Islip Department of Public Safety Enforcement, who shall
act for and in place of the Commissioner.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Town of Islip Department
of Public Safety Enforcement, who shall be the chief executive officer
of the Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Public Safety
Enforcement, which shall perform a major function of Town
government.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER — The Deputy Commissioner of the Town of
Islip Department of Public Safety Enforcement, who shall act for and in
place of the Commissioner.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Public Safety
Enforcement. The principal executive officer and administrative head of
such Department shall be the Commissioner, who shall be appointed by
the Town Board for the term fixed by law, at such salary as may from
time to time be fixed by said Town Board. The Commissioner shall be
appointed on the basis of his administrative experience and
qualification for the duties of such office and such additional standards
as may be required by the Town Board. The Commissioner shall be the
head of the Department, with the power and authority to appoint and
remove officers and employees under his jurisdiction in accordance
with the Civil Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint a Chief Deputy
Commissioner and a Deputy Commissioner who shall generally act for
and in his behalf and who shall perform such duties as are vested in and
imposed upon that office by the provisions of this chapter, by statute or
by other lawful authority. In the absence of the Commissioner, the Chief
Deputy Commissioner shall act as the chief executive officer of the
Department. In the absence of the Commissioner and Chief Deputy
Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner shall act as the chief
executive officer of the Department. The Commissioner shall be
authorized to modify the divisions, assignments and the responsibilities
of the Chief Deputy Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner as he
shall deem necessary. [Amended 2-9-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. The Commissioner is also empowered herein to appoint an executive
assistant for such administrative functions as may be assigned and to
advise and aid the Commissioner in the planning and coordination of
projects and policies of the Department.
§ 40B-2 (RESERVED) § 40B-3
38:403
§ 40B-4. Organization. [Amended 2-8-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 40B-5. Powers and duties.
D. The Commissioner is also empowered herein to appoint a secretary who
shall perform such duties, functions and assignments as are proper and
necessary in executing the administrative and clerical obligations and
needs of the Commissioner and the Department.
E. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same
is required by the Town Board, in such form as approved by the Town
Attorney.
A. The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall be divided into the following five divisions:
[Amended 2-9-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Division of Public Safety.
(2) Division of Harbor and Marine Safety.
(3) Parking Violations Bureau.
(4) Division of Emergency Management.
(5) Division of Fire Prevention.
(6) Division of Code Enforcement. [Added 12-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
A. The powers and duties of such divisions therein shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Commissioner, and each
division shall be supervised by a person designated by the
Commissioner in conformance with the Civil Service Law.
B. The Commissioner may, with the approval of the Town Board, establish,
consolidate or abolish any divisions or subdivisions not existing or
hereafter created in the Department.
C. Powers and duties of individual divisions. [Amended 2-9-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
(1) Division of Public Safety. Its powers and duties are to provide for
the protection of Town property and of the health, safety and
welfare of citizens using Town property maintained for public use,
by the enforcement of the following provisions of the Code of the
Town of Islip: Chapter 4, Chapter 4A, Chapter 12, §§ 12-2 through
12-4, Chapter 32, Chapter 35, Chapter 35A, Chapter 36, Chapter
§ 40B-3 ISLIP CODE § 40B-5
38:404
§ 40B-6. Costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department, or its officers or
employees, on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against each district or project and paid for from
the funds fully apportioned for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 40B-7. Effect on powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
37, Chapter 39, Chapter 44, Chapter 49, Chapter 51, Chapter 57,
Chapter 58, Chapter 59, Chapter 60, Chapter 60A and Chapter 68,
§ 68-30C.
(2) Division of Harbor and Marine Safety. Its powers and duties are the
enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 37 of the Code of the
Town of Islip and jurisdiction over navigation on all navigable
waters within or bordering the Town of Islip.
(3) Parking Violations Bureau. Its powers and duties are set forth in
Chapter 59 of the Code of the Town of Islip, entitled "Uniform
Traffic Code," Chapter TC7, Parking Violations Bureau.
(4) Division of Fire Prevention. Its powers and duties are set forth in
Chapter 19 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
(5) Division of Code Enforcement. Its powers and duties are to
investigate all alleged violations of the Code of the Town of Islip or,
to such end, applicable state codes, laws, rules and regulations.
The Commissioner may employ such investigators, zoning
inspectors, ordinance inspectors, sign inspectors, fire marshals or
any other personnel as may be required to effectuate the same,
within budgetary limits set by the Town Board. The Division shall
be responsible for the enforcement of all violations of the aforesaid
codes, laws, rules and regulations and/or obtaining compliance
with the same. Persons in said Division designated by the
Commissioner in conformance with the Civil Service Law may issue
notices of violation, appearance tickets, summonses or any other
notices as permissible by law. Nothing herein shall be construed to
limit any other power of the Commissioner as provided by the Code
of the Town of Islip or any other applicable law, rule or regulation.
[Added 12-18-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
D. In cooperation with the Town Attorney, the Department shall assist in
preparation, investigation, trial and enforcement of all litigation
instituted by or against the Town in all courts as well as the prosecution
of violations of applicable state codes, Town codes and local laws and
the enforcement of any and all civil or criminal judgments.
§ 40B-5 (RESERVED) § 40B-7
38:405
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 40B-8. Fees.
The Commissioner may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him
for any service rendered in connection with the work of this Department
and for which he deems it necessary to charge and collect a fee therefor.
§ 40B-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part hereof in this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 40B-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 41
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
15.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 16.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 18.
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 21.
Housing standards — See Ch. 27.
Littering — See Ch. 32.
Noise — See Ch. 35.
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Filling or diversion of streams and
watercourses — See Ch. 47.
Abandoned and impounded property — See
Ch. 60.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 67.
§ 41-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Department of Public
Works Law."
§ 41-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
§ 40B-7 ISLIP CODE § 41-2
41:406
§ 41-3. Department established; powers and duties of
Commissioner. [Amended 3-1-77 by L.L. No. 1, 1977; 6-17-80 by L.L.
No. 16, 1980]
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHIEF DEPUTY COMMISSIONER — The Chief Deputy Commissioner
of the Town of Islip Department of Public Works, who shall act for and
in place of the Commissioner.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works, who shall be
the chief executive officer of the Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Public Works, which
shall perform a major function of Town government.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Public Works. The
principal executive officer and administrative head of such Department
shall be the Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the Town Board
for the term fixed by law at such salary as may from time to time be
fixed by said Town Board. The Commissioner shall be appointed on the
basis of his administrative experience and qualifications for the duties
of such office and such additional standards as may be required by the
Town Board. The Commissioner or his designee shall have the powers
and duties of the Highway Superintendent, pursuant to the Highway
Law, and shall be the head of the Department with the power and
authority to appoint and remove employees under his jurisdiction in
accordance with the Civil Service Law and other applicable laws.
B. Powers and duties of Commissioner.
(1) The Commissioner is empowered herein to appoint a Chief Deputy
Commissioner and two Deputy Commissioners who shall generally
act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such duties as are
vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this
local law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
(2) The Commissioner is also empowered herein to appoint executive
assistants to the Commissioner for such administrative functions as
may be assigned and to advise and aid the Commissioner in the
planning and coordination of projects and policies of the
Department.
(3) The Commissioner is also empowered herein to appoint Division
heads of each Division of the Department, and it shall be the duty of
each Division head to carry out the duties and functions of the
Division as provided herein or by direction of the Commissioner.
Deputy Division heads may be appointed by the Commissioner to
assist the Division heads in the performance of their duties and, in
the absence of the Division head, to perform the duties and possess
the power of the Division head.
§ 41-2 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 41-3
41:407
§ 41-4. Organization. [Amended 3-1-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977;
6-17-1980 by L.L. No. 16-1980]
§ 41-5. General powers and duties. [Amended 3-1-1977 by L.L. No.
1-1977; 9-18-1979 by L.L. No. 10-1979; 6-17-1980 by L.L. No.
16-1980]
(4) Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner
shall execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if
the same is required by the Town Board, in such form as approved
by the Town Attorney.
A. The Commissioner shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall be divided into the following Divisions: [Amended
4-7-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(1) Division of Highway and Road Maintenance.
(2) Division of Facilities Management.
(3) Division of Marina and Beach Maintenance.
(4) Division of Central Vehicle Maintenance.
(5) Division of Traffic Safety.
A. The powers and duties of such Divisions therein shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Commissioner, and each of
said Divisions shall be supervised by a Division head. The Commissioner
may, with the approval of the Town Board, establish, consolidate or
abolish any Divisions or subdivisions, now existing or hereafter created
in the Department.
B. Powers and duties of individual Divisions and bureaus. [Amended
5-17-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 4-7-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(1) Division of Highway and Road Maintenance.
(a) Its powers and duties are to have charge and supervision of the
construction, repair, reconstruction, improvement,
maintenance and snow removal for all highways, roads,
streets, sidewalks, bridges, municipal parking areas, drains
and drainage structures under Town jurisdiction or any special
districts thereof or other such duties as may be assigned.
(b) Its powers and duties are to have charge and supervision of
Town-operated litter and refuse collection throughout the
Town, including responsibility for litter and refuse collection
and cleaning of all Town-owned, -leased or -rented properties.
§ 41-3 ISLIP CODE § 41-5
41:408
§ 41-6. Special districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid for from
the funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
Private refuse collection, regulations and control for Town
garbage districts shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Environmental Control.
(2) Division of Facilities Management. Its powers and duties are to
have charge and supervision of the maintenance, repairs,
alterations and custodial services of and for all buildings and
structures owned or leased by the Town or any of its special
districts, including all furnishings and equipment, but not including
buildings or structures used for recreation purposes or Long Island
MacArthur Airport.
(3) Division of Marina and Beach Maintenance. Its powers and duties
are to have charge and supervision of the construction, alteration
and maintenance of all docks, marinas and other similar structures
of the Town or any of its special districts in the nature of public
works.
(4) Division of Central Vehicle Maintenance. Its powers and duties are
to have charge and supervision of and provide for the repair and
maintenance service for all vehicles owned by and under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Islip or any of its special districts and to
manage and maintain related facilities, equipment and personnel
necessary for the proper administration thereof.
(5) Division of Traffic Safety. Its powers and duties are to administer,
manage and provide for ordinances embodying appropriate traffic
control regulations, collection and compilation of traffic data,
design, installation, operation and maintenance of appropriate
traffic control devices, coordination with Suffolk County Traffic
Safety Department and other agencies in the establishment of
traffic regulatory measures; to review and comment on roadways
and other traffic facilities; to conduct and cooperate in traffic
planning for the Town of Islip, in conjunction with other Town
agencies, to develop ways and means to improve traffic safety
conditions; and to appropriate traffic research to assist in planning
and maintenance of parking meters, establishment of systems of
truck routes and the performance of all other similar or related
efforts of traffic safety and the installation and maintenance of
streetlighting and related facilities.
§ 41-5 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 41-7
41:409
§ 41-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
powers of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 41-8. Fees.
The Commissioner may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him
for services rendered in connection with the work of his Department and for
which he deems it necessary to charge and collect a fee therefor.
§ 41-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 41-10. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 42
RACETRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Parades, assemblies and carnivals — See Ch.
36.
§ 42-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 8-28-62]
By the enactment of this ordinance, the Town Board of the Town of Islip
declares its intent in so doing to be to regulate and control the operation
of certain racetracks involving go-kart races, stock car races and similar
racing events between motor vehicles, motorcycles, motor scooters, midget
autos and other vehicles. It is enacted in the interests of the inhabitants of
the Town of Islip so as to protect the life and property of persons in the
vicinity of such events: to prevent unreasonable loud noises, dust, gases and
other noxious or objectionable odors emanating from such tracks, which
could be detrimental to the peace, welfare and good order of the people of
the Town of Islip; and to prevent the disturbance of the peace and quiet of
the Town from the operation of such tracks. In addition, it is the further
purpose of the Town Board in enacting this ordinance to promote the
§ 41-7 ISLIP CODE § 42-1
42:410
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Town of Islip. Therefore,
recognizing the above and the need for regulating the racetracks above
described, and in the exercise of its police power in these regards, the Town
Board of the Town of Islip does hereby enact the following ordinance.
§ 42-2. Definitions.
A. Terminology. All terminology used in this ordinance, not defined below,
shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. [Added
8-19-80]
B. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured
by the use of an instrument with the metering characteristics and
A-weighting frequency response prescribed for sound level
meters.[Added 8-19-80]
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not an impulsive
sound.[Added 8-19-80]
DAYTIME — From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.[Added 8-19-80]
dB(A) — The abbreviation for A-weighted sound level in
decibels.[Added 8-19-80]
DECIBEL[Added 8-28-62; repealed 8-19-80] —
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound characterized by brief excursions of
sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient sound.[Added
8-19-80]
L10 — The A-weighted sound level measured with slow response that is
exceeded ten percent (10%) of the time.[Added 8-19-80]
LEVEL — The logarithm of the ratio of a quantity to a reference of the
same kind. The base of the logarithm is ten (10). The kind of level and
the reference must be specified.[Added 8-19-80]
NIGHTTIME — That part of a twenty-four-hour time interval which is
not otherwise defined as daytime.[Added 8-19-80]
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.[Added 8-19-80]
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or
other body, group or unit, or combination thereof.
RACETRACK — Any ground, area or track upon which races, contests
or demonstrations of skill or stunts are conducted for the enjoyment or
entertainment of the public or for the gratification of the contestants,
which employ gokarts, stock cars, motor scooters, midget autos, motor-
§ 42-1 RACETRACKS § 42-2
42:411
§ 42-3. Permit required.
No person shall operate in the Town of Islip any racetrack, as defined
herein, without possessing a permit to operate the same as hereinafter
provided.
§ 42-4. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to operate a racetrack, as defined herein, in the Town
of Islip, may apply to the Town Clerk thereof for a permit therefor. Each
such applicant shall execute under oath an application for such permit, to
be supplied to him by the Town Clerk, containing the following information:
that he is a citizen of the United States, over twenty-one (21) years of age;
whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; whether he
has had any previous experience in the operation of racetracks, as defined
herein; and such other facts or evidence deemed necessary to establish
that he is a person fit, qualified and capable of operating a racetrack, as
defined herein, so as to protect the safety, health, morals and welfare of the
Town and its inhabitants; a decription of the type of racetrack he intends
to operate; the number of employees he intends to employ; the name and
cycles, motor vehicles or other vehicle propelled by a force other than
human energy.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property
owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not
including intrabuilding real property divisions.[Added 8-19-80]
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement,
particle velocity, etc., in a medium with internal forces (e.g., elastic,
viscous) or the superposition of such progagated oscillations.[Added
8-19-80]
SOUND LEVEL — The quantity in decibels measured by a sound level
meter satisfying the requirements of American National Standards
Specification for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971. This publication is
available from the American National Standards Institute, Inc., 1430
Broadway, New York, New York 10018. Sound level is the frequencyweighted
sound pressure level obtained with the standardized dynamic
characteristic "fast" or "slow" and weighting A, B or C; unless indicated
otherwise, the A-weighting is understood.[Added 8-19-80]
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound levels. Sound level meters shall conform to the
requirements of ANSI Specification for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971,
Types 1, 2, S1A or S2A.[Added 8-19-80]
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty (20) times the logarithm to the
base ten (10) of the ratio of the root mean squared pressure of a sound
to a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. The unit applied to
this measure shall be the decibel (dB).[Added 8-19-80]
§ 42-2 ISLIP CODE § 42-4
42:412
address of the owner or owners of the land and the nature of his right of
occupancy; and a statement that if granted the permit applied for, he will
operate the racetrack pursuant to the regulations hereinafter set forth and
that, upon his failure to do so, such permit may be revoked forthwith.
§ 42-5. Issuance of permit; fees; revocation.
The fee for the permit is hereby fixed at five dollars ($5.) for a permit to
operate a racetrack, as defined herein, for one (1) day; fifteen dollars ($15.)
for one (1) week or any part thereof; fifty dollars ($50.) for one (1) month or
any part thereof over one (1) week; or a permit for a year may be purchased
for two hundred fifty dollars ($250.), subject to the following limitation:
Such permit shall be effective from the date of its issuance until the 31st day
of December of the year of its issuance, after which a new application must
be made for a permit if the permittee desires to continue to operate the
racetrack. Such permit may not be sold, assigned, transferred or otherwise
disposed of. Such permit may be revoked by the Town Board after a public
hearing thereon at which the permittee shall have an opportunity to be
heard. Upon the revocation of such permit, the permittee shall desist the
operation of the racetrack for which the permit was issued.
§ 42-6. Regulations.
A. The permittee must personally operate, manage and be responsible for
the operation of the racetrack for which the permit was granted.
B. The permittee shall at all times maintain in full force and effect a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy of the type and in
amounts acceptable to the insurance advisor of the Town of Islip. The
permittee shall provide to the Town of Islip a certificate of insurance
showing that the Town of Islip is an additional insured on the policy and
that the Town of Islip will receive at least ten (10) days' notice of
cancellation. [Amended 5-3-83]
C. The permittee may operate the racetrack for which the permit is
granted on weekdays only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. and on Sundays only between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 11:00
p.m.
D. Go-kart operation. The permittee shall not at any time allow the
operation of any gokart upon the premises unless the same shall be
equipped with a muffler device in effectively good working order, of one
(1) of the following types or equal: [Amended 5-26-64; 8-19-80]
(1) Muffler, Model 162 Triple-A Manufacturing Company.
(2) Muffler, Model 163 Triple-A Manufacturing Company.
(3) Muffler, Model 164 Triple-A Manufacturing Company.
E. Noise control [Amended 8-28-62; 8-19-80]
§ 42-4 RACETRACKS § 42-6
42:413
§ 42-7. Penalties for offenses.
(1) The permittee shall not at any time allow the operation of the
racetrack for which the permit is granted to be conducted in such a
manner as to cause unreasonably loud or disturbing noises of such
a character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the health,
safety, peace, welfare or good order of the people of the Town of
Islip or in such a manner as to cause disturbing, noisy, riotous or
tumultuous conduct within the Town. Racecars, loudspeakers,
announcing devices, horns and other sound-producing devices
shall not at any time be operated in violation of Subsection E(2)
below.
(2) Any continuous sound in air which has crossed the real property
boundary of any racetrack and enters any residential land shall not
exceed either of the following levels:
(a) During daytime: an L10 in excess of sixty (60) dB(A).
(b) During nighttime: an L10 in excess of fifty-five (55) dB(A).
(3) The sound levels specified in Subsection E(2) shall be decreased by
five (5) decibels if the sound contains impulsive or prominent
discrete tone characteristics.
F. The permittee shall not at any time allow the operation of the racetrack
for which the permit is granted to be conducted in such manner as to
result in the creation and dissemination through the air to any adjoining
residential areas of the Town of any noxious gases, smoke, fumes, dust
or other objectionable matter in such concentration or volume as to be
detrimental to the health, peace, welfare and good order of the people
of the Town or as to hurt, destroy or deface the property of the
inhabitants of the Town. Evidence that there is concentration of such
matter in any residential area in excess of part thereof per million parts
of air, as measured by an approved Health Department recorder, shall
be deemed to be prima facie evidence of the violation of this section.
[Amended 8-28-62]
A. Any person who operates a racetrack in the Town of Islip without
having applied for and been granted a permit to operate the same
pursuant to the provisions hereof, and any person granted a permit
hereunder who commits or allows any act in violation of any of the
provisions of this ordinance, shall be deemed to have committed an
offense against this ordinance and also shall be liable for said violation
or the penalty therefor.
B. For every violation of any provision of this ordinance the person
violating the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.) or to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 42-6 ISLIP CODE § 42-7
42:414
§ 42-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or regulations heretofore adopted in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
§ 42-9. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this ordinance shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 42-10. When effective; effect of amendments.
Chapter 42A
RECEIVER OF TAXES, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 42A-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Receiver of Taxes Law."
§ 42A-2. Definitions and word usage.
C. Conviction for any above-mentioned violation shall constitute and effect
an immediate forfeiture of the permit.
D. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty,
enforceable and collectible by the Town, in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.) for each such offense. Such penalty shall be collectible
by and in the name of the Town.
E. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of such ordinance.
A. This ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after publication and
posting or immediately upon personal service as provided by § 133 of
the Town Law.
B. Amendments to this ordinance shall not operate as an abatement of any
action or proceeding pending under or by virtue of any prior provisions
of this ordinance. [Added 8-19-80]
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
§ 42-7 RACETRACKS § 42A-2
42:415
§ 42A-3. Department established. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10,
1980]
§ 42A-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 11-21-78 by L.L. No.
7, 1978; 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10, 1980]
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of Receiver of Taxes,
which shall perform a major function of Town government.
DEPUTY RECEIVER — The Deputy Receiver of Taxes of the Town of
Islip appointed and holding office pursuant to § 20, Subdivision 3(c) of
the Town Law as amended, who shall act generally for and in place of
the Receiver.
RECEIVER — The public official elected to the office of Receiver of
Taxes, who shall be the chief executive officer of the Department.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of Receiver of Taxes.
The principal executive officer and administrative head of such
Department shall be the Receiver who shall be elected to said office for
the term fixed by law at such salary as may from time to time be fixed by
said Town Board. The Receiver shall be the head of the Department
with power and authority to appoint and remove officers and employees
under his jurisdiction in accordance with the Civil Service Law and
other applicable laws.
B. The Receiver is empowered herein to appoint a Deputy who shall
generally act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such duties as
are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this local
law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Receiver shall execute
and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same is
required by the Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town
Board and in such form as approved by the Town Attorney.
D. The Receiver shall have such powers as prescribed by law and as shall
be necessary for the proper administration of the Department
consistent with applicable provisions of law.
A. Accounting. The Receiver of Taxes administers, manages, supervises
and maintains accounting records over the collection of property taxes
throughout the Town of Islip as levied by warrant and disbursement of
all said taxes and prepares summary reports for all appropriate
municipalities and public officials.
B. Apportionment. The Receiver of Taxes administers, manages,
supervises and processes apportionment of parcels for real property tax
purposes, makes and records all required Tax Map changes and title
§ 42A-2 ISLIP CODE § 42A-4
42:416
§ 42A-5. Special districts. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10, 1980]
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 42A-6. Powers of Town Supervisor. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No.
10, 1980]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 42A-7. Fees. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10, 1980]
The Receiver may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him for:
changes, processes all tax delinquencies for collection purposes and
answers all taxpayer inquiries regarding tax status.
C. Billing. The Receiver of Taxes administers, manages, supervises and
processes all the billing of all school and general taxes of property
owners throughout the Town of Islip.
D. Tax roll. The Receiver of Taxes administers, manages, supervises and
processes all printing related to tax services, processes all mailing
directed to the Department and maintains and operates all required
equipment and machinery servicing the Department.
E. The Receiver performs such other duties and functions that are
prescribed to be performed by him in any law, ordinance or resolution
of the Town Board or lawful directive of the Supervisor. However, the
Receiver may delegate any of his powers or direct any of his duties to be
performed to a Deputy Receiver or duly appointed assistant.
F. The Receiver shall, if so directed by a resolution passed unanimously by
the Town Board, include with each tax bill a letter setting forth the fact
that the Town is the mandated collection agency for the various taxing
jurisdictions and that these jurisdictions set their own budgets and tax
rates. The letter may specifically identify the amount of tax attributable
to the Town and describe briefly what services are rendered for the
taxes collected.
A. Filing in his office or Department of any map or written instrument
required to be so filed.
B. The preparation of any copy of a map or written instrument filed in his
office or Department.
C. Certifying any such map or written instrument.
§ 42A-4 RACETRACKS § 42A-7
42:417
§ 42A-8. Severability. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10, 1980]
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 42A-9. When effective. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 10, 1980]
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 43
SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Peddlers — See Ch. 39.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 46.
Trespassing — See Ch. 58.
§ 43-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this enactment to preserve the character of residential
areas. In order to further this intent, personal property sales will be
regulated.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words will have the following
meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS — Organizations or corporations for
pleasure, recreation and other not-for-profit purposes, substantially all of
the activities of which are for such purposes and no part of the net earnings
of which inures to the benefit of any member, employee or shareholder.
DAY — The mean solar day of twenty-four (24) hours beginning at mean
midnight.
LOT — A parcel of land, exclusive of street areas, used or designed to be
used by one (1) use or building or by a related group of uses or buildings
and the accessory uses or buildings customarily incident thereto, including
such open spaces.
D. Any other service rendered in connection with the work of his
Department and for which he deems it necessary to charge and to
collect a fee therefor.
§ 42A-7 ISLIP CODE § 43-2
43:418
PERSON — An individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Tangible objects which are temporary and
movable, including but not limited to clothes, furniture, vehicles, tools,
jewelry, household items and books.
PERSONAL PROPERTY SALE — The offering of more than five (5) items of
tangible personal property for sale, including a "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any similar sale which
occurs on a lot on which a dwelling is located.
RESIDENT — A person who has his principal place of abode in the Town of
Islip.
SELLER — A person who sells or contracts to sell goods.
§ 43-3. Permit required.
§ 43-4. Conditions of sale.
A. A personal property sale is prohibited unless:
(1) The seller resides on the lot.
(2) The goods for sale are owned by or in the control of the seller or
another person at that lot.
(3) The seller has first obtained a permit from the Town Clerk.
B. Before any permit will be issued, the following information must be
presented to the Town Clerk:
(1) The name of the person conducting the personal property sale.
(2) The name of the owner of the lot on which the personal property
sale is to be conducted and the consent of the owner if the
applicant is other than the owner.
(3) The location of the proposed personal property sale.
(4) Proof acceptable to the Town Clerk that the lot on which the
personal property sale is to be conducted is the seller's residence.
(5) The number of days of the personal property sale.
(6) The date of any previous personal property sale.
A. A permit for a personal property sale is valid only for the dates
indicated thereon.
B. A personal property sale shall not exceed two (2) consecutive calendar
days.
C. No more than two (2) personal property sales may be permitted per
year, per lot.
§ 43-2 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43-4
43:419
§ 43-5. Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be established by the Town Board.
§ 43-6. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for a time not to exceed ten (10)
days, or both.
§ 43-7. Sales by charitable organizations.
Any charitable organization conducting a personal property sale of goods
owned or controlled by it must first obtain a permit from the Town Clerk,
subject to the provisions in §§ 43-3B and 43-4. This permit must be obtained
by a resident of the Town of Islip.
§ 43-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its passage, approval and
recording according to law.
Chapter 43A
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 47.
Water quality — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
D. During a personal property sale, the permit must be at all times
displayed so that it is clearly visible from the street.
§ 43-4 ISLIP CODE § 43-8
43:420
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections to Storm Sewer
[Adopted 2-26-2008 by L.L. No. 4-200860]
§ 43A-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Islip through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES
general permit for municipal separate storm sewer systems. The objectives
of this article are:
§ 43A-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
60.Editor's Note: This local law was originally adopted as Ch. 70 but was renumbered to
maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 43A-1 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43A-2
43:421
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including
but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 43A-6 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — An activity requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — The municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Islip.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Town of Islip;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
§ 43A-2 ISLIP CODE § 43A-2
43:422
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water, which may cause or
might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state
in contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure that future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges, has been approved by the EPA for
a water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by the EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
D.
§ 43A-2 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43A-2
43:423
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
Municipal Engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Town of
Islip to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated by the
municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 43A-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 43A-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the Town of Islip.
§ 43A-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 43A-6. Discharge prohibitions; exceptions.
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
§ 43A-2 ISLIP CODE § 43A-6
43:424
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges; exceptions. No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than
stormwater, except as provided in Subsection A(1). The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
MS4 is prohibited, except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the Department or the Town of
Islip has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
§ 43A-6 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43A-6
43:425
§ 43A-7. Activities contaminating water prohibited.
§ 43A-8. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants
by use of best management practices.
§ 43A-9. Suspension of access to MS4.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the Town of Islip's MS4 or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the Town of Islip's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the Town of Islip being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 43A-2, Definitions, of this article.
B. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Town of Islip's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the Town of Islip's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 43A-2 or activities contaminating stormwater
as defined in § 43A-7 the Town of Islip may require implementation of
best management practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges
and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 43A-2 or an
activity contaminating stormwater as defined in § 43A-7 may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
§ 43A-6 ISLIP CODE § 43A-9
43:426
§ 43A-10. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town of Islip prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 43A-11. Access to facilities for inspection; monitoring of
discharges.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, notify the person of
such suspension, in writing, and of the reasons for the suspension. If
the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to
persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the Town of Islip's MS4 in violation of this article may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator, in writing,
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines, in writing,
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
§ 43A-9 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43A-11
43:427
§ 43A-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Town of Islip in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the Town of Islip within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Town of Islip shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The Town of Islip has the right to require the facilities subject to
this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town of Islip access to a
facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an
offense if the person denies the Town of Islip reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 43A-11 ISLIP CODE § 43A-12
43:428
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 43A-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When the Town of Islip's SMO, or his designee, finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
article, he/she may order compliance by written notice of violation
to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without
limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $5,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
§ 43A-12 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 43A-13
43:429
§ 43A-14. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 43A-15. Effect on other remedies.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 43A-16. When effective.
This article shall be effective upon filing the appropriate certified copies
with the Secretary of State.
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 43A-13 ISLIP CODE § 43A-16
43:430
Chapter 44
SHELLFISH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Trawling and eel dredging — See Ch. 56.
§ 44-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Shellfish Ordinance of the Town of
Islip."
§ 44-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings indicated:
CERTIFIED AREA — An area designated by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation to be in such sanitary condition that
shellfish therein may be taken for use as food.
MANAGEMENT AREA — An area set aside by the Town Board for the
conservation, preservation, protection, rehabilitation, seeding and/or
growth of shellfish.
NIGHT — The period between sunset and sunrise.
RESIDENT — A person who has his or her principal place of abode in the
Town of Islip and/or a person who owns real property in the Town of Islip.
SHELLFISH — Includes all types and varieties of oysters; Crassostrea
virginica, mussels, scallops; Pectin irradians, hard clams; Mercenaria
mercenaria, soft clams; Mya arenaria; and any combination thereof.
TAKING — Includes the actual removal of shellfish from Town lands
underwater and/or the area above Town lands underwater and all lesser
acts, such as attempting to remove shellfish, disturbing shellfish and using
any implement or device to remove shellfish, regardless of whether such
acts result in the removal of shellfish.
TOWN LANDS UNDERWATER — Includes all land underwater in and owned
by the Town of Islip except land underwater leased by the Town to others
for shellfish cultivation.
UNCERTIFIED AREA — An area designated by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation to be in such unsanitary
condition that shellfish therein may not be taken for use as food.
§ 43A-16 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-3
43:431
§ 44-3. Permit required.
No person shall take shellfish from Town lands underwater unless such
person has obtained a permit therefor as prescribed by this chapter.
§ 44-4. Exceptions to permit requirement.
§ 44-5. Types of permits. [Amended 5-5-1981; 11-18-1986]
A. A resident of the Town of Brookhaven who has duly obtained a permit
for the taking of shellfish from lands underwater in and owned by the
Town of Brookhaven, in accordance with the Town of Brookhaven
Shellfish Law, may take shellfish from Town lands underwater which
have not been designated by the Town Board as open only to residents
of the Town of Islip.
B. A resident of the Town of Brookhaven desiring to avail himself of the
privileges hereinbefore stated shall display evidence of the permit
issued to him by the Town of Brookhaven, in conspicuous places, either
upon his person or the vessel used in taking.
C. A resident of the Town of Babylon who has duly obtained a permit for
the taking of shellfish from lands underwater in and owned by the Town
of Babylon, in accordance with the Town of Babylon Shellfish
Ordinance, may take shellfish from Town lands underwater, which have
not been designated by the Town Board as open only to residents of the
Town of Islip.
D. A resident of the Town of Babylon desiring to avail himself of the
privileges hereinbefore stated shall display evidence of the permit
issued to him by the Town of Babylon, in conspicuous places, either
upon his person or the vessel used in taking.
A. Personal permit. A personal permit shall allow the person to whom it is
issued to take shellfish from Town lands underwater, for the personal or
family use of such person only, in an amount permitted under § 44-10,
by use of feet, hands or a rake with a head no wider than 14 inches
measured perpendicularly to the tines and a straight handle no longer
than 10 feet, except that a person to whom a personal permit has been
issued, may take scallops by any means permitted by § 44-9. [Amended
6-19-2012]
B. Commercial permit. A commercial permit shall allow the person to
whom it is issued to take shellfish, except hard clams (Mercenaria
mercenaria), from Town lands underwater for any purpose by any
means permitted by § 44-9. [Amended 1-26-2010; 12-13-2011;
6-19-2012]
C. Commercial permit hard clam endorsement. A hard clam endorsement
shall allow the person to whom it is issued to harvest no more than
2,000 hard clams (Mercenaria mercenaria) per day, in addition to other
§ 44-3 ISLIP CODE § 44-5
43:432
§ 44-6. Application for and issuance of permits; fees.
shellfish harvested in accordance with the provisions herein. [Added
1-26-2010;61 amended 12-13-2011; 6-19-2012]
D. Senior citizen personal permit. A senior citizen personal permit shall be
issued to any applicant for a personal permit, aged 60 years or older. A
senior citizen permit shall allow the person to whom it is issued to take
shellfish from Town lands underwater for any purpose by any means
permitted by § 44-9.
E. The Town Clerk shall not issue more then one type of permit to any
person, nor shall the Town Clerk issue a personal permit or a senior
citizen personal permit to any person holding a New York State
commercial permit.
F. No person shall hold more than one type of permit at a time. A person to
whom a New York State commercial permit has been issued shall not
have a personal permit or a senior citizen personal permit at the same
time.
A. Permits shall be issued to residents only.
B. Each permit application shall be made in duplicate, in writing, on the
form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall include the applicant's
name, residence, mailing address, date of birth, weight, height, color of
hair and eyes, signature and all other information requested by the
Town Clerk.
C. An application for a permit for a person under the age of 17 years shall
be cosigned by that person's parent or guardian.
D. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Town Clerk shall be satisfied as to
the identification and residency of the applicant.
E. Each permit application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee:
[Amended 6-19-2012]
(1) Personal permit: $5, except that there shall be no fee for a persons
60 years of age or older, or for any person serving in the United
States Military.
(2) Commercial permit: $75, except that the fee shall be $25 for
persons 60 years of age or older, or for any person serving in the
United States Military.
F. Each commercial permit application shall be accompanied by the
applicant's New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
permit.
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C,
D and E as Subsections D, E and F, respectively.
§ 44-5 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-6
43:433
G. Each commercial permit application shall be accompanied by three fullface
photos of the applicant taken within two months prior to the
application date. [Amended 5-5-1981]
H. The number of commercial permit hard clam endorsements issued by
the Town Clerk in any one year shall be limited to an annual cap of 50.
The annual cap may be adjusted to reflect changes in the health of the
hard clam population based on the results of the most recent population
surveys and harvest statistics available for Town waters and set, on a
biyearly basis, by Town Board resolution and proper publication of
notice thereof. [Added 1-26-2010;62 amended 3-2-2010;
12-13-2011; 6-19-2012]
(1) An individual interested in obtaining a commercial permit hard
clam endorsement shall annually apply to the Town Clerk before
March 1. Commercial permit hard clam endorsements will be
issued only to those individuals who provide documentation
demonstrating compliance with one of the following:
(a) The applicant was issued and held in good standing a
commercial permit hard clam endorsement in the previous
year; or
(b) The applicant was issued a commercial shellfish harvester
permit during any consecutive five-year period while
maintaining residency in the Townships of Islip, Babylon or
Brookhaven; or
(c) The applicant was eligible for a commercial permit hard clam
endorsement in the previous year but was unable to apply due
to active-duty military service; or
(d) The applicant is age 60 or older at the time of application.
(2) Those individuals who do not fall into § 44-6H(1) will be issued a
commercial permit hard clam endorsement based solely on
availability and will be placed on a waiting list. If, by the end of the
annual renewal period as determined by the Town Clerk, there are
sufficient commercial permit hard clam endorsements remaining
under the cap, all individuals on the waiting list shall be issued a
commercial permit hard clam endorsement based upon the
applicant's position on the waiting list.
(3) All commercial permit hard clam endorsement holders shall
maintain monthly summary reports of their harvest activities. This
report shall include daily dated entries indicating quantities of
harvested hard clams by market size category, the harvest date, an
identification of the areas from which the shellfish were harvested,
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection H
as Subsection I.
§ 44-6 ISLIP CODE § 44-6
43:434
§ 44-7. Form of permit; nontransferability; display of permit.
§ 44-8. Expiration of permits.
§ 44-9. Permitted means of taking shellfish. [Amended 5-5-1981;
3-2-2010]
as required to be recorded under New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation regulation Chapter 1, § 42.7.
I. The Town Clerk may refuse to issue a permit pursuant to the rules set
forth in § 44-24G. [Added 5-3-1983]
A. Each permit shall be in the form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall
contain the matters set forth upon the application.
B. The original application shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office, and the
duplicate application shall be filed in the Harbormaster's office.
C. A person to whom a permit has been issued shall not transfer, assign or
allow any other person to use the permit.
D. No person shall use, display or possess a permit issued to another
person. [Amended 5-5-1981]
E. A person engaged in taking shellfish from Town lands underwater shall
locate his permit so that it shall be prominently displayed and clearly
visible. [Amended 5-5-1981]
F. (Reserved)63
G. A person whose permit or display card is lost or stolen shall report same
to the Town Clerk's office immediately. [Added 5-5-1981]
A. Each permit and endorsement shall be valid from the date of issuance
and, unless sooner voided, suspended or revoked, shall expire on the
31st day of December of the same calendar year in which it is issued.
[Amended 3-2-2010]
B. A permit shall expire immediately when the person to whom it is issued
ceases to be a resident. [Amended 5-5-1981]
A. Oysters and mussels. Oysters and mussels shall be taken from Town
lands underwater by means of tongs or rakes, without supplementary
mechanical power.
B. Hard clams.
(1) No person shall take any hard clams for commercial purposes from
Town lands underwater within the Great South Bay unless that
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Temporary permit, added 12-16-1980, was repealed
6-19-2012.
§ 44-6 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-9
43:435
§ 44-10. Restrictions on taking shellfish.
§ 44-11. Restrictions on sizes of shellfish.
person is in possession of a commercial permit hard clam
endorsement. [Amended 12-13-2011; 6-19-2012]
(2) No implement or device shall be used in taking hard clams from
Town lands underwater except:
(a) Tongs without supplementary mechanical power and having
not less than one inch of clear space between teeth and
between the teeth and the basket.
(b) Rakes without mechanical power and having not less than one
inch of clear space between teeth and between the teeth and
the basket.
C. No wire netting or other substance shall be used in the basket of any
implement used to take shellfish except as otherwise provided herein.
D. No person shall use any type of dredge to take shellfish from Town
lands underwater, except as provided herein.
E. Bay scallops may be taken with a dredge or scrape having an opening at
the mouth not to exceed 36 inches in width when towed by a boat
operated by mechanical power or other means, provided that such
dredge or scrape is brought aboard by hand power without the use of a
mechanical device or by use of hands, feet or a hand net.
F. The Town shall recognize the rights granted to an individual who is in
possession of a vessel endorsement as authorized under New York
Environmental Law § 13-0311. [Added 6-19-2012]
A. No unauthorized person shall take shellfish from an uncertified area.
B. No person shall take shellfish from Town lands underwater or from land
underwater leased by the Town to others for shellfish cultivation during
the night.
C. A person to whom a personal permit is issued shall not take more than
100 total shellfish per day. [Amended 5-5-1981; 6-19-2012]
D. A person to whom a commercial permit is issued shall not take shellfish
from Town lands underwater on Sunday.
A. No shellfish of less than the following sizes shall be taken, bought, sold
or possessed within the Town of Islip:
(1) Hard clams: No more than 3% of each bushel, package or other
container shall consist of clams less than one inch (2.54
centimeters) in thickness.
§ 44-9 ISLIP CODE § 44-11
43:436
§ 44-12. Seasons during which shellfish may be taken.
(2) Oysters: No more than 5% of any bushel, package or container
shall consist of oysters less than three inches (7.62 centimeters)
measured at the longest diameter. The size limit shall not apply to
oysters transplanted or cultured under permit from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, subject to the
provisions of §§ 13-0316, 13-0319 and 13-0321 of the New York
State Environmental Conservation Law. [Amended 6-19-2012]
(3) Bay scallops. No more than 2% of each bushel, package or other
container shall consist of scallops which do not have an annual
growth line or that measure less than 2 1/4 inches (5.715
centimeters) from the middle of the hinge to the middle of the bill.
[Amended 5-5-1981; 6-19-2012]
(4) Soft clams or steamers: not less than 1 1/2 inches (3.81
centimeters) in the longest dimension.
B. A person who takes the shellfish which are smaller than the required
shall immediately return such shellfish to the location from which they
were taken.
C. Shellfish shall be sorted as to size in the immediate area from which
they are taken and as soon as possible after they are taken.
D. All devices used to sort shellfish as to size, including but not limited to
cull racks, shall have no less than one inch (2.54 centimeters) of space
between bars. Such device shall be designed and affixed to the vessel in
such a manner as to allow shellfish to pass through the cull bars to fall
directly and unimpaired to the water from which they were taken.
[Amended 3-2-2010]
E. Those engaged in the taking of hard clams with tongs shall have no
more than three bushels of bay cull (shellfish and assorted bottom
material unavoidably taken during harvesting) on board at any time,
and shall have none on board while underway. [Added 3-2-2010]
A. Oysters.
(1) No oysters or oyster sets shall be taken from Town lands
underwater from May 15 to August 31, both inclusive, in any year.
(2) A person who takes oysters from Town lands underwater out of
season shall immediately return such oysters.
B. Scallops.
(1) Scallops shall be taken from Town lands underwater during the
period form the first Monday in November through March 31, both
inclusive, of each year. [Amended 5-5-1981; 6-19-2012]
§ 44-11 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-12
43:437
§ 44-13. Limitation on taking scallops with a commercial permit.
[Amended 5-5-1981]
§ 44-14. Beam trawls and otter trawls prohibited. [Amended
5-5-1981]
No beam trawls or otter trawls shall be used in any of the waters of the
Town of Islip.
§ 44-15. Management areas.
(2) A person who takes scallops from Town lands underwater out of
season shall immediately return such scallops.
A. A person to whom a commercial permit has been issued shall not take
more than 10 bushels of bay scallops from Town lands underwater per
day.
B. Two or more persons to whom commercial permits have been issued
and who are utilizing the same vessel concurrently shall not take more
than 20 bushels of bay scallops per vessel per day.
A. The Town Board may, in its discretion, designate any portion of Town
lands underwater a management area.
B. An uncertified area shall be a management area.
C. The Commissioner of Environmental Control may prohibit, restrict and
regulate the taking of shellfish from a management area. In making a
determination whether to prohibit, restrict or regulate the taking of
shellfish from a management area, the Commissioner of Environmental
Control shall give due consideration to the following:
(1) Whether the shellfish in the management area have been
sufficiently purified to be suitable as food for human consumption;
(2) Whether the first spawning period has passed for the shellfish in
the management area; and
(3) Whether a minimum quantity of shellfish is available within the
management area for spawning until such time as desired
quantities of shellfish are maintained.
D. A description of each management area and all prohibitions,
restrictions and regulations with regard to the taking of shellfish from a
management area shall be posted in the office of the Town Clerk and all
Town marinas.
E. No person shall violate the Commissioner of Environmental Control's
prohibitions, restrictions or regulations with regard to the taking of
shellfish from a management area.
§ 44-12 ISLIP CODE § 44-16
43:438
§ 44-16. Interference with shellfish, markers and leased and
management areas.
§ 44-17. Commercial buyer's or buyer's helper permit required.
No person shall buy, sell, possess or otherwise deal with shellfish for
commercial purposes unless such person has obtained a commercial buyer's
permit or buyer's helper permit as prescribed by this chapter.
§ 44-18. Application for commercial buyer's permit.
§ 44-19. Application for buyer's helper permit.
A. No person shall take, interfere with or otherwise disturb shellfish
possessed, planted or cultivated by another.
B. No person shall remove stakes, buoys or other devices used to mark
land under water leased by the Town to another for shellfish cultivation,
a management area or Town lands under water.
C. No person shall place any device used to take shellfish on or in water
above land under water leased by the Town to another for shellfish
cultivation. [Amended 5-5-1981]
A. Each commercial buyer's permit application shall be made in duplicate,
in writing, on the form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall include
the applicant's name; residence; mailing address; date of birth; weight;
height; color of hair and eyes; signature; the description, license plate
number and name and address of the owner of each motor vehicle to be
used by the applicant in dealing with shellfish for commercial purposes;
and all other information requested by the Town Clerk.
B. Each commercial buyer's permit application shall be accompanied by a
fee of $300.
C. Each commercial buyer's permit application shall be accompanied by a
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation permit
authorizing the applicant to deal with shellfish for commercial
purposes.
D. The Town Clerk shall issue to each person to whom a commercial
buyer's permit is issued one decal for each motor vehicle to be used by
such person in dealing with shellfish for commercial purposes.
A. Each buyer's helper permit application shall be made in duplicate, in
writing, on the form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall include the
applicant's name, residence, mailing address, date of birth, weight,
height, color of hair and eyes, signature, name and address of the
applicant's employer and all other information requested by the Town
Clerk.
§ 44-16 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-19
43:439
§ 44-20. Form of commercial buyer's permit and buyer's helper
permit; nontransferability; carrying of permit; display of decals.
§ 44-21. Expiration of commercial buyer's permit and buyer's helper
permit.
Each commercial buyer's permit and buyer's helper permit shall be valid
from the date of issuance and, unless sooner voided, suspended or revoked,
shall expire on the 31st day of December next ensuing.
§ 44-22. Restrictions on dealing with shellfish for commercial
purposes.
B. Each buyer's helper permit application shall be accompanied by a fee of
$50.
C. Each buyer's helper permit application shall be accompanied by the
applicant's employer's commercial buyer's permit.
A. Each commercial buyer's permit and buyer's helper permit shall be in
the form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall contain the matters set
forth upon the application.
B. The original application shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office, and the
duplicate application shall be filed in the Harbormaster's office.
C. A person or entity to whom a commercial buyer's permit or buyer's
helper permit has been issued shall not transfer, assign or allow any
other person or entity to use the permit.
D. No person or entity shall use a commercial buyer's permit or buyer's
helper permit issued to another person or entity.
E. A commercial buyer's permit or buyer's helper permit shall be carried
by a person dealing with shellfish for commercial purposes.
F. A decal issued with a commercial buyer's permit shall be prominently
displayed and clearly visible on the motor vehicle for which such decal
is issued.
A. No person shall deal with shellfish for commercial purposes on property
owned by the Town, during the period commencing 1/2 hour after
sunset and ending at sunrise. [Amended 5-5-1981]
B. A person dealing with shellfish for commercial purposes shall be in
possession of a device for the sorting of shellfish as to size; such device
shall have openings of not less than one inch (2.54 centimeters).
C. No person shall buy or otherwise receive shellfish for commercial
purposes from a person who has not obtained a Town of Islip
commercial permit, Town of Islip commercial buyer's permit or Town of
Islip buyer's helper permit.
§ 44-19 ISLIP CODE § 44-22
43:440
§ 44-23. Starfish, drills, periwinkles and whelks. [Amended
8-30-1983]
Starfish, drills, periwinkles and whelks, when taken, shall not be returned
alive to Town lands underwater.
§ 44-24. Penalties for offenses.
D. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer shellfish for commercial
purposes to a person who has not obtained a commercial buyer's
permit, buyer's helper permit or New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permit authorizing the person to whom it
is issued to deal with shellfish for commercial purposes.
A. Any person convicted of taking shellfish without a permit as required by
§ 44-3 or dealing with shellfish for commercial purposes without a
permit as required by § 44-17 shall be guilty of a violation and
punishable as follows: [Amended 6-19-2012]
(1) For a first conviction: by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$500.
(2) For a second or subsequent conviction within five years of a
previous conviction for a like offense: by a fine of $1,000.
B. Any person convicted of taking shellfish on Sunday in violation of
§ 44-10D shall be guilty of a violation and punishable as follows:
(1) For a first conviction: by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$250.
(2) For a second or subsequent conviction within five years of a
previous conviction for a like offense: by a fine of not less than $250
nor more than $500.
C. Any person convicted of taking shellfish from an uncertified area in
violation of § 44-10A or violating prohibitions, restrictions or
regulations with regard to taking shellfish from a management area in
violation of § 44-15E shall be guilty of the following:
(1) A violation for a first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not less than
three months nor more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(2) A misdemeanor for a second or subsequent conviction within five
years of a previous conviction for a like offense, punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not less than six months nor more than one year, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
D. Any person convicted of taking shellfish from Town lands underwater
during the night in violation of § 44-10B or dealing with shellfish for
§ 44-22 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-24
43:441
§ 44-25. Seizures.
commercial purposes on property owned by the Town during the night
in violation of § 44-22A shall be guilty of the following:
(1) A violation for a first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not less than
two months nor more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(2) A misdemeanor for a second or subsequent conviction within five
years of a previous conviction for a like offense, punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not less than six months nor more than one year, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
E. Any person convicted of taking shellfish by other than permitted means
in violation of § 44-9 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as
follows:
(1) For a first conviction: by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$750 or by imprisonment for not less than six months nor more
than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2) For a second or subsequent conviction within five years of a
previous conviction for a like offense: by a fine of not less than $800
nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than six
months nor more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
F. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter, except
as otherwise provided in § 44-24A, B, C or D shall be guilty of the
following:
(1) A violation for a first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $200.
(2) A misdemeanor for a second or subsequent conviction within five
years of a previous conviction for a like offense, punishable by a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $400 or by imprisonment
for not less than three months nor more than six months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
G. The Town Clerk, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Control, may refuse to issue a permit or
may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this chapter to any
person convicted of one or more violations of this chapter or of any
person convicted of a crime or of any partnership where any partner
has been convicted of one or more violations of this chapter or
convicted of a crime or of any corporation if any person having an
interest in the corporation is convicted of one or more violations of this
chapter or convicted of a crime. [Amended 5-3-1983; 6-19-2012]
§ 44-24 ISLIP CODE § 44-25
43:442
§ 44-26. Forfeitures.
A. Any peace or police officer shall have the power to seize as evidence
without a warrant, any rake, tong, dredge or device other than a boat or
vehicle, which he has cause to believe is being used or is possessed for
the taking of shellfish in violation of the Town Shellfish Ordinance,
provided that Subsection C requirements are fulfilled. [Amended
5-5-1981]
B. Any peace or police officer shall have the power to seize without a
warrant for conservation, health or evidentiary purposes, any shellfish
taken or possessed in violation of the Town Shellfish Ordinance,
provided that Subsection C requirements are fulfilled: [Amended
5-5-1981]
(1) Shellfish seized for conservation purposes shall be returned to the
bay.
(2) Shellfish seized for health or evidentiary purposes shall be dealt
with as provided in Subsection D.
C. Seizures of shellfish and devices without a warrant are allowable,
provided that there is not ample opportunity to obtain a warrant or
when seizure of such shellfish or devices is reasonable to prevent their
concealment or destruction. Ample opportunity includes advance
knowledge of the existence and precise location of the shellfish or
devices to be seized.
D. Any peace or police officer shall have the power to retain custody of and
provide for the safekeeping of anything seized as provided in
Subsection A or B, as he deems appropriate, subject to the regulations
of the Town, and subject to an order of any court having jurisdiction,
until a determination of any prosecution arising from the violation or
alleged violation with respect to which they are evidence. [Amended
5-5-1981]
A. Should the defendant be found guilty in any prosecution, civil or
criminal, of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the defendant's
interest in any and all shellfish rakes, tongs, dredges or devices, other
than a boat or vehicle, taken or used for the purpose of taking shellfish
in violation of such provision, shall be forfeited to the Town. Unless a
claim of ownership of such device shall be made to the Town by some
other person within 30 days thereafter and shall be established by
order of a court or to the satisfaction of the Town, such device shall be
disposed of as the Town shall direct.
B. Claim of ownership.
(1) For the purposes of this section a "claim of ownership" shall mean
any lawful interest, including a part interest or security interest.
§ 44-25 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY § 44-26
43:443
(2) A claim of ownership shall not prevent vesting or revesting of
ownership and right of possession in the Town pursuant to
Subsection A of this section unless the person establishing it either
establishes a right of ownership exclusive of any interest in the
defendant or shall purchase or redeem from the Town any interest
of the defendant by payment to the Town of the value thereof,
together with the reasonable expenses of safekeeping of such
property between the time of seizure and such redemption.
Establishment of a claim of ownership shall not, in any event,
prevent such revesting in the Town if the Town shall establish that
the illegal use or possession of which the defendant is held liable or
found guilty was expressly or impliedly permitted by the person
establishing the claim of ownership.
(3) Establishment of a claim of ownership consisting of a part
ownership or a security interest shall not entitle the person
establishing it to delivery of property as to which the interest of the
defendant is declared confiscated or forfeited as provided in
Subsection A of this section unless the person establishing it shall
redeem any interest of the defendant by payment to the Town of the
value thereof, together with the reasonable expenses of
safekeeping of such property between the time of seizure and such
redemption. Establishment of a claim of ownership shall not in any
event entitle the person establishing it to delivery of the property if
the Town shall establish that the illegal use or possession of such
property, in the manner or for the purposes or in the circumstances
making such use or possession illegal, was expressly or impliedly
permitted by the person establishing such claim of ownership.
(4) Where a person establishing a claim of ownership is required to
purchase or redeem any interest of the defendant in a civil or
criminal prosecution in order to be entitled to delivery of property
in which such claim of ownership is established, such interest of
the defendant must be so purchased or redeemed not less than 10
days after the price of purchase or redemption shall have been
fixed by order of the court or agreed between the person whose
claim is so established and the Town. If a person establishing a
claim of ownership shall fail to purchase or redeem the interest of
the defendant within the time provided in this subsection, or such
longer time as may be provided by order of the court or agreement
of the Town, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his claim of
ownership, and the property may be disposed of as if no such claim
had been asserted.
(5) A person asserting a claim of ownership as provided in this section
shall have the burden of proof.
(6) In any action or proceeding in which any person asserts a claim of
ownership with respect to property in which the interest of the
defendant is declared confiscated and forfeited as provided in
Subsection A of this section, the testimony of such person or of the
§ 44-26 ISLIP CODE § 44-26
43:444
§ 44-27. Severability.
If any term, part, provision, section, subdivision or paragraph of this
chapter shall be held unconstitutional or ineffective, in whole or in part,
then, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective, this chapter
and such term, part, provision, section, subdivision or paragraph thereof
shall be in full force and effect; and such determination shall not be deemed
to invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions
or paragraphs thereof.
Chapter 45
SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, MISUSE AND
ABANDONMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 32. Abandoned vehicles and vessels — See Ch. 60.
§ 45-1. Declaration of policy.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby finds and declares that the
unlawful taking, the misuse and the abandonment of shopping carts and
similar conveyances is a threat to the protection and preservation of the
property of the Town and its inhabitants, constitutes a hazard to the health,
safety and general welfare of the populace of the Town, and adversely
affects the legitimate conduct of trade and business in the Town of Islip and
constitutes a nuisance detrimental to the neighborhood and the community
at large.
§ 45-2. Definitions and usage.
defendant in the civil or criminal prosecution, or of both, shall not
be deemed sufficient to establish his claim unless corroborated by
documentary evidence or by testimony of some other person not
interested in the event.
A. Definitions. When used in this local law:
TOWN — Includes all areas within the Town of Islip, exclusive of areas
wholly within any incorporated Village.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, society and other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean every class of road, sidewalk, parking
lot and other area publicly owned or operated, or privately owned and
open to the use of the public or segment thereof, excluding the interior
of any building where a "shopping cart" was obtained.
§ 44-26 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 45-2
45:445
§ 45-3. Prohibited acts.
§ 45-4. Marking of shopping carts.
Every person who, in connection with the conduct of a food-dispensing or
other establishment or business, makes any cart available to the public,
shall mark or cause the same to be marked and identified conspicuously
with his name and address. Such identification shall be in the form of a
metal tag securely fastened to the cart or a cutting or stamping on the frame
of the cart.
§ 45-5. Removal and disposal of abandoned carts.
SHOPPING CART — Shall mean a basket, container or other device
made of wire, metal or other material, mounted on wheels or handcarried,
manually or otherwise operated, such as is generally provided
by merchants for carrying merchandise or foodstuffs to automobiles or
other places.
B. Usage. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice
versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. No person may leave or abandon a shopping cart in any public place, as
defined herein, or on private property other than the place of the
person who makes the shopping cart available to the public. No person
may take or remove any shopping cart from the place of the person who
makes the shopping cart available to the public. No person may bring,
take or propel any shopping cart onto or upon any street, sidewalk,
parking field or other public place, as defined herein, or on private
property other than the place of the person who makes the shopping
cart available to the public. [Amended 1-2-79 by L.L. No. 1, 1979]
B. No person who makes available to the public, in connection with the
conduct of business or trade, any shopping cart, shall leave it or suffer
or permit it to be left by himself, his agent or other person to whom
temporary possession has been permitted by said person, upon any
street, sidewalk, parking field or other public place, as defined herein,
or on private property other than the place of the person who makes the
shopping carts available to the public.
C. Nothing in this local law shall be construed to prohibit the use of
shopping carts in any place by any person who has been given
permission to use the shopping cart by the person who makes the
shopping cart available to the public. Such permission must be written
and must be produced for inspection upon request of any police officer
or peace officer or other public servant who is authorized to issue
appearance tickets pursuant to § 150-10 of the Criminal Procedure Law
in the course of instituting prosecutions against violators of the Code of
the Town of Islip. [Added 1-2-79 by L.L. No. 1, 1979]
§ 45-2 ISLIP CODE § 45-5
45:446
A. The Superintendent of Highways of the Town or such person whom the
Town Board by resolution may appoint shall remove or cause to be
removed from time to time any cart found in any public place and shall
take custody of same and shall hold it until redeemed, sold or otherwise
disposed of as hereinafter provided.
B. Whenever the Town shall remove any cart bearing identification of
ownership, the Superintendent of Highways or such person whom the
Town Board by resolution may appoint shall mail a notice to the owner
at the address shown on the identification tag, cut or stamp. Such
notice shall advise that such cart or carts may be redeemed upon
payment of the sum of ten dollars ($10.) for each cart so redeemed and
shall set forth the place for the redemption of such cart or carts or
where possession of the same may be procured. Payment for
redemption shall be made and a receipt shall be given therefor, which
receipt shall entitle such owner to redeem, at the place of storage
thereof, one (1) or more carts, as provided for in said receipt, upon
surrender of said receipt at the place of storage for such cart or carts.
No cart shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem the same
unless proof is submitted establishing, to the satisfaction of the Town,
such person's ownership or right to possession. Any delivery to a person
apparently entitled thereto shall be a good defense to the Town against
any other person claiming to be entitled thereto, but if the person to
whom the delivery is made is not in fact entitled thereto, the person to
whom the same ought to have been delivered may recover the same
with interest and cost from the person to whom the same shall have
been delivered.
C. If, after fifteen (15) days following the mailing of the notice provided for
in § 45-5B hereof, or fifteen (15) days following the removal of a cart
bearing no identification of ownership, no person has presented to the
Superintendent of Highways or such person as may be designated by
resolution of the Town Board, proof establishing to his satisfaction such
person's ownership, the Town shall sell such carts at public auction.
Notice of such public auction shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Town by publication at least once, the first date of
publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of public
auction, and shall set forth the time and place of holding such public
auction and shall also advise that said carts will be sold at public
auction. Such sale at public auction shall be conducted by the
Superintendent of Highways or such person as may be designated by
resolution of the Town Board.
D. In the event that the said property shall remain unsold at public
auction, the Superintendent of Highways or such person as may be
designated by resolution of the Town Board may reoffer the said
property for sale at a subsequent public auction held pursuant to this
local law or he may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of this
property. Any such sale or other disposition of such property pursuant
to this local law shall be without any liability on the part of the Town to
§ 45-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 45-5
45:447
§ 45-6. Disposition of proceeds.
Upon a redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the
general funds of the Town.
§ 45-7. Exception as to Town property.
This local law shall not apply to any cart or personal property which
may come into the possession or custody of any department of the Town
pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation.
§ 45-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this local law shall,
for each and every offense, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars
($25.) for the first offense and by a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.)
for each subsequent offense.
§ 45-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or
provision of this local law shall not invalidate any other article, sentence,
section, paragraph, clause, word or provision thereof.
§ 45-10. When effective.
This local law shall take effect sixty (60) days after enactment.
Chapter 46
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Collateral loan brokers — See Ch. 9.
Hospital zones — See Ch. 25.
Ice cream trucks — See Ch. 28A.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 29.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Peddlers — See Ch. 39.
Sales of personal property — See Ch. 43.
§ 46-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, as defined in § 46-2 of
this chapter, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the
the owner of such property or other person lawfully entitled thereto or
having any interest therein.
§ 45-5 ISLIP CODE § 46-1
45:448
Town of Islip without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 46-1.1. Prohibited acts.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether resident of the Town
of Islip or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck or
any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or
from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for
future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person
who, for himself or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the Town
for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon residential premises,
whether publicly or privately owned, for the purpose of soliciting or
canvassing except after 9:00 a.m. of any day and prior to 1/2 hour
before sunset. [Amended 7-17-2018]
B. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, in plying his trade, to
ring the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is
painted or otherwise affixed or displayed to the public view any sign
containing any or all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors," "No Agents," or other wording, the purpose of which
purport to prohibit soliciting or canvassing on the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass in, at or upon
any residential property, whether such residential property is publicly
owned or privately owned, except upon the prior invitation and with the
prior consent of either an owner or a resident of such premises.
D. Term defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "residence" or
"residential property," when applied to a hotel, motel, boatel, rooming
house, boardinghouse or garden apartment, shall include an individual
apartment, room or suite of rooms, building, structure or group of
buildings or structures.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or assign any license
issued under the provisions of this chapter to any other person.
§ 46-1 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 46-2
45:449
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership or
society or any other organization.
§ 46-3. Application. [Amended 7-17-2018]
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Town
Clerk a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be
furnished by the Town Clerk, which shall give the following information:
(1) The name and description of the applicant.
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of the
applicant.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof are manufactured or produced;
where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be
two by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(8) The names of at least two reliable property owners of the County of
Suffolk, New York, who will certify as to the applicant's good
character and business respectability or, in lieu of the names of
references, such other available evidence as to the good character
and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to properly evaluate such character and business
responsibility.
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
(10) If the applicant proposes to operate a vehicle in connection with
the license, a description of the vehicle with a license plate number
or other means of identification, and the applicant's driver's license
number as issued by the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles.
§ 46-2 ISLIP CODE § 46-3
45:450
§ 46-4. Investigation and issuance.
(11) If applicant is a corporation or association, the name, address and
title of the officer upon whom process or other legal notices may be
served.
(12) A New York State sales tax identification number for all
corporations, partnerships, associations or other similar type
business entities. In the event that an individual applicant does not
possess such number, the individual's social security number shall
be substituted therefor.
(13) Any additional information which the Town Clerk may deem
necessary for the purpose of administering the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any change in circumstance with regards to the information provided in
the application or the license shall be reported to the Town Clerk within
30 days of occurrence.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Town Clerk, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character and
business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the Town Clerk
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same and shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved and that no license will be issued.
C. If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Town
Clerk shall endorse on the application his approval and shall issue a
license to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for,
upon payment of the prescribed license fee. Such license shall contain
the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name,
address and photograph of said licensee, the amount of fee paid, the
date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as
well as the license number and other identifying description of any
vehicle used in such business. The Clerk shall keep a permanent record
of all licenses issued.
D. Temporary license.
(1) The Town Clerk may issue a temporary license to an applicant who
is otherwise qualified, pending the investigation of the applicant's
application for a full solicitor's or canvasser's license. Such a
temporary license should only be issued when the applicant has
demonstrated an immediate need and after a full application has
been filed.
§ 46-3 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 46-4
45:451
§ 46-5. Fees.
(2) The holder of a temporary license shall be subject to all the
provisions of this chapter. The duration of a temporary license shall
be determined by the Town Clerk and in no event shall be longer
than 45 days, and such license may be revoked by the Town Clerk,
for cause shown, at any time.
A. The license fee which shall be charged by the Town Clerk for such
license shall be $100 per year for each person, provided that any
solicitor representing a licensed person and who shall have been
registered by said person with the Town Clerk as an agent of said
person and who shall have been investigated by said licensed person
and found to be reliable and reputable shall be issued a solicitor's
license upon payment of an additional fee of $25 and satisfactory
investigation by the Town Clerk. Such certification shall be in a manner
satisfactory in form to the Town Clerk. All other individual solicitors
shall pay the said fee of $100.
B. The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and on or after July 1 the amount of such fee for annual license
shall be 1/2 the amount stipulated above for the remainder of the year.
C. None of the license fees provided for by this chapter shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case
where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to
place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the
Supervisor for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be
discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such
application may be made before, at or within six months after payment
of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and
supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other
information as the Supervisor may deem necessary in order to
determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce.
The Supervisor shall then conduct an investigation, comparing the
applicant's business with other businesses of like nature, and shall
make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee
fixed by this chapter is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to
applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an
amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the fee has
already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above
the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the Supervisor shall
have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales or any
other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform
with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount
assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by § 46-5A of this
chapter. Should the Supervisor determine the gross sales measure of
the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to submit,
either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the Town
§ 46-4 ISLIP CODE § 46-5
45:452
§ 46-6. (Reserved)64
§ 46-7. Identification cards.
The Town Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his
license a card which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor," the period
for which the license is issued and the number of the license, in letters and
figures easily discernible from a distance of 10 feet.
§ 46-8. Exhibition of license.
Solicitors and canvassers are required to carry with them while soliciting
and to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen.
§ 46-9. Enforcement by police.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of Suffolk County to require any
person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by such officer
to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license, and
to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 46-10. Records.
The Town Clerk shall maintain a record of all convictions for violation of this
chapter.
§ 46-11. Revocation and suspension of license.
of Islip or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement
of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor, provided that no
additional fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the
licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as
prescribed in § 46-5A of this chapter.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Town Board of the Town of Islip after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser;
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
or
64.Editor's Note: Former § 46-6, Bond, was repealed 7-17-2018.
§ 46-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 46-11
45:453
§ 46-12. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Clerk in the denial of a
license as provided in § 46-4 of this chapter, or the action of the Supervisor
in the assessing of the fee as provided in § 46-5C of this chapter, shall
have the right of appeal to the Board of the Town of Islip. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Board, within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address,
a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Board
shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in
§ 46-11 of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The Town Board
may appoint an administrative hearing officer to conduct an appeal hearing
on the denial of a license. The hearing officer shall submit her written
findings and recommendations to the Town Board. The decision and order
of the Town Board on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 46-13. Expiration of license.
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st of December in the year when issued. Other than annual
licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license.
§ 46-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 46-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing.
C. The Town Board may appoint an administrative hearing officer to
conduct an appeal hearing on the suspension or revocation of a license.
The hearing officer shall submit her written findings and
recommendations to the Town Board.
§ 46-11 ISLIP CODE § 46-15
45:454
validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that
this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
§ 46-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 46-17. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect September 1, 1957.
§ 46-18. Exemptions.
A. Organizations chartered under the Religious Corporation Law or Not-
For-Profit Corporation Law of the State of New York, or their duly
accredited representatives, provided that such organization and
representative have registered with the Town Clerk. Said Town Clerk
may require proof that the organization is chartered under either of
these laws. The Town Clerk shall issue a letter of exemption valid for
one year from date, and a copy of such letter shall be carried by the
representative and exhibited upon request.
B. Persons under 16 years of age who are soliciting for an organization
recognized by the Town Clerk as a local not-for-profit organization
when said organization has requested and obtained approval, good for
one year, from the Town Clerk. Requests may be made by mail on the
letterhead of the organization, and copies of the Town Clerk's letter
recognizing the exempt status shall be carried by the solicitor and
exhibited upon request.
C. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(1) Persons engaged in delivering merchandise of any nature
whatsoever on regular, scheduled delivery routes to regular
customers.
(2) A person or persons licensed by the State of New York to conduct a
specific business or businesses to which the provisions of this
chapter would be otherwise applicable.
(3) Sales conducted pursuant to statute or court order.
(4) A commercial salesperson or deliveryman calling exclusively on
wholesale or retail establishments or to other business firms with
the Town.
(5) Any person selling personal property or other merchandise to
dealers and/or retailers engaged in the trade of selling such articles
in a business in the Town.
(6) Political organizations and their candidates and representatives.
§ 46-15 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 46-18
45:455
Chapter 47
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
15.
Subdivision improvements — See Ch. 47B.
Water quality — See Ch. 66.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 67.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 47-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
§ 46-18 ISLIP CODE § 47-1
45:456
§ 47-2. Purpose. [Amended 9-15-2009 by L.L. No. 8-2009]
The purpose of this local law is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 47-1 hereof. This local
law seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 47-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the Town Board of the Town of Islip has the authority to enact
local laws and amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety or general welfare of the Town of Islip and for the protection
and enhancement of its physical environment. The Town Board of the Town
of Islip may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment of
any municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor to effectuate,
administer and enforce such local law.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01 or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 47-1 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47-4
45:457
§ 47-4. Applicability.
§ 47-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this law:
A. This local law shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
B. The municipality shall designate the Town Engineer to accept and
review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and forward such
plans to the applicable municipal board. The Town Engineer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board of the Town of Islip, engage the
services of a registered professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee
schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this law.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board under the Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this
local law.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in § 47-5
shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) to the Town Engineer, who shall approve the SWPPP if it
complies with the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations. [Amended 9-15-2009 by L.L. No. 8-2009]
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this local law.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this law.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than 200,000 square
feet and are performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Town Engineer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Town of Islip on or before the effective date of this law.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this law.
G. Cemetery graves.
§ 47-4 ISLIP CODE § 47-5
45:458
§ 47-6. Inspections; guarantees; enforcement; penalties for
offenses.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The Town Engineer may require such inspections as necessary
to determine compliance with this law and may either approve
that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant
wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements of this
law and the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the
Town of Islip enforcement official at least 48 hours before any
of the following as required by the Town Engineer:
[1] Start of construction.
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
[3] Completion of site clearing.
[4] Completion of rough grading.
[5] Completion of final grading.
[6] Close of the construction season.
[7] Completion of final landscaping.
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the
required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted, except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the Town Engineer.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections. The Town Engineer
is responsible for conducting inspections of stormwater
§ 47-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47-6
45:459
management practices (SMPs). All applicants are required to
submit "as built" plans for any stormwater management practices
located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must
show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries
of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The Town Engineer may require monitoring
and reporting from entities subject to this law as are necessary to
determine compliance with this law.
(5) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when any
new connection is made between private property and the public
stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Town of Islip
the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
Subsection A(3), Inspection of stormwater facilities after project
completion above.
B. Performance guarantees.
(1) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Town of Islip in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Town of
Islip may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable
letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution
which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names
the Town of Islip as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an
amount to be determined by the Town of Islip based on submission
of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
§ 47-6 ISLIP CODE § 47-6
45:460
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in
force until the surety is released from liability by the Town of
Islip, provided that such period shall not be less than one year
from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that
the facility(ies) has(have) been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection
has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Town of Islip. Per-annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is
released from liability.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to
construction, may be required to provide the Town of Islip with an
irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution or
surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control facilities, both during
and after construction and until the facilities are removed from
operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate
and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control facilities, the Town of Islip may draw upon the account to
cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Town of Islip may require entities subject to
this law to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
law.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Town of Islip determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this local law, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant;
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
land development activity into compliance with this local law
and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
§ 47-6 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47-6
45:461
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Town of Islip may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this law. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order.
The stop-work order shall be in effect until the Town of Islip
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and
the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a
stop-work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or
monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures
authorized in this local law.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this local law may be restrained by
injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this local
law shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second
offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $2,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and
upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $700 nor more $5,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of
conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally,
violations of this local law shall be deemed misdemeanors and for
such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
local law, the Town Engineer may prevent the occupancy of said
building or land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Town of Islip
may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall
become a lien upon the property until paid.
§ 47-6 ISLIP CODE § 47-7
45:462
§ 47-7. Fees for services.
The Town of Islip may require any person undertaking land development
activities regulated by this law to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates
for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by the
Town of Islip or performed by a third party for the Town of Islip.
§ 47-8. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this local law shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this local law.
Chapter 47A
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 16.
§ 47-7 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47-8
45:463

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 47A-1. Mud and gravel deposits.
§ 47A-2. Block parties. [Added 1-22-1974]
A. No person shall cause or permit any accumulation of sand, gravel,
cinders, topsoil, mud, earth or other materials to be placed, deposited,
tracked or washed upon any street or highway.
B. State law reference. The authority of the Town to prohibit the deposit of
dirt, filth, waste or rubbish in any street, highway, sidewalk or public
place is established pursuant to Town Law, § 130, Subdivision 7.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLOCK — A portion of a Town highway enclosed on each end by cross
streets or highways upon which lots, plots or parcels of land abut which
are partially or wholly occupied by buildings.
PARTY — A social gathering for entertainment purposes only.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind whatsoever.
B. Permits. No person or group of persons shall operate or conduct a block
party in the Town of Islip without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Town Clerk as provided in this section. No permit shall be issued by
the Town Clerk unless and until 2/3 of the houses abutting on the said
block shall have consented in writing to the application. Each house
shall have one vote; and if there is a dispute within the house, the
majority of those individuals over 18 who are residents shall determine
the vote of the house. Not more than one block party shall be permitted
for the same block in any one calendar year. As a condition of such
permit, those having the party agree to abide by emergency requests
for ingress and egress of residents of the block.
C. Applications. The applicant for a block party permit shall file the same
not less than one month prior to the date requested. The applicant for
the permit shall file said application on forms furnished by the Town
Clerk. The application shall state and show the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number, if any, of the applicant.
(2) Date of party.
(3) Hours of party.
(4) Name of street to be closed.
(5) Names, address and consents in writing of 2/3 of the houses on the
block.
§ 47A-1 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47A-2
45:465
§ 47A-3. Liability of Town. [Added 10-3-1978]
(6) Certification that not more than one block shall be closed at any
one time pursuant to the application and that there are no other
block party applications pending within three blocks therefrom.
(7) Name of persons to be responsible for the removal of garbage,
litter and debris from the block and the date and time of removal
which shall be not later than 24 hours after the closing time of the
party.
(8) Certification that all the information provided in the application is
accurate. [Added 3-10-2009]
D. Fees.
(1) The applicant shall furnish a certified check in the sum of $50 to
guarantee the cleanup performance on the part of the applicant or
his agent. The applicant consents to allow the Town of Islip to apply
said sum of $50 towards cleanup upon failure of the applicant to do
so in the time required therefor. In no event shall any portion of
said cleanup fee be refunded until the Superintendent of Highways
shall have inspected the block and approved of the release of said
fee or the balance remaining.
(2) In addition to the cleanup fee set forth in Subsection D(1), the sum
of $25 shall accompany the application provided for in Subsection
C, said fee to be required as a nonrefundable filing fee. [Amended
3-10-2009]
(3) No block party shall charge a fee for any item, including but not
limited to admission, food or beverage. [Added 10-1-1991]
E. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable by a fine in an amount not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed 50 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such hereunder.
F. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof.
G. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
§ 47A-2 ISLIP CODE § 47A-3
45:466
§ 47A-4. Termination order. [Added 10-1-1991]
The Police Department and any other law or code enforcement entity shall
have the authority to order termination of the block party for violation of the
conditions of the permit or for violation of any Town, County or state law or
ordinance.
§ 47A-5. (Reserved)
§ 47A-6. (Reserved)
§ 47A-7. (Reserved)
A. No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Islip or any of its
employees for damages or injuries to persons or property sustained by
reason of any highway, street, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
highway or street marking, traffic sign, signal or device, tree, tree limb
or other property owned or maintained by the Town of Islip being
defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless written
notice of such defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
condition of such highway, street, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
highway or street marking, traffic sign, signal or device, tree, tree limb,
or other property was actually given to the Town Clerk or Commissioner
of Public Works and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable
time after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the defect,
danger, obstruction or condition complained of, and no such action shall
be maintained for damages or injuries to persons or property sustained
solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any highway,
street, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway or street marking,
traffic sign, signal or device or other property owned or maintained by
the Town of Islip unless written notice specifying the particular place
was actually given to the Town Clerk or Commissioner of Public Works
and there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be
removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a
reasonable time after receipt of such notice. [Amended 8-21-1984;
12-17-1985]
B. The Commissioner of Public Works shall transmit in writing to the Town
Clerk, within five days after the receipt thereof, all written notices
received by him pursuant to this section and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of
the Town Law. The Town Clerk shall cause all written notices received
by him or her, pursuant to this section and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the
Town Law to be presented to the Town Board within five days of the
receipt thereof or at the next succeeding Town Board meeting,
whichever shall be sooner.
C. This section shall supersede in its application to the Town of Islip
Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
D. This section shall take effect immediately.
§ 47A-3 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47A-8
45:467
§ 47A-8. (Reserved)
§ 47A-9. (Reserved)
§ 47A-10. (Reserved)
§ 47A-11. (Reserved)
§ 47A-12. (Reserved)
§ 47A-13. (Reserved)
§ 47A-14. (Reserved)
§ 47A-15. (Reserved)
§ 47A-16. (Reserved)
§ 47A-8 ISLIP CODE § 47A-16
45:468
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
§ 47A-17. Snow and ice removal; general maintenance.
Each owner or occupant of any house or other building and any owner
or person entitled to possession of any vacant lot and any person having
charge of any church or any public building in the Town shall, during the
winter season or during the time snow shall continue on the ground, keep
the sidewalk in front of the lot or house free from obstruction by snow or ice
and icy conditions and shall at all times keep the sidewalk in good and safe
repair and maintain it in a clean condition and free from filth, dirt, weeds or
other obstructions or encumbrances.
§ 47A-18. (Reserved)
§ 47A-19. Obstructing sidewalks prohibited; exception.
No person who is the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises abutting
on any street, road, highway or parkway in the unincorporated area of
the Town shall place, keep, permit or suffer to be placed or kept on any
sidewalk in front of, adjoining or adjacent to his premises, any goods,
wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels, display signs or material things of any
kind or description, nor shall be in any manner obstruct any sidewalk,
nor in any manner obstruct or interfere with the use of any sidewalk; but
nothing contained in this section shall prevent persons from placing goods,
wares, merchandise or household furniture on a sidewalk temporarily while
loading or unloading it if it is done without unnecessary delay and if such
goods, wares or merchandise are not allowed or permitted to remain on the
sidewalk for a longer period than one hour.
§ 47A-20. (Reserved)
§ 47A-21. (Reserved)
§ 47A-22. (Reserved)
§ 47A-23. (Reserved)
§ 47A-24. (Reserved)
§ 47A-25. Authority of Board to require construction and repair.65
The Town Board may from time to time by resolution require the
construction or repair of sidewalks or curbs along streets, roads, highways
and parkways in the Town, as well as the construction of sidewalks along
state highways within the Town, and the repair of sidewalks constructed by
65.Editor's Note: Authority for construction and repair of sidewalks pursuant to order of the
Town Board, Town Law, Section 200-a.
§ 47A-17 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47A-25
45:469
the state along state highways in the Town at the expense of the abutting
owners, or otherwise, upon such notice and pursuant to the authority of the
requirements of Section 130, Subdivision 4, and Section 200-a of the Town
Law of the state.
§ 47A-26. Developments along private streets.
All sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveways constructed on any privately
owned street, highway or parkway of a new development shall be subject to
these regulations and comply in all respects with the regulations covering
streets, the title to which is vested in the Town. Failure to comply with
these regulations shall constitute sufficient cause for the Town to reject any
dedication of such a street.
§ 47A-27. Order to repair or reconstruct; notice.
§ 47A-28. Noncompliance by owner; payment of costs.
§ 47A-29. Permits: Town or state.
A. Whenever the Town Board adopts an order or orders directing the
abutting owners of the respective lots or parcels of land in front of
which it is desired that sidewalks or curbs be built, relaid or repaired,
or to construct them in accordance with §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40, the
Town Board shall specify the place, manner and time within which the
construction or repair shall be done, which time shall not be less than
48 hours from the time of the Town Board's order.
B. The Town Clerk shall publish a notice of the Town Board's orders
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, in a paper to be designated by
the Town Board, at least twice, the first publication of which shall be at
least 15 days before the time specified for the completion of the work,
and he shall serve a copy of the notice by registered mail upon the
owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the land in front of which it
is desired that such construction or repair shall be done.
A. Whenever a notice to construct or repair a sidewalk or curb, pursuant
to an order of the Town Board, has been served upon an owner of a lot
or parcel of land in front of which it is desired that sidewalks or curbs
be built, relaid or repaired, and the owner or occupant shall not cause
the construction or repair to be made to the sidewalk or curb as
required by the notice, the Superintendent of Highways is hereby
authorized and directed to cause the construction and repair to be
made as required by notice.
B. The Superintendent of Highways is hereby authorized to perform such
work or repair with his own forces or cause a contract to be let therefor,
and to pay for the work out of the funds to be appropriated by the Town
Board for such purposes.
§ 47A-25 ISLIP CODE § 47A-29
45:470
§ 47A-30. Assessment of costs; collection.
The Town shall be reimbursed for the cost of building, relaying or repairing
any sidewalk or curb, when made by the Superintendent of Highways
pursuant to §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40, by the owner of the respective lot
or parcel of land in front of which the construction or repair was made,
by assessment upon, and collection from, the lot or parcel of land termed
benefited by the construction or repair; so much of the actual and complete
cost upon and from each lot as shall be in just proportion to the amount
of the benefit which the improvement shall confer upon the property, and
collected in the same manner and at the same time as other ad valorem
Town charges.
§ 47A-31. Standards and specifications established by Board.
No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or permitted to be
constructed or repaired along any street, road, highway or parkway in
the Town unless such construction shall conform to the lines, grades and
specifications furnished by the Superintendent of Highways and in
conformity with all the specifications and requirements established by rules
and regulations of the Town Board.
§ 47A-32. Permit required; application; endorsement.
No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or repaired, or work
thereon commenced, until the owner of the premises in front of which the
sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed or repaired, or the authorized
agent of the owner, shall have obtained a permit therefor. Applications
for the permit required by this section shall be made in writing to the
Superintendent of Highways in such form as may be required by the Town
Board. No permit required by this section shall be issued without the
approval of the Superintendent of Highways, endorsed on the application
therefor, unless so directed by resolution of the Town Board.
A. Whenever the owner or occupant of property in front of which the Town
Board, pursuant to §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40, has ordered a sidewalk
or curb constructed or repaired, shall build, relay or repair the sidewalk
or curb called for by the notice, he shall obtain a permit therefor as
required by §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40.
B. If the location where the construction or repair is to be made shall be
upon a state highway where the sidewalks or curbs have been
constructed by the state, the permit shall be obtained from the highway
division of the State Department of Public Works in accordance with the
rules and regulations of that Department.
C. The Superintendent of Highways may require such bonds or deposits
and issue the permit subject to such terms and conditions as he may
consider necessary for the protection of the Town property.
§ 47A-29 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47A-33
45:471
§ 47A-33. Contractors not exempt.
Whenever a sidewalk or curb construction or repair is made by contract let
therefor by the Superintendent of Highways, made pursuant to §§ 47A-25
through 47A-40, the provisions of §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40 in respect to
obtaining a permit and the powers of the Superintendent of Highways on
the issuance of a permit shall apply to the contractor for the work.
§ 47A-34. Permit required in addition.
The permit required by §§ 47A-45 through 47A-40 shall be in addition to
the permit required for street openings and obstructions and shall be in
addition to any permit required for any excavation or curb cut permit if any
is required.
§ 47A-35. Permit to specify lines or grades.
A permit issued pursuant to §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40 shall specify the lines
or grades of the sidewalk, curb or gutter to be constructed or repaired and
such other directions as the circumstances may require.
§ 47A-36. Insurance required. [Amended 10-5-1982]
Unless waived or modified by the Superintendent of Highways, each
applicant for a permit required by §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40 must file with
said Superintendent an insurance policy or certificate showing proof of the
following coverages:
A. Compensation insurance. The permittee shall take out and maintain,
during the life of the permit, workers' compensation insurance for all
his employees employed at the site of the work, and in case of any of the
work being sublet, the permittee shall require the subcontractor
similarly to provide workers' compensation insurance for all of the
latter's employees, unless such employees are covered by the
protection afforded by the permittee.
B. Public liability and property damage insurance. The permittee shall
take out and maintain during the life of the permit such comprehensive
general liability insurance, including completed operations, as shall
protect him and any subcontractor performing work covered by the
permit from claims for damages for personal injury, including
accidental death, as well as from claims for property damage which
may arise from operations by himself or by any subcontractor or by
anyone directly or indirectly employed by either of them, and the
amounts of such insurance shall be as follows:
(1) Bodily injury insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000 for
bodily injuries, including wrongful death to any one person, and an
amount not less than $500,000 on account of one occurrence.
§ 47A-33 ISLIP CODE § 47A-36
45:472
§ 47A-37. Performance bond.
The applicant for a permit required by §§ 47A-25 through 47A-40 must file
a performance bond with the Superintendent of Highways in at least the
amount of the job to be performed under the permit.
§ 47A-38. Permit fee.
Except as otherwise provided by law, or where permits required by
§§ 47A-25 through 47A-40 are granted for work done at the direction of the
Superintendent of Highways, each application for such a permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of $10 for each installation, to be paid to the Town.
§ 47A-39. (Reserved)
§ 47A-40. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be an offense against
the ordinance, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $20 and
not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days for
each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(2) Property damage insurance in an amount not less than $100,000
for damages on account of any one accident, and in an amount of
not less than $200,000 for damages on account of all accidents.
C. Said policy for public liability and property damage insurance must be
so written as to include contractors' protective liability to protect the
permittee against claims arising from the operation of any
subcontractor.
D. Owner's (Town of Islip) protective liability insurance. The permittee
shall furnish to the Town, with respect to the operations he or any of his
subcontractors perform, a regular owner's protective liability policy in
the name of the Town of Islip, providing for a limit of not less than
$300,000 for all claims arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one
person and, subject to that limit for each person, a total limit of
$500,000 for all claims arising out of bodily injuries to or death of two
or more persons in any one occurrence and providing for a limit of not
less than $100,000 for all claims arising out of injury to or destruction
of property during the policy period. The coverage provided under this
policy must not be affected if the Town performs work in connection
with the permit either for or in cooperation with the permittee or as an
aid thereto, whether the same is a part of the permit or separate
therefrom, by means of its own employees or agents, or if the Town
directs or supervises the work to be performed by the permittee.
[NOTE: In lieu of the above dual limits, the permittee may provide a
combined single limit of $1,000,000.]
§ 47A-36 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47A-40
45:473
Chapter 47B
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
§ 47B-1. Legislative intent.
§ 47B-2. Definitions.
As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
blocks or sites with or without streets.
§ 47B-3. Review of application by Planning Board.
Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall apply to the Building
Department of the Town of Islip for a building permit whereby a subdivision
is involved in said application, the Building Inspector, before issuing the
permit therefor, shall submit the proposed application to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall review the application and shall determine
which improvements shall be required under the Town of Islip subdivision
requirements. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
A. The Town Board of the Town of Islip deems it necessary and proper to
regulate the building development of private lands in the Town of Islip
for the protection, good order, proper conduct, safety, health and wellbeing
of both the persons and property within the Town of Islip.
B. The Town Board of the Town of Islip deems it necessary for the proper
development and future growth and planning with regard to the real
property in the Town of Islip.
C. It is necessary and proper that pursuant to the powers granted unto the
Town of Islip by virtue of Section 10, Subsections 6 and 7, of the Statute
of Local Governments to provide and perform comprehensive and other
planning work in regard to zoning in the Town of Islip.
D. Pursuant to the Statute of Local Governments, Section 10, Subsection 1
thereof, the Town of Islip deems it proper and necessary to adopt rules
and regulations for the proper functioning of its Planning Board and
Planning Department with regard to the subdivision of real property.
A. The installation of curbs and/or sidewalks.
B. The installation of leaching basins or positive drainage.
C. The construction or reconstruction of roads fronting premises sought to
be built upon, whether or not owned by the builder and whether or not
dedicated. The dedication of land upon which curbs, sidewalks and
roads are to be built pursuant to §§ 47B-1, 47B-2 and 47B-3 hereof.
§ 47A-40 ISLIP CODE § 47B-3
45:474
§ 47B-4. Waiver of requirements; bond.
In the event the Planning Board determines that, by virtue of the nature of
the proposed application, all of the items aforesaid are not necessary it may
waive any and all of said requirements. Furthermore, in order to guarantee
the full performance of any item required the Planning Board may require a
bond.
§ 47B-5. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 47C
SUPERVISOR, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 47C-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Town of Islip Supervisor's Department
Law."
§ 47C-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 47C-3. Department established.
D. A contribution to a Town recreation fund.
E. The payment of inspection fees.
F. The installation of trees.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Supervisor's Department.
DEPUTY SUPERVISOR — The Deputy Supervisor of the Town of Islip
Department of the Supervisor's office who shall act generally for and in
place of the Supervisor.
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT — The executive assistant of the Supervisor's
Department of the Town of Islip.
SUPERVISOR — The elected public official, who shall be chief executive
officer of the Town of Islip.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Supervisor's Department. The
principal executive officer and administrative head of such Department
shall be the Supervisor, who shall be an elected official for a term of
four (4) years at such salary as may from time to time be fixed by the
§ 47B-3 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47C-3
45:475
§ 47C-4. Organization. [Amended 12-20-77 by L.L. No. 4, 1977;
6-17-80 by L.L. No. 7, 1980]
§ 47C-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 7, 1980]
Town Board. The Supervisor may serve up to three (3) four-year terms
regardless of whether said terms are served consecutively. These term
limitations shall be applied prospectively commencing with the
Supervisor elected in the November, 1995 general election. Terms of
office held prior to the November, 1995 general election shall not be
counted for term limitation purposes. The Supervisor shall be the head
of the Department with power and authority to appoint and remove
officers and employees under his jurisdiction in accordance with the
Civil Service Law and other applicable laws. [Amended 7-13-1994 by
L.L. No. 2, 199466]
B. The Supervisor is empowered herein to appoint a Deputy, who shall
generally act for and in his behalf, and who shall perform such duties as
are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of this local
law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Supervisor shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same
is required by the Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town
Board and in such form as approved by the Town Attorney.
A. The Supervisor shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department consistent with applicable
provisions of law.
B. Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the
Department shall include the following:
(1) Division of Administration.
(2) Youth Bureau.
A. The powers and duties of such Divisions therein shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Supervisor, and each of said
Divisions shall be supervised by a Division head who shall be
designated as Director.
B. The Supervisor may, with the approval of the Town Board, establish,
consolidate or abolish any Divisions now existing or hereafter created
in any such Division.
C. General powers and duties.
66.Editor's Note: This local law passed mandatory referendum 11-8-1994, Section 2 of this
local law provided that this local law is controlling over inconsistent law, specifically § 24
of the Town Law.
§ 47C-3 ISLIP CODE § 47C-5
45:476
(1) Community relations. The Supervisor's powers and duties are to
administer, manage and provide a more effective Town emphasis on
improvement of services to the citizens; to act as an ombudsman in
Town government for residents of the Town; and to research and
recommend new and improved programs of services which focus
on improving suburban life style.
(2) Governmental research. The Supervisor's powers and duties are to
administer, manage and provide advice and assistance concerning
local government matters to officials of the executive branches of
the Town government; to conduct continuing research in the major
areas of local government organization and operations to provide
information for the development of Town policies relating to
government activities and problems and for the development of
new programs and techniques to meet local public demands for
new and improved services and facilities; to help resolve specific
problems of municipal management and organization; to
coordinate state, federal, local and private agencies in the
evaluation of problems and in the delivery and integration of
specific services; and to advise on the coordination of all federal
and state suburban grant programs.
(3) Finance. The Supervisor is the chief fiscal officer of the Town of
Islip.
D. Divisions:
(1) Division of Administration. Its powers and duties are to administer,
manage, advise and assist the Supervisor in the solutions of
managerial and organizational problems involving administrative
techniques, personnel, labor relations, purchasing, electronic data
processing, internal and external communications and all other
matters related to the administration of Town government.
(2) Youth Bureau. Its powers and duties are to administer, manage and
provide for programs, projects and plans which promote and
advance the moral, physical, mental and social well-being of the
youth in the Town of Islip, which will stimulate and encourage
community interest and participation in youth programs and which,
alone or in cooperation with other persons, groups and
municipalities, will foster and cultivate a wholesome environment
for the involvement of youth in meaningful activities.
(a) Legislative intent. The Board of the Town of Islip recognizes
that the youth of Islip deserve special attention. The needs of
our youth are presently being met only with the greatest
difficulty by current existing institutions, including the family,
the school, the judicial system, religious organizations and
community groups. The purpose of this Bureau is to accept
responsibility for supplementing and strengthening these
§ 47C-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47C-5
45:477
existing institutions so that they can be aided in their tasks of
fulfilling the basic needs of our youth.
(b) Objectives of the Youth Bureau. The Youth Bureau shall be
concerned with all youth, the untroubled as well as youth in
trouble. In order to define and resolve existing problems of our
youth and to prevent the development of new problem
situations, the Bureau shall pursue the following objectives:
[1] Conduct an ongoing program of research to determine the
needs of youth in the Town of Islip.
[2] Inventory community resources capable of meeting the
needs of youth.
[3] Plan for and encourage the development of new services
considered essential for meeting needs of youth or
endorse modifications of current services.
[4] Grant financial aid to public and private agencies in order
to expand current services or to create new services for
youth.
[5] Integrate and help coordiate the services of local, public
and private agencies working with the Town's youth.
[6] Maintain a continuous research program on social
problems affecting youth and new ways of meeting the
needs created by these problems.
(c) Definitions. For the purposes of this local law, the following
words shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Town of Islip Youth Board.
BUREAU — The Town of Islip Youth Bureau.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The head of the Youth Bureau and
the executive secretary to the Youth Board.
LOCAL CORPORATIONS — Local youth development
corporations within the Town of Islip.
YOUTH — Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program designated to accomplish
the objectives of the Youth Bureau.
(d) Organization. The Youth Bureau shall operate within and shall
be subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Supervisor and upon such conditions as to qualify for state aid
under Article 19-A of the Executive Law of the State of New
York and any amendments thereto. The Bureau shall be staffed
by an Executive Director and such other personnel as shall be
deemed necessary for accomplishing the goals of the Youth
§ 47C-5 ISLIP CODE § 47C-5
45:478
Bureau. The Executive Director, pursuant to Article 19-G of the
Executive Law of the State of New York and any amendments
thereto, shall be responsible to the Supervisor for the purpose
of planning, coordinating and supplementing the activities of
public, private or religious agencies devoted in whole or in
part to the welfare and protection of the youth. The Town
of Islip Youth Board shall consist of persons representing the
fields of education, law enforcement, mental hygiene, judiciary,
welfare, business, recreation and youth organizations, who
shall be appointed by the Supervisor, with the approval of the
Town Board. The Board, in fulfilling its obligations to the Youth
Bureau, shall advise and assist community groups devoted
in whole or in part to youth, administer youth programs at
the request of the Youth Bureau and recommend legislation.
The Executive Director shall be the executive secretary of the
Board. The executive secretary shall have no vote in the official
deliberations of the Board, but shall administer to its needs
and requirements in the fulfillment of its obligations to the
Youth Bureau.
[1] Composition of the Youth Board.
[a] The Board shall consist of a minimum of thirteen (13)
and a maximum of twenty-five (25) adults and youth,
who shall be appointed by the Supervisor of the Town
of Islip, subject to confirmation by the Town Board. In
addition, the Supervisor may appoint one (1) or more
ex officio members.
[b] One (1) member of the Board shall be designated as
Chairperson for a specified term by the Supervisor,
subject to confirmation by the Town Board.
[c] Officers, other than the Chairperson, shall be elected
from and by the Board and confirmed by the
Supervisor.
[d] Members of the Board shall not be considered Town
employees for any purpose whatsoever.
[2] Terms of office.
[a] Each member of the Board shall be appointed for a
term of four (4) years, except that of the members first
appointed, five (5) shall be appointed for two (2) years,
five (5) for three (3) years and the remaining members
for four (4) years.
[b] Ex officio members shall serve at the pleasure of the
Supervisor.
[3] Vacancies and removals.
§ 47C-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47C-5
45:479
[a] Any member of the Board appointed to fill a vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be appointed for the remainder of the unexpired term
of the member whom he or she is to succeed.
[b] The Supervisor and the Town Board may remove any
member of the Board for cause.
[c] If a member of the Board is absent from three (3)
consecutive scheduled (not special) meetings and is
not excused by the Chairperson of the Board, the
Board shall declare his or her position vacant.
[d] Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled by
appointment by the Supervisor, subject to
confirmation by the Town Board.
[4] Personnel. The Board may recommend to the Supervisor
and the Town Board employment of personnel, who shall
be responsible to the Supervisor.
[5] Compensation. The Chairperson and all other members of
the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
allowed all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties set forth in § 28-10, within the
amount made available by appropriations of the Town
Board.
[6] Meetings.
[a] The Board shall meet monthly and at such additional
times as the Chairperson of the Board or a majority
thereof may determine.
[b] One-third (1/3) of the voting members shall constitute
a quorum. A majority of the quorum must approve any
action of the Board. Each voting member shall have
one (1) vote which must be cast in person. Ex officio
members shall have no vote.
[7] Powers and duties of the Board. The Board shall have the
following powers and duties:
[a] Establish local youth development corporations with
the approval of the Supervisor to oversee youth
programs in specific communities in the Town of Islip.
[b] Develop and effect policies and programs with the
approval of the Supervisor, such as guidance,
education, counseling, community involvement and
recreation, for the Board and any established local
youth bureaus.
§ 47C-5 ISLIP CODE § 47C-5
45:480
[c] Formulate and adopt rules and bylaws, with the
approval of the Supervisor, governing the activities of
the Board and its relationship to local youth bureaus.
[d] Supplement and aid in coordinating the activities of
public, private and religious agencies devoted in
whole or in part to the prevention of delinquency and
youthful offenders and serve as a consultant to such
agencies.
[e] Encourage closer cooperation between all public and
private agencies and groups so as to stimulate
employment for youth and encourage sound youth
programs.
[f] Cooperate with all public and private agencies and
groups in developing plans, programs and facilities
designed to promote the welfare of youth.
[g] Receive and expend grants with the approval of the
Supervisor from the state, federal or County
governments or from private individuals, corporations
or associations and establish a reasonable basis for
allocation of these funds to youth programs so as to
serve most effectively the objectives of this section.
[h] Approve or reject applications with the approval of the
Supervisor for federal, state and/or County financial
assistance to public and private agencies seeking to
engage in the development and expansion of
recreation and youth service projects, as defined by
the laws of the State of New York and the regulations
of the New York State Division of Youth.
[i] Devise, analyze, accept or reject plans for the creation
or expansion of recreation and youth service projects
or other youth programs and make appropriate
recommendations to the Town Board.
[j] Obtain, assemble and develop statistical records and
data, including those that reflect the incidence and
trends of delinquency and youthful crimes and
offenses in the Town.
[k] Make necessary studies and recommendations with
respect to family affairs and problems, youth
guidance, adult education, recreation, rehabilitation
of juvenile delinquents and parole, institutional or
other corrective treatment.
[l] Foster educational programs in connection with youth
problems.
§ 47C-5 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 47C-5
45:481
§ 47C-6. Special districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid for from
the funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 47C-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any statutory or other powers which may
be lawfully exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 47C-8. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole, or any
section, provision or part hereof not so adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 47C-9. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 48
TAXATION: PARTIAL EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
§ 48-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be entitled and shall be cited as "An Ordinance to Grant
a Partial Tax Exemption of Real Property to Qualified Elderly."
§ 48-2. Scope. [Amended 9-20-1983; 2-27-1990]
Real property owned by persons 65 years of age or over shall be exempt
from Town, highway, special and improvement district taxes within the
Town of Islip to the extent of the percentage of the assessed valuation set
[m] Appoint such advisory groups and committees as may
be necessary to carry out its powers and duties.
[n] Keep minutes of all meetings.
[o] Submit an annual report to the Supervisor.
[p] Submit a proposed annual budget to the Supervisor.
[q] Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the
Supervisor and/or the Town Board.
§ 47C-5 ISLIP CODE § 48-2
45:482
forth in § 48-3B herein, subject to the conditions and provisions of § 467 of
the Real Property Tax Law. Any person qualifying under this section shall
not be denied the exemption under this section if he or she becomes 65
years of age after the taxable status date and before December 31 of the
same year.
§ 48-3. Application for exemption; conditions.
A. The owner or all the owners must file an application annually in the
Assessor's office at least 90 days before the day for filing the final
assessment roll or such other time as may be hereafter fixed by law. Any
person who has been granted exemption on five consecutive completed
assessment rolls shall not be required to make application every year.
Such exemption shall be automatically granted on each assessment roll.
When tax payment is made by such person, a sworn affidavit must be
included with such payment, which shall state that such person
continues to be eligible for such exemption. [Amended 2-27-1990]
(1) The Assessor is authorized to accept an application for such
exemption after the appropriate taxable status date but not later
than the last date on which a petition with respect to complaints of
assessment may be filed, where failure to file a timely application
resulted from death of the applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother
or sister or an illness of the applicant or of the applicant's spouse,
child, parent, brother or sister which actually prevents the
applicant from filing on a timely basis, as certified by a licensed
physician. The Assessor shall approve or deny such application as if
it had been filed on or before the taxable status date. [Added
11-16-1993]
B. The income of the owner or the combined income of the owners as
defined by § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, for the calendar year
prior to the date that the application is filed, shall determine the
percentage of assessed valuation which is exempt from taxation, in
accordance with the following schedule. For the purposes of this
section, $29,000 shall constitute the maximum income exempt
eligibility level (M). [Amended 8-25-1970; 10-3-1972; 12-17-1974;
6-12-1977; 7-9-1979; 8-19-1980; 8-17-1982; 9-20-1983;
8-28-1986; 2-27-1990; 7-24-1990; 10-1-1991; 10-6-1992;
2-7-1995; 2-27-1996; 1-28-1997; 2-16-199967; 10-25-2011]
67.Editor's Note: This amendment also provided that it apply to tax years which begin after
January 1, 1999.
§ 48-2 SHOPPING CARTS: UNLAWFUL TAKING, § 48-3
45:483
§ 48-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately pursuant to law.
Chapter 48A
TAXATION: BUSINESS EXEMPTION
§ 48A-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose and intent of this local law is to grant incentive for the
expansion of existing businesses in the Town of Islip and the location of new
businesses in said Town by granting tax exemptions to said businesses for
periods as specified herein.
§ 48A-2. Special tax credits and assessments.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
More than (M) but less than (M +
$1,000)
45%
(M + $1,000 or more) but less than (M +
$2,000)
40%
(M + $2,000 or more) but less than (M +
$3,000)
35%
(M + $3,000 or more) but less than (M +
$3,900)
30%
(M + $3,900 or more) but less than (M +
$4,800)
25%
(M + $4,800 or more) but less than (M +
$5,700)
20%
(M + $5,700 or more) but less than (M +
$6,600)
15%
(M + $6,600 or more) but less than (M +
$7,500)
10%
(M + $7,500 or more) but less than (M +
$8,400)
5%
C. Title to the property must be vested in the owner or if more than one in
all the owners for at least 24 consecutive months prior to the date that
the application is filed. [Amended 1-15-1980]
D. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes, be
occupied in whole or in part by the owners and constitute the legal
residence of the owners.
§ 48-3 ISLIP CODE § 48A-2
45:484
§ 48A-3. Commencement of special assessment.
Any assessment so granted shall commence with the assessment roll
prepared on the next following taxable status date of the Town of Islip.
§ 48A-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this local law shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this local law but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part of this local law that shall be directly involved in the case or
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 48A-5. When effective.
This local law shall be effective immediately.
Chapter 48B
TAXATION: HOMESTEAD BASE PROPORTION
§ 48B-1. Title.
This local law shall be known and may be cited as the
"Taxation — Homestead Base Proportion Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 48B-2. Adoption of Real Property Tax Law § 1903.
The provisions of § 1903 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York are hereby adopted by the Town of Islip.
§ 48B-3. Authorization of Town Board to determine and adopt
homestead base proportion.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby adopts homestead base
proportions, as certified by the State Board of Equalization and Assessment,
for all assessment rolls finally filed and applicable to the levy of all taxes
A. The Assessor of the Town of Islip shall have the power and be charged
with the duty to carry out the purpose and intent of Article 4-A of the
Commerce Law, § 485 of the Real Property Tax Law and other
applicable laws of the State of New York, to grant to business facility
owners or operators exemptions from taxes and special ad valorem
levies to the extent provided in the aforesaid New York State laws.
B. The Assessor shall determine the assessed value of the exemption
pursuant to such state laws and shall grant as an exception one
hundred percent (100%) thereof for the first year and eighty percent
(80%) thereof for the second year for a period of two (2) years.
[Amended 9-21-82 by L.L. No. 4, 1982]
§ 48A-2 TAXATION: HOMESTEAD BASE PROPORTION § 48B-3
48B:485
levied thereon for each tax year subsequent to the effective date of this act
and commencing with the first assessment roll finally filed subsequent to
the effective date of this act in accordance with the provisions of Article 19
of the Real Property Tax Law and the Rules of the New York State Board of
Equalization and Assessment.
§ 48B-4. Severability.
The invalidity of any Article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or
provision of this local law shall not invalidate any other Article, sentence,
section, paragraph, clause, word or provision thereof.
§ 48B-5. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate certified
copies hereof being filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of
the State of New York.
Chapter 48C
TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT EXEMPTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Partial tax exemption for senior
citizens — See Ch. 48.
Tax exemption for businesses — See Ch. 48A.
Homestead base proportion of taxable
assessed value — See Ch. 48B.
§ 48C-1. Title.
This local law shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxation:
Handicapped Improvement Exemption Law."
§ 48C-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose and intent of this local law is to exercise the power provided
by the State Legislature in § 459 of the Real Property Tax Law authorizing
local legislation to grant real property tax exemptions to the extent of
any increases attributable to an improvement which facilitates or
accommodates the use of real property by a disabled owner-resident.
§ 48C-3. Certain improvements to be exempt.
Improvements to any real property made after June 1, 1983, and used
solely for residential purposes as a one-, two- or three-family residence
shall be exempt from real property taxation to the extent of any increase in
value attributable to such improvement if such improvement is used for the
purpose of facilitating and accommodating the use and accessibility of such
real property by:
§ 48B-3 ISLIP CODE § 48C-3
48C:486
§ 48C-4. Application for exemption.
An application for a handicapped improvement exemption shall be made on
a form prescribed by the State Board and shall be filed with the Assessor on
or before taxable status date. This application must be accompanied with a
statement of disability, pursuant to § 48C-5.
§ 48C-5. Proof of disability required.
To qualify as physically disabled for the purposes of this local law, an
individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified statement from a
physician licensed to practice in the state, on a form prescribed and made
available by the State Board, which states that the individual has a
permanent physical impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more
of such individual's major life activities, except that an individual who has
obtained a certificate from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually
Handicapped, stating that such individual is legally blind, may submit such
certificate in lieu of a physician's certified statement.
§ 48C-6. Review of application.
The Assessor shall review the application in accordance with § 459 of
the Real Property Tax Law to determine if the applicant qualifies for a
handicapped improvement exemption. If the exemption is granted, the
amount of the exemption shall be entered in a separate column on the
assessment roll.
§ 48C-7. Duration of exemption.
If granted, the exemption shall continue on the real property until the
improvement ceases to be necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use
and accessibility of the property by a resident who is physically disabled.
§ 48C-8. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
A. A resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled; or
B. A member of a resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if
such member resides at the real property.
§ 48C-3 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48C-8
48C:487
Chapter 48D
TAXATION: PARTIAL EXEMPTION FOR VETERANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation: partial exemption for senior
citizens — See Ch. 48.
Taxation: business exemption — See Ch. 48A.
Taxation: homestead base proportion — See
Ch. 48B.
Taxation: handicapped improvement
exemption — See Ch. 48C.
Taxation: business investment
exemption — See Ch. 48E.
Taxation: home improvement
exemption — See Ch. 48F.
Taxation: exemption for persons with
disabilities — See Ch. 48G.
Taxation: exemption for volunteer fire fighters
and ambulance workers — See Ch. 48H.
Taxation: exemption for Cold War
veterans — See Ch. 48I.
Taxation: Superstorm Sandy assessment
relief — See Ch. 48J.
§ 48D-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxation — Partial
Exemption for Veterans Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 48D-2. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York, as amended by Chapter 477 the Laws of 1996 of the State of New
York, are hereby adopted by the Town of Islip.
§ 48D-3. Preservation of ratio of exemption to assessment.
If the ratio between the exemption granted under this section and the
total assessed value of the real property for which such exemption has
been granted increases or decreases due only to a change in the manner
of assessing real property in the tax district in which such property is
located, the amount of the exemption heretofore or hereafter granted shall
be increased or decreased in such subsequent year in the same proportion
as the total assessed value has been increased or decreased.
§ 48D-4. Alternative veterans exemption.
A. The maximum exemption allowable to qualifying residential real
property exempt from taxation, under § 458-a of the New York Real
Property Tax Law, to the extent of 15% of the assessed value, shall be
increased from $27,000 to $54,000.
B. The maximum exemption allowable to veterans who served in a combat
theater or combat zone of operations, as documented by the award of
the United States Campaign Ribbon or Service Medal, under § 458-a of
§ 48C-8 ISLIP CODE § 48D-4
48C:488
§ 48D-5. Exemption granted.
For the purposes of determining eligibility for a partial veterans exemption
from real property taxes under § 458 of the New York Real Property Tax Law
and for the purposes of determining eligibility for a veterans alternative
exemption under § 458-a of the New York Real Property Tax Law, the
following shall apply:
§ 48D-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
the New York Real Property Tax Law, is hereby increased from $18,000
to $36,000.
C. The maximum exemption allowable, as an additional exemption
available to a veteran who has received a compensation rating from a
New York veterans organization or the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, calculated as the
product of the assessed value multiplied by 50% of the veteran's
disability rating under § 458-a of the New York Real Property Tax Law,
is hereby increased from $90,000 to $180,000.
A. For the purpose of this section, title to that portion of real property
owned by a cooperative apartment corporation in which a tenantstockholder
of such corporation resides and which is represented by his
share or shares of stock in such corporation as determined by its or
their proportional relationship to the total outstanding stock of the
corporation, including that owned by the corporation, shall be deemed
to be vested in such tenant-stockholder.
B. The proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by such
cooperative apartment corporation determined by the relationship of
such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such entire
parcel and the building thereon owned by such cooperative apartment
corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to
exemption from taxation pursuant to this section, and any exemption so
granted shall be credited by the appropriate taxing authority against
the assessed valuation of such real property; the reduction in real
property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by the cooperative
apartment against the amount of such taxes otherwise payable by or
chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, a tenant-stockholder who
resides in a dwelling that is subject to the provision of Articles 2, 4, 5 or
11 of the New York Private Housing Financing Law shall not be eligible
for an exemption pursuant to this section.
§ 48D-4 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48D-6
48C:489
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, partnership, entity or circumstance directly involved in the
controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
§ 48D-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate certified
copies hereof being filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
Chapter 48E
TAXATION: BUSINESS INVESTMENT EXEMPTION
§ 48E-1. Title.
This local law shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxation: Business
Investment Exemption."
§ 48E-2. Scope.
This local law shall apply to the increase in assessed value attributable
to construction, alteration, installation or improvement of commercial,
business or industrially used real property which is eligible for partial
exemption from taxation, special ad valorem levies and services to the
extent provided in § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York.
§ 48E-3. Reduction of exemption.
The per centum of exemption otherwise allowed pursuant to § 485-b is
reduced to zero percent (0%).
§ 48E-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this local law shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the judgment
shall not affect or impair or invalidate the remainder of this local law,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section or part of this local law that shall be directly involved in the case or
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 48E-5. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect January 1, 1987.
§ 48D-6 ISLIP CODE § 48E-5
48C:490
Chapter 48F
TAXATION: HOME IMPROVEMENT EXEMPTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax exemption for home improvements for
handicapped — See Ch. 48C.
§ 48F-1. Legislative purpose and findings.
The Town Board finds that the reluctance of homeowners to undertake
capital improvements to their property threatens the stability of
neighborhoods and the housing stock within the Town of Islip. The Town
Board further finds that one (1) of the most significant reasons homeowners
fail to undertake such improvements is the increased tax assessment that
results from such improvements. As a result, the Town Board finds that the
health, welfare and safety of the Town of Islip is affected by the reluctance
to undertake capital improvements to residential homes, and there exists a
legitimate public purpose for certain exemptions from increases in assessed
valuation resulting from such improvements in certain instances.
§ 48F-2. Exempt structures; criteria for exemption.
§ 48F-3. Extent of exemption.
Such buildings shall be exempt for a period of one (1) year to the extent of
one hundred per centum (100%) of the increase in assessed value thereof
attributeable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement and for an
additional period of seven (7) years; provided, however, that the extent
of such exemption shall be decreased by twelve and one-half per centum
A. Residential buildings reconstructed, altered or improved subsequent to
the effective date of this local law shall be exempt from taxation and
special ad valorem levies to the extent provided hereinafter, provided
that all of the following criteria are met:
(1) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this local law.
(2) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000.).
(3) The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the
building reconstructed, altered or improved is at least five (5) years
old.
B. For the purposes of this local law, the terms "reconstruction,"
"alteration" and "improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance
or repairs.
§ 48E-5 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48F-3
48C:491
(12 1/2%) of the initial exemption each year during such additional period;
provided, further, that such exemption shall be limited to eighty thousand
dollars ($80,000.) in increased market value of the property attributable to
such reconstruction, alteration or improvement, and any increase in market
value greater than such amount shall not be eligible for the exemption
pursuant to this section. For the purposes of this section, the market value
of the reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall be equal to the
increased assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or
improvement divided by the most recently established state equalization
rate for the Town of Islip.
§ 48F-4. Forms required to be filed.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such building on a form prescribed by the State Board. The original of such
application shall be filed with the Assessor of the Town of Islip on or before
the next taxable status date of the Town of Islip. A copy thereof shall be filed
with the State Board.
§ 48F-5. Approval of application.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this local law, he shall approve the application, and such
building shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem
levies as herein provided commencing with the assessment roll prepared
after the taxable status date referred, to in § 48F-4. The assessed value of
any exemption granted pursuant to this local law shall be entered by the
Assessor on the portion of the assessment roll provided for property exempt
from taxation.
§ 48F-6. Definitions.
For the purposes of this local law, as used in this local law, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any legal building or structure designed and
occupied exclusively for residential purposes by not more than two (2)
families.
§ 48F-7. Cessation of use.
In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this local
law ceases to be used solely for residential purposes or title thereto is
transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the owner, the
exemption granted pursuant to this local law shall cease. In addition, a
building shall not qualify for an exemption pursuant to this local law if an
accessory apartment as defined in § 68-600 et seq.68 shall be established as
a result of the reconstruction, alteration or improvement undertaken.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Zoning, Art. XLVII, Accessory Apartments.
§ 48F-3 ISLIP CODE § 48F-8
48C:492
§ 48F-8. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 48F-9. When effective.
This local law shall take effect when the appropriate certified copies hereof
are filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York pursuant to
the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 48G
TAXATION: EXEMPTION FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation: Partial exemption for senior
citizens — See Ch. 48.
Taxation: business exemption — See Ch. 48A.
Taxation: homestead base proportion — See
Ch. 48B.
Taxation: Handicapped improvement
exemption — See Ch. 48C.
Taxation: Partial exemption for
veterans — See Ch. 48D.
Taxation: business investment
exemption — See Ch. 48E.
Taxation: home improvement
exemption — See Ch. 48F.
Taxation: exemption for persons with
disabilities — See Ch. 48G.
Taxation: exemption for volunteer fire fighters
and ambulance workers — See Ch. 48H.
Taxation: exemption for Cold War
veterans — See Ch. 48I.
Taxation: Superstorm Sandy assessment
relief — See Ch. 48J.
§ 48G-1. Applicability; maximum income.
A. Real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, or real
property owned by a husband, wife or both, or by siblings, at least one
of whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereafter defined, is
limited by reason of such disability shall be exempt from taxation to the
maximum extent of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof as
hereinafter provided.
B. For the purpose of this chapter the maximum income eligibility level is
provided in § 48G-5 of this chapter (represented in the hereinbelow
schedule as "M"), and the assessed valuation shall be reduced to the
extent provided in the following schedule:
§ 48F-8 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48G-1
48C:493
§ 48G-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — One who has a physical or mental
impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drug use, which
substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major life
activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working and who is
certified to receive social security disability insurance (SSDI) or
supplemental security income (SSI) benefits under the federal Social
Security Act; or is certified to receive railroad retirement disability benefits
under the federal Railroad Retirement Act; or has received a certificate
from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped stating
that such person is legally blind. An award letter from the Social Security
Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board or a certificate from the
State Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped shall be
submitted as proof of disability.
SIBLING — A brother or a sister, whether related through half blood, whole
blood or adoption.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
More than (M) but less than (M +
$1,000)
45%
(M + $1,000 or more) but less than (M
+ $2,000)
40%
(M + $2,000 or more) but less than (M
+ $3,000)
35%
(M + $3,000 or more) but less than (M
+ $3,900)
30%
(M + $3,900 or more) but less than (M
+ $4,800)
25%
(M + $4,800 or more) but less than (M
+ $5,700)
20%
(M + $5,700 or more) but less than (M
+ $6,600)
15%
(M + $6,600 or more) but less than (M
+ $7,500)
10%
(M + $7,500 or more) but less than (M
+ $8,400)
5%
§ 48G-1 ISLIP CODE § 48G-3
48C:494
§ 48G-3. Computation affected by other exemptions.
Any exemption provided by this chapter shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed; provided, however, that no parcel may receive an
exemption for the same municipal tax purpose pursuant to both this chapter
and § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 48G-4. Exemption for school purposes.
Exemption from taxation for school purposes shall not be granted in the
case of real property where a child resides if such child attends a public
school of elementary or secondary education.
§ 48G-5. Limitations.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the sum of $29,000. "Income
tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or
owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the husband or
the wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum, except that,
where the husband or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the
property due to divorce, legal separation or abandonment, then only the
income of the spouse or ex-spouse residing on the property shall be
considered and may not exceed such sum. Such income shall include
social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain
from the sale or exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a
loss from the sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax
year, net rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts, inheritances
or monies earned through employment in the federal foster
grandparent program; and any such income shall be offset by all
medical and prescription drug expenses actually paid which were not
reimbursed or paid for by insurance, if the governing board of a
municipality, after a public hearing, adopts a local law, ordinance or
resolution providing therefor. In computing net rental income and net
income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be
allowed for the exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property
held for the production of income.
B. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event that any portion of such property is
not so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation, and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this chapter.
§ 48G-3 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48G-5
48C:495
§ 48G-6. Property owned by cooperative apartment corporations.
§ 48G-7. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner, or all
of the owners, of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board and
shall be filed in the Assessor's office on or before the appropriate taxable
status date; provided, however, that proof of a permanent disability need be
submitted only in the year exemption pursuant to this section is first sought
or the disability is first determined to be permanent.
§ 48G-8. Notice and application for continuing exemption.
At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the Assessor
shall mail, to each person who was granted exemption pursuant to this
chapter on the latest completed assessment roll, an application form and a
notice that such application must be filed on or before the taxable status
date and be approved in order for the exemption to continue to be granted.
Failure to mail such application form, or the failure of such person to
receive the same, shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of
the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
C. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the disabled person; except where the disabled
person is absent from the residence while receiving health-related care
as an inpatient of a residential health-care facility, as defined in § 2801
of the Public Health Law, provided that any income accruing to that
person shall be considered income for purposes of this section only to
the extent that it exceeds the amount paid by such person or spouse or
sibling of such person for care in the facility.
A. Title to that portion of real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides,
and which is represented by his or her share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
B. That proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by a
cooperative apartment corporation determined by the relationship of
such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such entire
parcel and the buildings thereon owned by such cooperative apartment
corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to
exemption from taxation pursuant to this chapter, and any exemption so
granted shall be credited by the appropriate taxing authority against
the assessed valuation of such real property; the reduction in real
property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by the cooperative
apartment corporation against the amount of such taxes otherwise
payable by or chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
§ 48G-5 ISLIP CODE § 48G-9
48C:496
§ 48G-9. Property held in trust.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions
of this chapter shall apply to real property held in trust solely for the benefit
of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible for a real property
tax exemption, pursuant to § 48G-1, were such person or persons the owner
or owners of such real property.
§ 48G-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 20 days after filing with the Secretary
of State.
Chapter 48H
TAXATION: EXEMPTION FOR VOLUNTEER FIRE FIGHTER
AND AMBULANCE WORKERS
§ 48H-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxation: Volunteer
Fire Fighters and Volunteer Ambulance Workers Partial Exemption."
§ 48H-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to exercise the power provided by
the State Legislature in § 466-c of the Real Property Tax Law authorizing
local legislation to grant a real property tax exemption for certain volunteer
fire fighters and certain volunteer ambulance workers who meet the criteria
set forth herein.
§ 48H-3. Exemption granted. [Amended 2-15-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005; 3-20-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
Real property owned by an enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer
fire company, fire department, or incorporated voluntary ambulance
service, or such enrolled member and spouse, or the unremarried spouse of
a deceased enrolled member, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of
10% of the assessed value of such property for Town purposes, exclusive of
special assessments.
§ 48H-4. Criteria for exemption.
A. Such exemption shall not be granted to an enrolled member of an
incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department, or incorporated
voluntary ambulance service residing in such Town unless:
(1) The applicant resides in the Town which is served by such
incorporated volunteer fire company or fire department or
incorporated voluntary ambulance service; [Amended 2-15-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 48G-9 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48H-4
48C:497
§ 48H-4.1. Continuation of exemption for unremarried spouses;
restrictions. [Added 3-20-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(2) The property is the primary residence of the applicant;
(3) The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that, in the event any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the
remaining portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided
by this law; and
(4) The applicant has been certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company or fire
department as an enrolled member of such incorporated volunteer
fire company or fire department for at least five years, or the
applicant has been certified by the authority having jurisdiction for
the incorporated voluntary ambulance service as an enrolled
member of such incorporated voluntary ambulance service for at
least five years.
B. Any enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department. or incorporated voluntary ambulance service who accrues
more than 20 years of active service and is so certified by the authority
having jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department, or incorporated voluntary ambulance service, shall be
granted the exemption as authorized by this section for the remainder
of his or her life as long as his or her primary residence is located within
the Town of Islip.
A. Unremarried spouses of deceased enrolled members of an incorporated
volunteer fire company, fire department, or incorporated voluntary
ambulance service may continue any exemption claimed under such
statutes by the deceased enrolled member, provided that either:
(1) Such unremarried spouse is certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department, or incorporated voluntary ambulance service as an
unremarried spouse of a deceased enrolled member of such
incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department, or
incorporated voluntary ambulance service, and:
(a) Such deceased volunteer had been an enrolled member for at
least 20 years; and
(b) Such deceased volunteer and unremarried spouse had been
receiving the exemption for such property prior to the death of
such volunteer.
(2) Such unremarried spouse is certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department, or incorporated voluntary ambulance service as an
§ 48H-4 ISLIP CODE § 48H-4.1
48C:498
§ 48H-5. Application for exemption.
§ 48H-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
law or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation, firm,
partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, partnership, entity or circumstance directly involved in the
controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
§ 48H-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate certified
copies hereof being filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
unremarried spouse of an enrolled member of such incorporated
volunteer fire company, fire department, or incorporated voluntary
ambulance service who was killed in the line of duty, and:
(a) Such deceased volunteer had been an enrolled member for at
least five years; and
(b) Such deceased volunteer had been receiving the exemption
prior to his or her death.
B. This section shall take effect on the first of January next succeeding the
date on which it shall have become a local law and shall apply to the
taxable status dates occurring on or after such date.
A. Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Assessor of the
Town of Islip on or before the taxable status date on a form as
prescribed by the State Board of Real Property Services.
B. Incorporated volunteer fire companies, fire departments, and
incorporated volunteer ambulance services shall file lists of its enrolled
members eligible for the exemption provided by this law with the
Assessor of the Town of Islip on or before the taxable status date on a
form as prescribed by the State Board of Real Property Services.
C. No applicant who is a volunteer fire fighter or volunteer ambulance
worker, who by reason of such status is receiving any benefit under the
provisions of any other law on the effective date of this section, shall
suffer any diminution of such benefit because of the provisions of this
section.
§ 48H-4.1 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48H-7
48C:499
Chapter 48I
TAXATION: EXEMPTION FOR COLD WAR VETERANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Partial tax exemption for veterans — See Ch.
48D.
§ 48I-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxation — Exemption
for Cold War Veterans Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 48I-2. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York are hereby adopted by the Town of Islip.
§ 48I-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty for a period of more than 365 days in the United States Armed Forces,
during the time period from September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, was
discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions and has been
awarded the Cold War recognition certificate as authorized under Public
Law 105-85, the 1998 National Defense Authorization Act.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the State
Board pursuant to Title 1 of Article 12 of this chapter69 for use in a special
assessing unit as defined in § 1801 of this chapter.70
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final equalization rate
established by the State Board pursuant to Article 12 of this chapter.71
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
69.Editor's Note: See Title 1 of article 12 of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
70.Editor's Note: See § 1801 of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
71.Editor's Note: See article 12 of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
§ 48H-7 ISLIP CODE § 48I-3
48C:500
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation and only the remaining portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided by this chapter. Such property shall be the primary residence of
the Cold War veteran or the unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran, unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is
absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization for
up to five years.
SERVICE CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated, in the line of duty on active military, naval
or air service.
§ 48I-4. Exemption granted for qualifying residential real property.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed $12,000 or the product
of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the
assessing unit or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class
ratio, whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential
real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value of such property multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption
shall not exceed $40,000 or the product of $40,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit or, in the case of a
special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
C. Limitations.
(1) The exemption from taxation provided by this subdivision shall be
applicable to Town of Islip taxation only.
(2) If a Cold War veteran receives the exemption under Chapter 48D of
the Code of the Town of Islip, the Cold War veteran shall not be
eligible to receive the exemption under this chapter.
(3) The exemption provided by Subsection A of this section shall be
granted for a period of 10 years. The commencement of such tenyear
period shall be governed pursuant to this subsection. Where a
§ 48I-3 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48I-4
48C:501
§ 48I-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, partnership, entity or circumstance directly involved in the
controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
§ 48I-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate certified
copies hereof being filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
Chapter 48J
TAXATION: SUPERSTORM SANDY ASSESSMENT RELIEF
qualified owner owns qualifying residential real property on the
effective date of this chapter, such ten-year period shall be
measured from the assessment roll prepared pursuant to the first
taxable status date occurring on or after the effective date of
this chapter. Where a qualified owner does not own qualifying
residential real property on the effective date of this chapter, such
ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment roll
prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring at
least 60 days after the date of purchase of qualifying residential
real property; provided, however, that should the veteran apply
for and be granted an exemption on the assessment roll prepared
pursuant to a taxable status date occurring within 60 days after
the date of purchase of residential real property, such ten-year
period shall be measured from the first assessment roll in which the
exemption occurs. If, before the expiration of such ten-year period,
such exempt property is sold and replaced with other residential
real property, such exemption may be granted pursuant to this
section for the unexpired portion of the ten-year exemption period.
D. Application for exemption shall be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property, on a form prescribed by the State Board. The
owner or owners shall file the completed form in the office of the
Assessor of the Town of Islip on or before the taxable status date of
March 1. The owner or owners of the property shall be required to refile
each year. The applicant shall refile on or before March 1. Any applicant
convicted of willfully making any false statement in the application for
such exemption shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the Penal
Law.
§ 48I-4 ISLIP CODE § 48J-1
48C:502
§ 48J-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Taxation: Superstorm Sandy Assessment
Relief Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 48J-2. Legislative purpose and findings.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to grant assessment relief for the
2012/2013 tax year for real property located in the Town of Islip impacted
by Superstorm Sandy.
§ 48J-3. Adoption of Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief Act.
The provisions of the State of New York Superstorm Sandy Assessment
Relief Act are hereby adopted by the Town of Islip.
§ 48J-4. Election of assessment relief.
The Town of Islip hereby elects to provide assessment relief for real
property that lost the following specified percentages of its improved value
due to Superstorm Sandy as adopted or classified by the Assessor in
accordance with the New York State Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief
Act, by reducing the assessed value attributable to the improvements on the
2012/2013 tax roll, provided that any exemptions which the property may
be receiving shall be adjusted as necessary to account for such reduction in
the total assessed value, by the following percentages:
Loss of Improved Value
(percentage)
Reduction of Improved Assessed
Value
(percentage)
At least 10% but less than 20% 15%
At least 20% but less than 30% 25%
At least 30% but less than 40% 35%
At least 40% but less than 50% 45%
At least 50% but less than 60% 55%
At least 60% but less than 70% 65%
At least 70% but less than 80% 75%
At least 80% but less than 90% 85%
At least 90% but less than 100% 95%
100% 100%
§ 48J-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
§ 48J-1 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 48J-5
48C:503
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, partnership, entity or circumstance directly involved in the
controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
§ 48J-6. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon the appropriate certified
copies being filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 49
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 59.
§ 49-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Includes any single act of transporting a passenger or
passengers in a motor vehicle for hire or for compensation of any kind upon
the public streets, roads and highways within the Town of Islip.
OWNER — The owner, registered with the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles, of a motor vehicle used as a taxicab or otherwise engaged
in the business of transportation for hire within the confines of the Town of
Islip, and/or a purchaser under a conditional sales contract, a reserve title
contract, a vendor's lien agreement, or a similar agreement, who is entitled
to obtain in his or her own name proper New York State registration, of
a motor vehicle used as a taxicab or otherwise engaged in the business
of transportation for hire within the confines of the Town of Islip and/or a
person, as that term is defined herein, who is a business owner, principal,
director and/or officer of a business, and/or a person owning or controlling
one or more taxicabs operated or driven for compensation.
PASSENGER — Includes any person other than the operator/driver who is
an occupant of a taxicab upon the public streets, roads and highways of the
Town of Islip.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporations, partnership, form of business
entity and any other form of organization. For the purposes of this Chapter
49, upon a change in the identity of the owner of 20%, or more, of the
outstanding shares of a corporation or partnership, such corporation or
partnership shall be deemed to be a new and different "person."
STREET — Any street, avenue, bridge, highway, public way or public place
within the confines of the Town of Islip.
§ 48J-5 ISLIP CODE § 49-1
48C:504
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of transporting
persons for hire, except vehicles subject to the provisions of the Public
Service or Transportation Corporations Laws or vehicles under an express
written contract to provide transportation for weddings, funerals or similar
functions.
§ 49-2. Business license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of transporting
people for hire by taxicab, from point to point within the confines of the
Town of Islip, without having first obtained a license to conduct such
business from the Town Clerk. All such persons are required to maintain a
fleet of at least three vehicles to qualify for a license to operate a taxicab
business within the Town of Islip.
A. Application.
(1) To obtain a business license required by this section, or any
renewal thereof, a verified application shall be made to the Town
Clerk, upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, which
application shall set forth the following information:
(a) The name and resident address of the applicant and, if
applicant is not a natural person, the names and resident
addresses of all officers, partners, directors and stockholders
(if there are any and that they number 10 or less) of the
applicant.
(b) The make, model, year, mileage, seating capacity, vehicle
identification number and license plate number of each vehicle
to be used in said taxicab business. [Amended 5-8-2012]
(c) The registered owner of each such vehicle.
(d) The business address of the applicant.
(e) Proof of insurance as required by § 49-13 of this chapter.
[Added 5-8-2012]
(f) Any additional information the Town Clerk shall deem
necessary for the purpose of administering the provisions of
this chapter or to assist in determining the applicant’s fitness
to engage in the business of transportation for hire. [Added
5-8-2012]
(2) Fingerprints. When the business license application form has been
completed, the applicant and, if applicant is not a natural person,
all officers, partners, directors and stockholders (if there are any
and that they number 10 or less) of the applicant shall submit to
being electronically fingerprinted at Long Island MacArthur
Airport. Such fingerprints shall be compared against those prints
on file with the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Service
§ 49-1 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-2
48C:505
(DCJS) Record Review Program. The Town Clerk shall secure from
the applicant the fee required by the DCJS in the form of a check
or money order made payable to the Town of Islip. Applicants
shall comply with the application requirements of the DCJS Record
Review Program, which requires at least one form of valid photo
identification. Valid photo identification shall include U.S. passport
(unexpired or expired); permanent resident card; driver's license or
photo ID card (issued by U.S. state or territory); or, for a noncitizen,
alien registration receipt card.
B. Need and necessity.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a business license pursuant to this chapter,
the Town Clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the Need
and Necessity Committee to determine if a license should be
issued. The Committee shall consist of three members to be
appointed by the Commissioner of the Department of Aviation and
Transportation. The Committee shall meet with the applicant and
determine the need for the operation of an additional taxicab
business within the Town. If it shall determine that there is no need
or necessity for an additional taxicab business within the Town, the
application shall be denied by the Committee.
(2) After such a denial the applicant shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Committee to the Town Board who shall make the
final determination, after a public hearing, as to the need and
necessity of an additional taxicab business.
(3) If the Committee finds that there is a need and necessity for an
additional taxicab business, it shall so notify the Town Clerk who
shall then issue the license.
C. Form. A business license shall state the name and address of the
licensee and a listing of all the taxicabs used in said business by license
plate numbers and the dates of the issuance and expiration of said
business license.
D. Fee and term. The Town Board shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of
license and medallion fees as shall be necessary, pursuant to this
chapter, and the annual renewal thereof. Such fees shall be collected by
the Town Clerk and shall be the fees required under the chapter until
the same shall be amended or modified or repealed by a subsequent
resolution of the Town Board. No license fee shall be prorated.
[Amended 5-8-2012]
E. Posting and business office. A business license shall be conspicuously
posted, in full public view, in the main office of the licensee. Each
applicant for a business license shall maintain a business office within
the Town of Islip. A taxi office shall obtain all required use permits as
described in Chapter 68, Zoning, and shall obtain a proper certificate of
occupancy for any premises prior to issuance of a business license. The
§ 49-2 ISLIP CODE § 49-2
48C:506
§ 49-3. Taxicab license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a
taxicab, from point to point within the confines of the Town of Islip, without
having first obtained therefor a taxicab license from the Town Clerk. All
taxicabs licensed by the Town of Islip shall have TLC, T- or taxicab license
plates as issued by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
proper certificate of occupancy shall be presented to the Town Clerk as
part of the application to obtain a business license.
F. Renewal. Application for the renewal of a business license shall be filed
no later than May 1 of each year. The application shall be verified and
shall set forth the information listed in § 49-2A of this chapter. Forms
for the renewal application shall be supplied by the Town Clerk and
shall be requested by the licensee, in writing, no later than April 15 of
each year.
A. Application. To obtain a taxicab license as required by this section, or
any renewal thereof, a verified application shall be made to the Town
Clerk, which application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and resident address of the applicant and the registered
owner of the vehicle.
(2) The business address from which the taxicab will be used and the
business license under which it will be used.
(3) The make, model, year, seating capacity, mileage, vehicle
identification number and the license plate number. [Amended
5-8-2012]
(4) If the vehicle has been previously used as a taxicab and where.
(5) Any additional information the Town Clerk shall deem necessary for
the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter or to
assist in determining the applicant’s fitness to engage in the
business of transportation for hire. [Added 5-8-2012]
B. Form. The taxicab license shall state the name and address of the
registered owner; if the vehicle is held under a conditional sales
contract, a reserve title contract, a vendor's lien agreement or under a
similar sales agreement, the taxicab license shall state the name and
address of the person entitled to obtain proper New York State
registration for the vehicle in his or her own name. The taxicab license
for all vehicles shall also state the seating capacity; the year, make and
model; the license plate number; and the business license number
under which the taxicab is being operated.
C. Fee and term. The license fee for each motor vehicle licensed pursuant
to this section, and any renewal thereof, shall be nonrefundable and in
§ 49-2 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-3
48C:507
§ 49-4. Taxicab driver's license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or, as an owner,
to allow any person to drive or operate a taxicab or other motor vehicle
engaged in transportation of persons, for hire, from point to point within the
confines of the Town of Islip, without having first obtained a taxicab driver's
license to drive or operate such a taxicab from the Town Clerk.
an amount set by the Town Board. No license fee shall be prorated.
[Amended 5-8-2012]
D. Posting. The taxicab license shall be conspicuously posted and securely
fastened on the interior of such vehicle in such a manner as to be
readily visible to a passenger in the rear seat.
E. Identification sticker.
(1) When issuing a taxicab license, the Department of Public Safety
Enforcement shall also deliver to the licensee a sticker bearing the
taxicab license number, the vehicle license plate number and the
expiration date of the taxicab license. Each such sticker must be
securely affixed to the left front quarter panel near the driver's
door. The sticker is to remain there and shall be kept clearly visible
at all times.
(2) Should this sticker become lost, stolen or destroyed through no
fault of the licensee, the Department of Public Safety Enforcement
shall issue a duplicate sticker at a fee as set by the Town Board.
F. Renewal. Application for the renewal of a taxicab license shall be filed
no later than May 1 of each year. The application shall be verified and
shall set forth the information listed in § 49-3A of this chapter. Forms
for the renewal applications shall be supplied by the Town Clerk and
shall be requested by the licensee, in writing, no later than April 15 of
each year.
A. Application. To obtain a taxicab driver's license required by this section,
or any renewal thereof, a verified application shall be made to the Town
Clerk, upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, which application
shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and resident address of the applicant.
(2) Any other names ever used by the applicant.
(3) The applicant's place of residence for the past five-year period.
(4) The applicant's age, date of birth, color, height, weight, color of
eyes, color of hair, place of birth and citizenship.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime
and, if so, the details of such conviction. Any conviction for a felony
or any conviction for a violation of § 1192 or 1190 of the Vehicle and
§ 49-3 ISLIP CODE § 49-4
48C:508
Traffic Law or of an conviction under Articles 120, 125, 130, 135,
155 or 160 of the New York State Penal Law may act as a bar to the
granting of a taxicab driver's license.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever had an "indicated" report of
suspected child abuse or maltreatment or has ever had a finding by
the Family Court of the State of New York of an act of child neglect
or abuse as defined by Family Court Act, Art. 10, or such similar
laws as exist in any state or country.
(7) The applicant's chauffeur's license classification and license
number.
(8) Whether or not the applicant has been previously licensed in such
occupation and, if so, the details of where, when and for what
period. If such license was ever suspended or revoked, the reason
therefor and the date thereof.
(9) Whether the applicant is a registered Level 2 or Level 3 Sex
Offender, as recorded on the Division of Criminal Justice Services
Subdirectory maintained pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration
Act,72 or if the applicant has ever been the focus of an "indicated"
report to the New York State Central Registry of Child Abuse and
Maltreatment or has been found to have neglected or abused a
child as defined by New York State Family Court Act Article 10.
[Added 5-8-2012]
(10) Any additional information the Town Clerk shall deem necessary
for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter or to
assist in determining the applicant's fitness to engage in the
business of transportation for hire. [Added 5-8-2012]
B. Taxicab driver's photographs and fingerprints.
(1) All license applications shall be accompanied by two unmounted,
unretouched photographs of the applicant, showing head and
shoulders, taken within 30 days of the date of the application. Said
photographs shall be two inches by two inches in size.
(2) Fingerprints. When the application form has been completed, the
applicant shall submit himself to be electronically fingerprinted at
Long Island MacArthur Airport. Such fingerprints shall be
compared against those prints on file with the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Service (DCJS) Record Review
Program. The Town Clerk shall secure from the applicant the fee
required by the DCJS in the form of a check or money order made
payable to the Town of Islip. Applicants shall comply with the
application requirements of the DCJS Record Review Program,
which requires at lease one form of valid photo identification. Valid
photo identification shall include a U.S. passport (unexpired or
72.Editor's Note: See Correction Law § 168 et seq.
§ 49-4 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-4
48C:509
§ 49-5. Duties of taxicab drivers.
A taxicab driver shall:
expired); a permanent resident card; a driver's license or photo ID
card (issued by U.S. state or territory); or, for a noncitizen, an alien
registration receipt card.
C. Form. The taxicab driver's license shall contain the name, address, date
of birth, signature and photograph of the licensee. It shall state the
dates of issuance and expiration of the license. In addition, there shall
be sufficient blank spaces to record any suspension or revocation of the
driver's license.
D. Fee and term. The license fee for each taxicab driver's license issued
under this section shall be in an amount set by the Town Board. No
license fee shall be prorated. [Amended 5-8-2012]
E. Posting. The driver's license shall be conspicuously posted and securely
fastened on the visor on the driver's side of the taxicab.
F. Renewal. Application for the renewal of a driver's license shall be filed
no later than May 1 of each year. The application shall be verified on a
form furnished by the Town Clerk and shall contain the information
required by § 49-4A and all its subsections. The licensee shall request
these renewal forms from the Town Clerk, in writing, no later than April
15 of each year. Upon every annual renewal, the licensee shall execute
a written affidavit, sworn to under oath, before an officer empowered to
administer such oath, that the licensee has not been charged with, nor
convicted of, any crime. Upon the licensee's disclosure of such charge
or conviction, the Town Clerk shall have the discretion to issue, renew
or not. The affidavit to be executed by the licensee shall be preceded by
a written warning that knowingly making a false sworn statement
constitutes the separate crime of perjury and that the discovery of any
false statement will result in the immediate revocation of the license.
All licensees are required to notify the Town Clerk within 24 hours of
their being charged or convicted of a crime, or found to have committed
an act of child neglect or abuse as defined by Family Court Act Article
10, or such similar laws as exist in any state or country. Upon learning
that a licensee has been charged with, or convicted of, a crime, or found
to have committed an act of child neglect or abuse as defined by Family
Court Act Article 10, or such similar laws as exist in any state or
country, the Town Clerk shall have the discretionary power to suspend
or revoke the subject license. Upon every third annual renewal, the
licensee shall again undertake the fingerprint check procedure set forth
in § 49-4B(2).
A. Keep the interior and exterior of his taxicab clean at all times.
B. Transport all orderly persons upon request, unless already under hire.
§ 49-4 ISLIP CODE § 49-5
48C:510
§ 49-6. Duties of owners.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a taxicab subject to the provisions of
this chapter to:
C. Inform the Town Clerk, in writing, of any change in address within 72
hours.
D. Thoroughly search his or her taxicab for lost or misplaced items after
the discharge of each fare and surrender all items found to the taxicab
business office.
E. Inform the Town Clerk, in writing, within 24 hours of the loss or theft of
his driver's license.
F. Not transport persons without payment of a fare, except the owner of
the taxicab or a fellow employee.
G. Not transport a greater number of persons than the rated capacity of
the taxicab as listed on the license.
H. Maintain a written record of all trips, showing the time and place each
passenger engaged the taxicab and the time and place each passenger
left the taxicab, as well as the fare charged. The driver shall deliver a
copy of this record to the taxicab owner. This record shall be retained
by the driver for a period of one month.
I. Not conduct himself or herself in any manner or way that is either
dangerous or offensive to the general public.
J. Not lease, assign, or otherwise transfer his or her taxicab license.
A. Inspect and repair all damage or malfunction to or in the taxicab each
week. All said repairs and maintenance to the taxicab shall not be made
while the vehicle is on the public street, public way or public place.
B. Not allow the taxicab to be used in business if not in proper working
condition.
C. Equip and maintain each taxicab with:
(1) All-season tires or snow tires when there is snow or ice on the
streets.
(2) Interior lights, under the control of the driver, which shall fully
illuminate the passenger area when a passenger is boarding or
alighting from the vehicle.
(3) Vehicle identification. The exact name and telephone number of the
business license under which the taxicab is being operated, and the
car or vehicle number, shall be conspicuously lettered on each
longitudinal side of the exterior of the vehicle in letters at least five
inches in height, unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner
of the Department of Aviation and Transportation in writing.
§ 49-5 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-6
48C:511
§ 49-7. License record and seal.
§ 49-8. Transfer, lease or assignment of licenses.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any Person to transfer, assign
or lease, or to accept the transfer, assignment or leasing, of any license
issued under this chapter from Person to Person or from vehicle to vehicle.
Failure to comply with this provision shall be deemed sufficient cause for
the revocation or suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
and is a violation chargeable against both the transferor, assignor or leaser
D. Not allow any unlicensed taxicab driver or other unauthorized person to
operate the taxicab, and not lease, assign, or otherwise transfer his or
her taxicab license.
E. Maintain the driver's fare record, which has been delivered to the
owner, for a period of one year. If the driver fails to deliver the fare
record to the owner, the owner shall request the record from the driver
and, if still not delivered, shall inform the Town Clerk of the driver's
failure to provide the fare record. The owner shall make such record
available to the Town Clerk upon 30 days' written notice to the owner.
F. Report to the Town Clerk the loss or the theft of the taxicab license, in
writing, within 24 hours.
G. Conspicuously and securely post and maintain a fare schedule within
the taxicab and forward a copy thereof to the Town Clerk.
H. The provisions of Subdivision 50 of § 375 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
are not applicable to taxicabs registered or licensed by the Town of
Islip.
I. Maintain a proper certificate of occupancy for the taxicab business
office required by § 49-2E.
J. Not allow the taxicab to be used in business if it is more than 10 years
old or if it has in excess of 250,000 miles on the odometer, effective June
1, 2013, unless the vehicle meets Department of Motor Vehicles
requirements and passes New York State inspection. [Added
5-8-2012; amended 6-9-2015]
K. Any vehicle carrying in excess of nine passengers, such as a minibus,
must comply with New York State Department of Transportation
requirements for omnibus and paratransit vehicles. [Added 5-8-2012]
A. Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
stamped with the Seal of the Town of Islip.
B. In addition, the Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued
pursuant to this chapter. Such record shall list the complaints,
suspensions and revocations recorded against each licensee and shall
be open to view by the public during regular business hours.
§ 49-6 ISLIP CODE § 49-8
48C:512
and transferee, assignee or leasee, as well as against the holder(s) of the
taxicab business license.
§ 49-9. Loss of license.
Should any license issued pursuant to this chapter be lost or stolen through
no fault of the licensee, the Town Clerk shall issue a duplicate license for a
fee to be set by the Town Board.
§ 49-10. Lost and found articles.
All property which is lost or misplaced in the taxicab shall be kept at the
address listed on the business license under which the taxicab is operated
for a period of 24 hours. After this period, if the property is still not claimed,
it shall be brought to the appropriate precinct of the Suffolk County Police
Department, and a receipt obtained.
§ 49-11. Posted fare schedule.
§ 49-12. Inspection.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate or permit to be operated
a taxicab, from point to point within the confines of the Town of Islip,
unless there is conspicuously posted in the interior of the taxicab a
schedule of the fares to be charged for the hire of such vehicle. Such
schedule shall be legibly printed on white cardboard or similar
material, in easy view of the passenger riding in the back seat and not
less than 8.5 inches by 11 inches in size.
B. This fare schedule shall contain the following information:
(1) The minimum and the maximum fare to be charged within the Town
of Islip.
(2) The fare per mile.
(3) Any fare for transportation outside of the Town should be checked
with the office.
(4) Cost for waiting time.
(5) Fare for exclusive, one-passenger service.
(6) Cost for packages.
C. The owner or operator of the taxicab will not be allowed to collect a fare
greater than that which is posted.
A. Each and every taxicab licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to inspection by the Town of Islip Department
of Public Safety Enforcement. Said inspection shall concern the
cleanliness of the taxicab, the required safety equipment, the proper
§ 49-8 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-12
48C:513
§ 49-13. Liability insurance; proof required. [Amended 5-8-2012]
posting of licenses and other items required by this chapter and that
the taxicab is in proper working condition.
B. Should the taxicab be found to be operating while in an unclean or
unsafe condition or without the equipment and posted items required
by this chapter, the driver shall be issued a warning summons by the
Department of Public Safety Enforcement. Such summons shall state
the violation that has been discovered, and the summons shall further
state that corrective measures shall be taken within 48 hours. Proof
that the violation has been corrected or repaired shall be presented to
the Division of Special Services within the forty-eight-hour period.
C. If such proof is not received, the Department of Public Safety
Enforcement shall promptly notify the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall
mail to the owner of the taxicab by registered mail, to the business
address listed on the application, notice of a suspension hearing
regarding the taxicab license and the date of that hearing, along with
notice that the taxicab license has been temporarily suspended pending
the hearing.
A. Business owners.
(1) Owners shall, prior to issuance of their licenses and/or certificates
of operation, file with the Town Clerk memoranda of insurance for
the business, insurance for each vehicle used therein and workers'
compensation insurance.
(2) The memoranda shall set forth the following information:
(a) That the business and each vehicle is insured against public
liability in the minimum amounts required by the laws of the
State of New York for personal injury and property damage,
which insurance shall be maintained in force during the period
covered by the license. [Amended 6-9-2015; 5-24-2016]
(b) Each applicant shall, before the issuance to him of a license
under this chapter or any renewal thereof, file with the Town
Clerk a certificate of insurance that the applicant and each
motor vehicle is insured against public liability in the amounts
set forth in Subsection A(2)(a) above for personal injury and
property damage, which insurance shall be maintained in force
during the period covered by the license. Such certificate and
insurance policy shall provide that the Town of Islip shall be
given 30 days' prior written notice of cancellation. Such policy
shall not be canceled or suspended either by the insured or the
insurer unless at least 30 days' notice, in writing, of the
intention to cancel.
(c) That said insurance company shall provide the Town of Islip
with 30 days' prior written notice of cancellation.
§ 49-12 ISLIP CODE § 49-13
48C:514
§ 49-14. License fees, expirations and renewals. [Amended
5-8-2012]
(d) The name, local address and telephone number of the
insurance agent.
(3) Cancellation. If said insurance is suspended or canceled for any
reason whatsoever, the business license and all certificates of
operation for each vehicle shall be suspended until such time as a
reinstatement of said policy or memorandum of an acceptable,
current and valid policy is filed with the Town Clerk.
B. Vehicle operator. Operators while in possession of a vehicle are
responsible for having the valid, current insurance card for said vehicle
issued to the business and/or vehicle owner with them at all times.
A. Regular fees. The Town Board shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of
the following fees necessary, pursuant to this chapter, and the annual
renewal thereof. Such fees shall be collected by the Town Clerk at the
time applications are presented for issuance, replacement, substitution,
processing, waiver or hearing and shall be the fees required under the
chapter until the same shall be amended or modified or repealed by a
subsequent resolution of the Town Board.
(1) For a business license.
(2) For a taxicab license for each motor vehicle.
(3) For a taxicab driver license.
(4) For processing by the Town of fingerprints, when applicable, in
addition to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services
fee.
B. Late fees. The following additional fees shall be set by Town Board
resolution and collected by the Town Clerk at the time applications are
presented for renewal when said applications are made less than 10
days before the expiration date thereof.
(1) For a business license.
(2) For a taxicab license for each motor vehicle.
(3) For a taxicab driver license.
C. Refunds. Regular and late fees shall not be refunded in the event that
an application is denied. Late fees may be waived at the discretion of
the Town Clerk upon a showing of good cause.
D. Reductions. There shall be no reduction in fees for licenses, certificates
or permits issued for a fractional part of a year.
§ 49-13 TAXATION: HANDICAPPED IMPROVEMENT § 49-14
48C:515
§ 49-15. Taxicab operation at Long Island MacArthur Airport.
[Amended 5-8-2012]
No taxicab shall operate at the Long Island MacArthur Airport taxicab
queue line, as established by the Commissioner of the Department of
Aviation and Transportation, without the written consent of the
Commissioner of the Department of Aviation and Transportation.
§ 49-16. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 5-8-2012]
§ 49-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-8-2012]
Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of not
E. Expirations. The term of all licenses and medallions issued hereunder
shall be from June 1 or from the date of issue, if later, to the following
May 31.
F. Renewals. Applications for renewal of all licenses, certificates and
permits shall be made no earlier than 30 days prior to the expiration
date thereof. An application for renewal of any license, certificate or
permit made less than 10 days before the expiration date thereof shall
be subject to an additional penalty fee as set forth herein.
A. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing, notice of which, stating
the charges alleged, shall be mailed to the licensee by registered mail,
at the address listed on the license application, at least five days prior
to the hearing.
B. Said hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the
Commissioner of the Department of Aviation and Transportation. At the
close of the hearing, the hearing officer may suspend or revoke the
license or dismiss the charges alleged. The hearing officer must state
the facts upon which the ruling is based.
C. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be seen as
sufficient cause for the revocation or suspension of such license.
D. Conviction of a violation of the Vehicle and Traffic Law in a court of
competent jurisdiction regarding the equipment or working condition
of the taxicab shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the
taxicab license.
E. A business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be immediately revoked, without a hearing, if the business should fail to
maintain a business office within the Town of Islip.
F. Failure to maintain workers' compensation insurance in compliance
with federal and state law shall be deemed sufficient cause for the
revocation or suspension of such license.
§ 49-14 ISLIP CODE § 49-17
48C:516
less than $500 and not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 49-18. Severability. [Amended 5-8-2012]
If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part or
provision of or application directly involved in the controversy in which the
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of this chapter or the application thereof to other persons
or circumstances.
§ 49-19. Application of provisions. [Added 5-8-2012; amended
6-28-2016]
Nothing proposed by this chapter, except those provisions included in §
49-15, shall apply to persons or taxicabs engaged in the business of
transporting persons, for hire or pay, from a point outside the Town of Islip
to a point within the Town nor from a point within the Town to a point
outside the Town of Islip nor from a point outside the Town to another point
outside the Town and passing through the Town of Islip.
§ 49-20. When effective. [Added 5-8-2012]
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect immediately, except that
those licenses which have been duly issued and are presently in full force
and effect within the Town shall remain so until the expiration date printed
upon them.
Chapter 49A
TERMS OF OFFICE
§ 49A-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to increase the accountability of elected Town
Board members by limiting the number of terms of office to a total of three
four-year terms.
§ 49A-2. Limitation on terms served.
No member of the Town Board shall serve more than a total of three
terms of office, regardless of whether those terms are served consecutively.
This limitation on the number of terms served shall commence with the
November 2007 election for Town Board. Terms of office held prior to the
November 2007 election shall not be counted for purposes of limitation of
terms.
§ 49-17 TERMS OF OFFICE § 49A-3
49A:517
§ 49A-3. Supersession of state law.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii)(a)(1) and, to the extent that the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent, is intended to supersede the provisions of Town
Law § 24 and limit the number of terms of office held by a Town Board
member.
§ 49A-4. When effective; applicability.
This chapter shall be effective upon filing with the Secretary of State and
shall apply to the Town Board members elected in November 2007 and all
Town Board members elected thereafter.
Chapter 50
TOWN ATTORNEY, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 50-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Office of the Town Attorney of the
Town of Islip."
§ 50-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 50-3. Department established. [Amended 6-17-1980 by L.L. No.
9-1980]
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSISTANT TOWN ATTORNEY — The "Assistant Town Attorneys" of
the Department, who shall act generally for and in place of the Town
Attorney.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of the Office of the
Town Attorney.
DEPUTY TOWN ATTORNEY — The deputy head of the Department, who
shall act generally for and in place of the Town Attorney.
TOWN ATTORNEY — The head of the Department.
A. There shall be established herewith as a department of the Town of Islip
a department to be known as the "Town of Islip Department of the
Office of the Town Attorney." The principal executive officer and
administrative head of such Department shall be the Town Attorney,
who shall be appointed by the Town Board for the term fixed by law at
such salary as may from time to time be fixed by said Town Board. The
Town Attorney shall be appointed on the basis of his administrative
§ 49A-3 ISLIP CODE § 50-3
49A:518
§ 50-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-1980 by L.L. No.
9-1980]
experience and qualifications for the duties of such office. He shall be
the attorney for the Town Board and all of the Town officers in their
official capacity and shall be the legal counsel and representative of
the Town Board in all proceedings, undertakings or activities which
the Town Board of the Town of Islip is concerned with or involved
therein. The Town Attorney shall be the head of the Department with
power and authority to appoint or remove officers and employees under
his jurisdiction in accordance with the Civil Service Law and other
applicable laws.
B. The Town Attorney is empowered herein to appoint deputies and
assistants who shall generally act for and in his behalf and who shall
perform such duties as are vested in and imposed upon that office by
the provisions of this local law, by statute or by other lawful authority.
C. The Town Attorney shall have powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the Department, consistent with applicable
provisions of law, and at his sole discretion and judgment he may amend
or modify the allocation of responsibilities of his Department.
A. General services. The powers and duties are to:
(1) Render legal advice to all Town departments, agencies and offices,
as well as to special boards established by the Town Board.
(2) Prepare and process the execution of all leases and land
acquisitions on behalf of the Town and special districts, whether
the same are acquired by condemnation, purchase or gift. He shall
be responsible for all of the proceedings regarding condemnation.
(3) Approve, prepare and process the execution of all contracts
entered into by the Town, its agencies and departments or special
districts of the Town, including the approval of the notice to
bidders, specifications, contract documents, insurance and bonds,
where required. He shall supervise the execution and review of
contracts and the preparation of related resolutions and any and all
change orders, processing notice of liens, attending all necessary
conferences involving departments, consultants, contractors and
the rendering of legal advice and assistance during the term of the
contract.
(4) Prepare and process the execution of all special agreements
entered into by and on behalf of the Town, such as consultant
agreements and park concession agreements.
B. Law. The powers and duties are to:
§ 50-3 TERMS OF OFFICE § 50-4
49A:519
(1) Prepare, review and recommend all Town ordinances and local
laws, and amendments thereto, and related public notices and
resolutions.
(2) Review all proposed legislation introduced before the New York
State Legislature which affects or concerns Town government and,
where appropriate, advise the Town Board and affected
departments or agencies, concerning proposed legislation. He shall
prepare and submit approving or opposing memoranda to the State
Legislature or Governor, whan appropriate, and advise the Town
Board and appropriate Town officials and departments when bills
are enacted into law.
(3) Render formal legal opinions.
(4) Perform such legal research and assist or prepare legal opinions.
(5) Review all petitions and exhibits for changes of zone, special use
permits, including preparation of public notices and related
resolutions.
(6) Review all applications and petitions in relation to special and
commissioner district improvements or extensions, including
preparation of related public notices, resolutions, orders and other
required documents.
(7) Process and undertake all disciplinary proceedings.
(8) Represent the Town Board in collective bargaining and personnel
issues.
C. Litigation. The powers and duties are to:
(1) Prepare and try all litigation matters instituted by or against the
Town in all courts.
(2) Prosecute all violations of Town ordinances and local laws.
(3) Institute or defend tort claims involving the Town which are not
covered by insurance or where the Town seeks direct
reimbursement.
(4) Prepare, process and file all necessary pleadings, briefs,
memoranda of law, etc., and investigate, examine, evaluate and
process all evidentiary matters and witnesses in related legal
proceedings.
D. The Town Attorney shall be empowered to perform such other duties
and functions which are prescribed to be performed by him in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board, or lawful directive of the
Supervisor. However, the Town Attorney may delegate any of his
powers to or direct any of his duties to be performed to any Assistant
Town Attorney.
§ 50-4 ISLIP CODE § 50-4
49A:520
§ 50-5. Powers of Town Supervisor. [Amended 6-17-1980 by L.L. No.
9-1980]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be exercised
lawfully by said Supervisor.
§ 50-6. Severability. [Amended 6-17-1980 by L.L. No. 9-1980]
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 50-7. Legislative authority; when effective. [Amended 6-17-1980
by L.L. No. 9-1980]
This local law is enacted under the provisions of Article 9 of the New
York State Constitution, of the Town Law and of the Municipal Home Rule
Law of the State of New York. This local law shall take effect when the
appropriate certified copies hereof are filed with the Secretary of State and
E. Furthermore, the Town Attorney is hereby authorized and empowered,
subject to the prior approval of the Town Board, except that such prior
approval will not be required in cases of emergency, to retain and
employ private consultants, experts and other parties which the Town
Attorney deems proper and appropriate in promulgating the
responsibilities and obligations of his office.
F. 73Division of Code Enforcement. Its powers and duties are to investigate
all alleged violations of the Code of the Town of Islip or, to such end,
applicable state codes, laws, rules and regulations. The Town Attorney
may employ such investigators, zoning inspectors, ordinance
inspectors, sign inspectors, or any other personnel as may be required
to effectuate the same, within budgetary limits set by the Town Board.
The Division shall be responsible for the enforcement of all violations of
the aforesaid codes, laws, rules and regulations and/or obtaining
compliance with the same. Persons in said Division designated by the
Town Attorney in conformance with the Civil Service Law may issue
notices of violation, appearance tickets, summonses or any other
notices as permissible by law. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
any other power of the Town Attorney as provided by the Code of the
Town of Islip or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. [Added
2-9-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
73.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Division of Code Enforcement, added 2-9-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-18-2018 by L.L.
No. 2-2018.
§ 50-4 TERMS OF OFFICE § 50-7
49A:521
the Comptroller of the State of New York, pursuant to the Municipal Home
Rule Law.
Chapter 50A
TOWN BOARD, OFFICE OF
§ 50A-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Office of the Town Board of the Town
of Islip."
§ 50A-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 50A-3. Office established.
There shall be in the Town of Islip an Office of the Town Board. The
governing head of said Office shall be the member of the Town Board
who, by majority decision, shall prescribe the duties, functions and
responsibilities of the personnel and divisions of said Office. The Office of
the Town Board shall serve the needs and responsibilities of the members of
the Town Board, individually, severally or collectively, in the performance of
its legislative duties as prescribed by the Town Law of the State of New York
and any other law applicable thereto. The Councilmen and the Supervisor,
by majority decision, shall appoint and remove any officer or employee of
the Office of the Town Board under its jurisdiction not otherwise prohibited
by law.
§ 50A-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No.
8, 1980]
The members of the Town Board shall exercise and maintain such powers
as shall be necessary for the administration of the Office consistent with
applicable provisions of law or procedures pertinent thereto, including but
not limited to legislative powers.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSISTANT TO TOWN BOARD — The chief executive administrator of
the Office of the Town Board.
COUNCILMEN — The public officials elected as Councilman of the
Town of Islip.
OFFICE — The administrative body of the Town Board.
§ 50-7 ISLIP CODE § 50A-5
49A:522
§ 50A-5. Powers of Town Supervisor. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No.
8, 1980]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 50A-6. Severability. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 8, 1980]
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 50A-7. When effective. [Amended 6-17-80 by L.L. No. 8, 1980]
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 50B
TOWN CLERK, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 50B-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Office of the Town Clerk of the Town
of Islip."
§ 50B-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 50B-3. Department established.
A. Word usage. Whenever used in this local law, words used in the singular
include the plural and vice versa.
B. Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Islip Department of the Town Clerk,
which shall perform a major function of Town government.
DEPUTY TOWN CLERK — The Deputy Town Clerk appointed and
holding office pursuant to § 30, Subdivision 10, of the Town Law, who
shall act generally for and in place of the Town Clerk.
TOWN CLERK — The elected public official, who shall be the chief
executive officer of the Department.
A. There shall be in the Town of Islip a Department of the Town Clerk. The
principal executive officer and administrative head of such Department
§ 50A-5 TERMS OF OFFICE § 50B-3
49A:523
§ 50B-4. General powers and duties.
shall be the Town Clerk, who shall be elected to said office for a term
of four (4) years at such salary as may from time to time be fixed by the
said Town Board. The Town Clerk may serve up to three (3) four-year
terms regardless of whether said terms are served consecutively or
nonconsecutively. These term limitations shall be applied prospectively
commencing with the Town Clerk elected in the November, 1995
general election. Terms of office held prior to the November, 1995
general election shall not be counted for term limitation purposes.
The Town Clerk shall be the head of the Department with power and
authority to appoint and remove officers and employees under his
jurisdiction in accordance with the Civil Service Law and other
applicable laws. [Amended 7-13-1994 by L.L. No. 3, 199474]
B. The Town Clerk is empowered herein to appoint two (2) Deputies who
shall generally act for and in his behalf and who shall perform such
duties as are vested in and imposed upon that office by the provisions of
this local law, by statute or by other lawful authority. The Town Clerk
shall file, in the office of the Town Clerk, a designation of successorship
with respect to said Deputies.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Town Clerk shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk an official undertaking, if the same
is required by the Town Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town
Board and in such form as approved by the Town Attorney.
D. The Town Clerk shall have such powers as prescribed by law as shall be
necessary for the proper administration of the Department consistent
with applicable provisions of law.
A. Licenses and records. The Town Clerk administers, supervises and
manages all necessary procedures regarding the issuance of licenses
and permits authorized under law on behalf of the Town of Islip, keeps
and maintains records thereon and collects all required fees thereof.
B. Legislative administration. The Town Clerk administers, supervises,
manages and performs all functions and duties as Clerk of the Town
Board of the Town of Islip in the performance of its legislative
responsibilities; supervises all official proceedings and acts of the Town
Board; arranges the posting and publication of all public and legal
notices as required by law; and keeps and safeguards complete and
accurate records of official proceedings and acts of the Town Board and
of every board or improvement district of the Town.
C. Vital statistics. The Town Clerk administers, supervises and manages
the filing and recording of all certificates, oaths and other papers and
74.Editor's Note: This local law passed mandatory referendum 11-8-1994. Section 2 of this
local law provided that this local law shall control over inconsistent law, specifically § 24
of the Town Law.
§ 50B-3 ISLIP CODE § 50B-4
49A:524
§ 50B-5. Board of Review.
documents required by law of the Registrar of Vital Statistics of the
Town of Islip, and the issuing of certifications and verifications thereof.
D. The Town Clerk shall be empowered to perform such other duties and
functions that are prescribed to be performed by him in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful directive of the
Supervisor. However, the Town Clerk may delegate any of his powers to
or direct any of his duties to be performed to a Deputy Town Clerk or
other duly appointed assistant.
A. The Town Clerk issues licenses or permits pursuant to Town ordinances
for the following items: bingo, pursuant to Chapter 5; carters, pursuant
to Chapter 21; games of chance, pursuant to Chapter 22; peddlers,
pursuant to Chapter 39; solicitors, pursuant to Chapter 46; taxicabs,
pursuant to Chapter 49; and towing, pursuant to Chapter 51. If the
Town Clerk determines that there is a question as to whether a license
should be issued or revoked under the aforementioned chapters of the
Islip Town Code, the Clerk may refer such applications to the Board of
Review.
B. Composition; powers; procedure.
(1) The Board of Review shall be composed of the same individuals
who make up the Board of Special Permits, established under
Chapter 68, § 68-420.4, of the Islip Town Code.
(2) The Board shall have the power to review applications for licenses
and/or permits or revocations of licenses and/or permits, under the
ordinances mentioned above, and shall have the power to
recommend, for good reason, the granting, denial, revocation or
granting with certain stipulations of such licenses or permits to the
Town Clerk. All meetings of the Board shall be held in accordance
with the Open Meetings Law, Public Officers Law, § 95 et seq. In
addition, the Board shall give written notice of its meeting to each
person or entity whose application or license is scheduled to be
considered at the meeting, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and such person or entity or a representative thereof
shall have the right to be heard and present evidence and
testimony before the Board prior to its rendering a decision. The
Board is empowered to hold public hearings and issue subpoenae.
[Amended 3-15-83 by L.L. No. 1, 1983]
(3) The main purpose of the licensing procedure is to make sure that
the individuals who come into contact with the public at large are
responsible and trust-worthy. In the case of persons previously
convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses, the Board will not
recommend a denial of a license or permit unless:
§ 50B-4 TERMS OF OFFICE § 50B-5
49A:525
(a) There is a direct relationship between one (1) or more of the
previous criminal offenses and the specific license or
employment sought; or
(b) The issuance of the license would involve an unreasonable risk
to the property or to the safety or welfare of specific
individuals or the general public.
(4) In making its determination pursuant to this local law, the Board
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The public policy of this state to encourage the licensure and
employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more
criminal offenses.
(b) The specific duties and responsibilities necessarily related to
the license or employment sought.
(c) The bearing, if any, the criminal offense or offenses for which
the person was previously convicted will have on his fitness or
ability to perform one (1) or more of such duties or
responsibilities.
(d) The time which has elapsed since the occurrence of the
criminal offense or offenses.
(e) The age of the person at the time of the occurrence of the
criminal offense or offenses.
(f) The seriousness of the offense or offenses.
(g) Any information produced by the person or produced on his
behalf in regard to his rehabilitation and good conduct.
(h) The legitimate interest of the Town of Islip in protecting
property and the safety and welfare of specific individuals or
the general public.
In making its determination, the Board shall also give
consideration to a certificate of relief from disabilities or a
certificate of good conduct issued to the applicant, which
certificate shall create a presumption of rehabilitation in
regard to the offense or offenses specified therein.
(5) The Board shall make its determination within thirty (30) days of
the receipt of the papers from the Town Clerk. At the request of any
person denied a license, the Board shall provide, within thirty (30)
days of a request, a written statement setting forth the reasons for
its recommendation.
§ 50B-5 ISLIP CODE § 50B-6
49A:526
§ 50B-6. Special districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid for from
the funds duly appropriated for the purposes of such district or project.
§ 50B-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York or any other powers which may be lawfully
exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 50B-8. Fees.
The Town Clerk may establish a schedule of fees to be collected by him for:
§ 50B-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 50B-10. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
A. The filing in his office or Department of any map or written instrument
required to be so filed.
B. The preparation of any copy of a map or written instrument filed in his
office or Department.
C. Certifying any such map or written instrument.
D. Any other service rendered in connection with the work of his
Department and for which he deems it necessary to charge and to
collect a fee therefor.
§ 50B-6 TERMS OF OFFICE § 50B-10
49A:527
Chapter 51
TOWING BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Safety Board — See Ch. 52.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 59.
Abandoned and impounded property — See
Ch. 60.
Vehicular uses on Fire Island — See Ch. 61.
§ 51-1. Findings and declaration of purpose.
§ 51-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words, for the purposes
of this local law, shall have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCIDENT — Any incident or occurrence in which one or more motor
vehicles come in contact with each other, or other object, thereby causing
damage to a motor vehicle.
A. Findings. It is hereby declared and found that delay in removal of
damaged and disabled motor vehicles results in congestion of traffic
and causes accidents; that, therefore, it is of vital importance to remove
damaged and disabled vehicles from the roads as promptly as possible;
that motorists whose vehicles have become damaged and/or disabled
are frequently concerned with more pressing problems than the
removal of their vehicles, or through absence or injury are unable to do
so; that in the past, when towing services have been selected from a
rotating list maintained at the behest of the Town, motor vehicles
damaged as the result of accidents have been towed to places where
they could not be located or when located could not be repaired, thus
causing the owner loss of time, confusion and additional expense either
in the form of further towing charges or premiums paid to the shop
which ultimately repairs the vehicle; that unfair competition has
occurred among tow truck operators; and that, in the past, members of
the motoring public have been the victims of frauds, overcharges and
similar abuses in connection with towing services.
B. Declaration of purpose. It is, therefore, the purpose and intent of this
local law to establish an orderly system for the safe and expeditious
removal of damaged and/or disabled motor vehicles from the roads of
the Town of Islip; to supervise and control the operation of towing
businesses within the Town; to ensure that, when towing services are
selected from a rotating list maintained at the behest of the Town,
motor vehicles damaged and disabled as the result of accidents are
towed to convenient and certain locations where they may be lawfully
repaired; and to protect the public from frauds, overcharges and similar
abuses.
§ 50B-10 ISLIP CODE § 51-2
49A:528
APPLICANT — A person who is applying for a towing business license and/
or a medallion.
BODY SHOP — A motor vehicle repair shop as defined in, and holding a
license as required by, the State Motor Vehicle Repair Shop Registration Act
(Vehicle and Traffic Law § 398-b or any amendment thereto).
DEPOT — Any place where tow trucks and/or motor vehicles can be stored.
DRIVER — Any person driving a tow truck upon the roads in the Town.
FOR HIRE — Any incident where a fee, charge or other consideration is
directly or indirectly imposed for towing, including any case where any
person makes repairs on a towed vehicle for a consideration and no charge
is expressly imposed for the towing of such vehicle.
GARAGE — Any place where mechanical repairs of motor vehicles are
conducted.
HEAVY-DUTY TOW TRUCK — A tow truck capable of righting and towing a
motor vehicle over three tons, with a minimum fourteen-ton boom capacity.
HOLDING AREA — A leased, owned or operated garage, depot or body
shop consisting of one single or several contiguous parcel(s) of land and
comprised of an enclosed fenced area suitable for the storage of motor
vehicles.[Added 3-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
LICENSE — A certificate issued by the Town Clerk to conduct a towing
business.
LICENSEE — A person who is the holder of a valid license.
MEDALLION — Identification plate (number) assigned to a particular tow
truck by the Town Clerk.
OPERATE — Includes the control and direction of the use of a vehicle and
the use of a vehicle for towing from places within the Town.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, any unincorporated
association, a corporation or any other entity.
TOWER — A person owning or leasing or controlling one or more tow trucks
and driving or operating or causing any such vehicle to be operated upon
the public highways for hire.
TOWING — The carrying, lifting or moving of a single motor vehicle by
another motor vehicle.
TOWING BUSINESS — The operation of one or more tow trucks for hire.
TOWN — The unincorporated area of the Town of Islip, outside the
incorporated villages located within the Town of Islip, whether on private
property or on the roads of the Town of Islip.
TOW TRUCK — A motor vehicle which is designed or equipped for carrying,
lifting or moving another motor vehicle.
§ 51-3. License required; exceptions.
§ 51-2 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-3
49A:529
§ 51-4. Medallion required.
§ 51-5. Application for license and medallion.
No license or medallion shall be issued unless an application is completed
and filed with the Town Clerk on a form, prescribed by the Town Clerk,
requiring:
A. No person shall conduct a towing business in the Town without having
first obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. A person shall be deemed to be conducting a towing business within the
Town, and shall be required to obtain a license hereunder, when he
operates one or more tow trucks for hire, and either has a garage, depot
or body shop within the Town or regularly advertises or solicits towing
business, responds to calls or otherwise regularly provides towing
services within the Town.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to require a license for a tow truck to
traverse the Town, with or without a motor vehicle in tow, or to require
a license of or otherwise prevent any person not conducting a towing
business within the Town from providing towing services at the request
of an owner, operator or other person in charge of a motor vehicle.
D. A person who is towing a vehicle that he owns shall not be required to
obtain a towing license as provided for in this local law. [Added
9-5-1978; amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
A. A licensee must obtain a medallion for each tow truck operated in the
Town in connection with his towing business.
B. Each medallion must be securely affixed to the driver's door of the tow
truck it was assigned to by the Town Clerk, and shall remain there and
be clearly visible for inspection at all times the medallion is valid.
A. The name and address of the applicant, along with a certified copy of
his certificate of doing business, specifying, in the case of a partnership
or unincorporated association, the name and address of each partner or
member thereof and, in the case of a corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of incorporation, including any certificates of amendment
thereto, in addition to the name and address of each officer, director
and stockholder, except that if the corporation is listed on the stock
exchange, the names and addresses of the stockholders owning 5% or
more of the stock issued shall be included. In addition, the applicant
shall furnish the name and address of all agents and employees who
shall be authorized to operate a tow truck under the applicant's license,
as well as the operator license number of every such agent or employee
issued by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
[Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
B. The date of birth of the applicant or each partner, member, officer,
director or stockholder where applicable.
§ 51-3 ISLIP CODE § 51-5
49A:530
C. With respect to each tow truck to be operated in the Town by the
applicant for which a medallion is requested:
(1) The vehicle identification number.
(2) The license plate number.
(3) The make, model and year.
(4) The amount of liability and property damage insurance; the name
of the insurance company, policy number and expiration date of the
policy.
(5) The name and address of the owner.
(6) Whether each tow truck is equipped as required herein.
(7) Whether each tow truck is a heavy-duty wrecker.
D. The address of any and all depots, garages or body shops, whether
located inside or outside the Town, that will be used by the applicant in
connection with his towing business and which tow trucks will be
stationed at each location.
E. The name and address of a single holding area in the Town to which the
applicant will tow motor vehicles in connection with applicant's towing
business, in the absence of a designation to the contrary, in accordance
with § 51-19, by the owner or person in charge of the motor vehicle.
[Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
F. Whether the applicant wants to be placed on the accident roster, the
nonaccident roster and/or the heavy-duty roster.
G. Statement whether the applicant or, if the applicant is a partnership, an
unincorporated association or a corporation, any partner, member,
officer, director or stockholder (as defined in Subsection A above):
(1) Has within the last five years ever been convicted of a crime, and if
so, the date, crime, charge and sentence imposed.
(2) Has ever been denied a license for a tow truck or towing business,
or a license issued to the applicant has ever been suspended or
revoked, and if so, the date, the location and the circumstances
thereof.
H. A list of all valid licenses, held by the applicant, which authorize him to
conduct a towing business and/or a body shop.
I. At least one but no more than two telephone numbers where the
applicant, his agent or employees can be located at all times.
J. Fingerprints. When the application form has been completed, the
applicant shall submit himself to an officer of the Town Division of
Public Safety to be fingerprinted. A copy of such fingerprints shall be
§ 51-5 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-5
49A:531
§ 51-6. Issuance of license. [Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Upon receipt of a properly completed application and the fees, the Town
Clerk shall issue a license or renewal thereof for a towing business, unless
upon investigations:
§ 51-7. Issuance of medallion. [Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
Upon receipt of the fees, the Town Clerk shall issue a medallion or renewal
thereof for each tow truck to be operated within the Town by a licensee, if
upon inspection by the Town it is determined that the tow truck is equipped
as provided herein.
§ 51-7.1. Conditions for use of license privilege. [Added 9-15-1981
by L.L. No. 3-1981]
No person shall conduct a towing business within the Town, unless he shall
comply with the following requirements:
mailed to the Division of Criminal Justice Services, Albany, New York,
requesting a fingerprint search. The Town Clerk shall secure from
the applicant the required fee in the form of a money order made
payable, as required, to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services in the amount of the required fee, to be forwarded with
such prints.75 [Added 8-28-1979; amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985; 11-18-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986; 7-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
A. The Town Clerk determines that the applicant is an undesirable person
or incapable of properly conducting a towing business in the Town.
B. The Town Clerk determines that an applicant, who has been convicted
of a misdemeanor or felony, is unfit or undesirable to carry on a towing
business in the Town.
C. The applicant's garage, depot or body shop used in connection with his
towing business is in violation of the zoning, building or fire laws,
ordinances or regulations in the municipality in which it is located.
D. The Town Clerk finds that the applicant has made a materially false
statement or misrepresentation in his application.
A. All tow trucks used by such person shall comply with the provisions of
§ 51-7 of this local law, whether garaged inside or outside the Town, as
well as the applicable safety provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
[Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
75.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K, Temporary license, added 12-16-1980, as amended,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-7-2015.
§ 51-5 ISLIP CODE § 51-7.1
49A:532
§ 51-8. Equipment and identification for trucks.
B. All tow trucks used by such person shall be insured in accordance with
the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, and in addition, shall be
insured for liability for damage to any vehicle, without regard to
negligence, for damage caused to such vehicle during the course of
towing or winching said vehicle pursuant to this local law.
C. Each licensee shall maintain each garage, depot and body shop used in
connection with such towing business in full compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 68 of this Code, the New York State
Building Construction Code and all other applicable statutes, codes,
rules and regulations.
D. Each license shall maintain a garage, depot or body shop in the Town to
which all motor vehicles towed pursuant to this local law shall be
transported. Unless otherwise directed in writing by the owner or
operator thereof, no such motor vehicle may be transported to any
location other than such garage, depot or body shop. No such motor
vehicle shall thereafter be removed from said garage, depot or body
shop without the written consent of the owner of such motor vehicle.
E. For the purposes of this local law, each parcel of real property
comprising a single street address shall be deemed a single garage,
depot or body shop. Only one licensee may operate a towing business
from a single street address. Only one license shall be granted to any
person operating a towing business within the Town, regardless of the
number of tow trucks he may own or operate. No garage, depot or body
shop shall be designated more than once or by more than one licensee
as a holding area under this local law. Each licensee shall be permitted
only one position on the accident roster, one position on the
nonaccident roster and one position on the heavy-duty roster,
regardless of the number of tow trucks owned or operated. [Added
2-2-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982; amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985]
A. Tow trucks used to respond to calls from the nonaccident roster must
be equipped at all times with:
(1) Emergency flashing yellow lights.
(2) A CO2 or dry powder fire extinguisher with a minimum capacity of
15 pounds.
(3) At least one dozen red railroad-type flares.
(4) A dolly.
(5) Safety chains.
(6) A push bar
(7) A shovel.
§ 51-7.1 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-8
49A:533
§ 51-9. Term of license and medallion.
Every license and medallion issued hereunder shall be effective from the
date of issuance and shall expire on the first day of September following the
issuance thereof, unless earlier suspended or revoked by the Town Board as
provided herein.
§ 51-10. Nontransferability of license and medallion.
§ 51-11. Fees. [Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
The Town Board shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of license and
medallion fees as shall be necessary pursuant to this chapter. Such fees
shall be collected by the Town Clerk and shall be the fees required under
the chapter until the same shall be amended or modified or repealed by a
subsequent resolution of the Town Board. No annual fee shall be prorated
or rebated.
§ 51-12. Certification of rosters.
(8) A rigid tow bar.
(9) A lifting boom on the rear of the truck.
(10) A minimum one-and-one-half-ton power winch equipped with 150
feet of three-eighths-inch steel cable.
B. Tow trucks used to respond to calls from the accident roster and the
heavy-duty towing roster must be equipped at all times with:
(1) The equipment specified in Subsection A above.
(2) Dual rear wheels.
(3) A broom.
(4) A crowbar.
(5) A hacksaw.
C. Every tow truck operated in connection with a licensee's towing
business in the Town must have inscribed on each side thereof, in
legible letters not less than three inches high, the name and address of
the licensee.
A. No license or medallion issued hereunder shall be transferred to
another person or vehicle.
B. The licensee shall notify the Town Clerk if any tow truck for which a
medallion was issued is destroyed, sold or otherwise transferred, within
10 days thereof, and immediately return the medallion to the Town
Clerk.
§ 51-8 ISLIP CODE § 51-12
49A:534
A. The Town shall be divided into the following sections, each with its own
accident and nonaccident roster:
(1) North: to be bounded on the west by the Town of Babylon and
running northerly by the Town of Huntington; on the north by the
Town of SmithTown; on the east by the Veterans Memorial Highway
to its junction with Connetquot Brook and then running southerly
by the Connetquot Brook; on the south by the Sunrise Highway and
running westerly by Heckscher Spur and then Southern State
Parkway to the Town of Babylon line.
(2) South: to be bounded on the west by the Town of Babylon line; on
the north by the Southern State Parkway and running easterly
along Heckscher Spur and then along Sunrise Highway to
Connetquot Brook; on the east by Connetquot River and on the
south by the Great South Bay.
(3) East: to be bounded on the west by the Connetquot River and then
running northerly by the Connetquot Brook to its junction with the
Veterans Memorial Highway and then northerly along Veterans
Memorial Highway to the Town of SmithTown line; on the north by
the Town of SmithTown and running easterly by the Town of
Brookhaven; on the east by the Town of Brookhaven and on the
south by the Great South Bay.
B. The Town Clerk shall prepare and certify to the Commander of the
interested precincts of the Suffolk County Police Department the
accident rosters and nonaccident rosters, with the names of the
licensees in each section listed in the order in which the licensees
qualify for such listing. [Amended 3-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
C. The Town Clerk shall prepare and certify to the Commander of the
interested precincts of the Suffolk County Police Department a heavyduty
towing roster, with the names of the licensees listed in the order in
which the licensees qualify for such listing. The roster shall be
maintained on a Town-wide basis. [Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
D. No person shall qualify for a position on the accident roster, the
nonaccident roster or the heavy-duty roster unless he shall maintain a
holding area within the Town to which the applicant will tow all motor
vehicles picked up as a result of a call from the accident, nonaccident or
heavy-duty roster, absent a specific designation to the contrary by the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle requiring such a tow. The
holding area must consist of or include 2,000 square feet of enclosed
fenced space and no less than six-foot-high opaque fencing or
equivalent fencing, which shall be used to store all vehicles towed
thereto, and must comply with the regulations of the Town Zoning,
Building and Fire Prevention Ordinances. A licensee shall make the
holding area accessible to the owners of vehicles towed thereto.
[Added 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; amended 4-7-2015]
§ 51-12 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-12
49A:535
§ 51-13. Nonaccident roster.
§ 51-14. Accident roster.
E. Any person who legally qualified for a position on any one of the
described rosters prior to the effective date of this revision may
continue to hold a position on said roster despite the fact that he may
not presently have a holding area of 4,000 square feet, provided that:
[Added 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
(1) He shall not fail to renew his license annually.
(2) He shall comply with all other provisions of this local law, including
the enclosed fencing requirement.
A. Motor vehicles not involved in accidents, but which are disabled and
which must be removed from the road, and where the owner or other
person in charge thereof does not request the services of a specific tow
truck operator, shall be towed by licensees from the nonaccident roster
on a rotating basis.
B. In order to qualify for the nonaccident roster, the person must:
(1) Hold a valid towing business license issued pursuant to this local
law.
(2) Have at least one tow truck equipped as provided herein, with a
valid medallion affixed to it.
(3) Maintain $100,000/$300,000 of automobile liability insurance and
$25,000 of property damage insurance on each tow truck that will
be used to respond to calls from the nonaccident roster and provide
evidence of garage liability insurance covering any depot, garage
and body shop specified in the licensee's application. [Amended
3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
(4) Maintain twenty-four-hour service to answer calls to remove
disabled motor vehicles.
C. A licensee shall have one turn on the nonaccident roster regardless of
how many tow trucks he may own or operate.
D. Only tow trucks properly equipped and with medallions that have been
issued hereunder may respond to calls from the nonaccident roster.
A. Motor vehicles which are involved in accidents and which are disabled,
and whose owners do not request the services of a specific tow truck
operator, shall be towed by licensees on the accident roster on a
rotating basis.
B. In order to qualify for the accident roster, a person must:
§ 51-12 ISLIP CODE § 51-14
49A:536
§ 51-15. Heavy-duty towing roster.
(1) Hold a valid towing business license issued pursuant to this local
law.
(2) Have at least one tow truck equipped as provided herein, with a
valid medallion affixed to it.
(3) 76Maintain twenty-four-hour service to answer emergency calls to
remove damaged and disabled motor vehicles.
(4) Maintain $100,000/$300,000 of automobile liability insurance and
$25,000 of property damage insurance on each tow truck that will
be used to respond to calls from the accident roster and provide
evidence of garage liability insurance covering any depot, garage
and body shop specified in the licensee's application. [Amended
3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
C. A licensee shall have one turn on the accident roster regardless of how
many tow trucks he may own or operate.
D. Only tow trucks properly equipped and with medallions that have been
issued hereunder may respond to calls from the accident roster.
A. In order to qualify for the heavy-duty towing roster, a person must:
(1) Hold a valid towing business license issued pursuant to this local
law.
(2) Have at least one heavy-duty tow truck, equipped as provided
herein, with a valid medallion affixed to it.
(3) Maintain $100,000/$300,000 of automobile liability insurance and
$25,000 of property damage insurance on each heavy-duty tow
truck that will be used to respond to calls from the heavy-duty
towing roster and provide evidence of garage liability insurance
covering any depot, garage and body shop specified in the
licensee's application. [Amended 3-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
(4) Maintain twenty-four-hour service to answer calls to remove
damaged and disabled motor vehicles over three tons.
(5) (Reserved)77
B. When the police officer at the scene determines that heavy-duty towing
services are required, the licensee shall be called from the heavy-duty
towing roster on a rotating basis. However, such licensee shall not lose
his turn on any other roster on which his name might appear.
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which provided for the designation of a single body
shop, was repealed 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985, which also provided for the renumbering
of former Subsection B(4) and (5) as Subsection B(3) and (4), respectively.
77.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(5), which provided for the designation of a single body
shop, was repealed in its entirety 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985.
§ 51-14 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-15
49A:537
§ 51-16. Maximum permitted charges. [Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 1-2002; 3-16-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
C. A licensee shall have one turn on the heavy-duty towing roster
regardless of how many heavy-duty tow trucks he may own or operate.
D. Only heavy-duty tow trucks properly equipped and with medallions that
have been issued hereunder may respond to calls from the heavy-duty
towing roster.
A. No tower shall charge more than the maximum charges set forth herein
for each tow truck used in towing a motor vehicle picked up within the
Town and towed to a place within the Town.
B. No license shall charge more than the maximum charges set forth
herein for each tow truck used in towing a motor vehicle picked up
pursuant to §§ 51-13 through 51-15 herein when towed to the licensee's
place of business or any location in the Town designated by the owner
or person in charge of the motor vehicle.
C. The maximum charges shall be:
(1) For towing of passenger cars, regardless of weight, and all other
motor vehicles with a weight of not more than two tons, from the
accident roster: $160.
(2) For towing of passenger cars, regardless of weight, and all other
motor vehicles with a weight of not more than two tons, from the
nonaccident roster: $125.
(3) For winching: $45.00 per 1/2 hour, not to exceed $90.
(4) The labor to right an overturned passenger car, regardless of
weight, and all other motor vehicles with a weight of not more than
two tons, may not exceed $75.
(5) Storage, whether inside or outside, may not exceed $30 per day up
to 40 days.
(6) Heavy duty; for trucks, buses and all other motor vehicles with a
weight of two tons or more: $250.
(7) The labor to right an overturned truck, bus and all other motor
vehicles with a weight of more than two tons: $150 per truck hour.
(8) The labor to perform any and all cleanup at the scene of an
accident: $25.
(9) Reimbursement of oil absorbent material used to clean up vehicle
fluids will be made at the rate of $10 per bag.
(10) Yard fee (the labor to secure a disabled vehicle within an
authorized storage yard): $45.
§ 51-15 ISLIP CODE § 51-16
49A:538
§ 51-17. Review of maximum charges.
§ 51-18. Designation of licensees in rotation; posting of roster.
(11) Light-duty recovery: when extracting a disabled motor vehicle from
extreme conditions, including removal from water, wooded areas
where the disabled motor vehicle is located more than fifty feet into
the wooded area, from atop roadway dividers or any other
condition requiring special skills, manpower or additional
equipment, a fee of $45 per 1/2 hour.
D. The maximum permitted charges provided in § 51-16 shall not apply to
the heavy-duty towing for motor vehicles with a weight of 10 tons or
more.
A. The maximum charges set forth herein may be reviewed and revised at
any time by the Town Board.
B. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 51% of the persons
currently holding valid towing business licenses, the Town Board shall
conduct a public hearing and review the maximum charges set forth
herein; however, the Town Board shall conduct no more than one
review based upon such a petition in any calendar year.
A. The interested Precinct Commander of the Suffolk County Police
Department or his authorized representative shall designate licensees
from the accident, nonaccident and heavy-duty towing rosters on a
rotating basis unless the owner or other person in charge of the motor
vehicle requests the services of a specific tower and provides the police
officer at the scene with the correct name or telephone number of the
requested tower. [Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
B. Notwithstanding the fact that the owner or other person in charge of
the motor vehicle has requested the services of a specific tower, if, in
the judgment of the police officer at the scene of an accident or
disablement, an emergency exists which requires the immediate
removal of a motor vehicle which cannot be provided by the requested
tower, the police officer may call the next tower from the applicable list
for the purpose of removing the vehicle from the roadway. In this event,
the tower requested by the owner or other person in charge of the
motor vehicle shall pick up the vehicle from the location to which it was
moved by the tower called by the Police Department. The tower called
by the Suffolk County Police Department shall be entitled to charge the
owner or operator in accordance with the applicable provisions hereof.
C. The interested Precinct Commander of the Suffolk County Police
Department or his authorized representative shall post the accident,
nonaccident and heavy-duty towing rosters, which have been certified
by the Town Clerk, in a public place selected by the Suffolk County
Police Department. [Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 51-16 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-19
49A:539
§ 51-19. Location for towing and storing motor vehicle.
§ 51-20. Refusal to tow vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee on the accident, nonaccident and heavyduty
towing roster to refuse to tow away a motor vehicle after having
appeared on the scene at the request of the Suffolk County Police
Department, provided that his equipment is capable of towing the vehicle.
§ 51-21. Nonassignability of place on roster.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to assign his place on the accident,
nonaccident or heavy-duty towing roster to any other person or licensee on
the accident, nonaccident or heavy-duty towing roster.
§ 51-22. Cleaning up of debris. [Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
A tower called to the scene of an accident or disablement must clean up
any debris resulting therefrom to the satisfaction of the police officer on
the scene. Failure to do so shall result in the tower being removed from the
roster.
§ 51-23. Accidents requiring more than one tow truck.
If more than one tow truck is required at the scene of an accident, the
choice of the damaged motor vehicles to be towed shall be determined by
the order in which the licensees arrive at the scene, irrespective of the time
each was called. Each licensee that appears on the scene shall, however,
if requested, assist the police officer in clearing the motor vehicles from
the road onto the shoulders or side of the road. No additional charge shall
A. Any motor vehicle picked up in the Town must be removed to a location
designated by the owner or the person in charge of the motor vehicle.
B. When the owner or other person in charge of the motor vehicle does not
designate a place to which the motor vehicle is to be towed, in the case
of a motor vehicle involved in an accident which is damaged or disabled
and picked up as a result of a call from the accident or heavy-duty
roster, such motor vehicle shall be towed to the holding area designated
in the licensee's application pursuant to § 51-5E. [Amended 3-1985 by
L.L. No. 2-1985]
C. Whenever a motor vehicle is towed to the holding area designated in
the licensee's application pursuant to § 51-5E or to the depot, garage or
body shop used by the licensee in connection with his towing business,
as indicated on his application for a towing license, that motor vehicle
must be made accessible to the owner or the person in charge of the
motor vehicle, during storage, for the purpose of inspection to ascertain
the extent of damage, if any, to that motor vehicle. [Added 2-6-1979;
amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 51-19 ISLIP CODE § 51-23
49A:540
be made for this service. No licensee shall forfeit his right to select any
particular damaged motor vehicle by virtue of having assisted the police
officer in clearing the road.
§ 51-24. Unauthorized towing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not designated from the accident,
nonaccident or heavy-duty towing roster to tow away any motor vehicle
which has been disabled or involved in an accident, unless such removal is
with the consent and by the direction of the police officer at the scene or
the owner or person in charge of the motor vehicle.
§ 51-25. Solicitation of towing or repair work at accident scene.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit towing or repair work at the
scene of an accident or a location where a motor vehicle is disabled or
damaged, or to go to the scene of such accident or disablement for the
purpose of soliciting towing or repair work.
§ 51-26. Loss of turn on roster.
A. A licensee who cannot be reached when called by the Suffolk County
Police Department at the telephone numbers provided by him in his
application, or who declines to provide services after answering the
call, shall lose his turn on the appropriate roster and must wait for that
roster to be called in its entirety before he is eligible to be called again.
B. In any case where a licensee has not arrived at the scene within 30
minutes from the time he receives a call for service from the Suffolk
County Police Department, or where a licensee arrives at the scene with
equipment which in the opinion of the police officer on the scene is not
adequate to perform the requested services, he shall lose his turn on
the appropriate roster and shall not be entitled to receive any charges
for responding.
C. In any case where a tower requested pursuant to § 51-18 does not
arrive upon the scene within 30 minutes from the time he receives a call
for service from the Suffolk County Police Department, or where he
arrives on the scene with equipment which in the opinion of the police
officer on the scene is not adequate to perform the requested services,
the police officer may call a tower from the appropriate roster, and the
requested tower shall not be entitled to receive any charges for
responding.
D. In responding to a call, the truck or company responding must be the
truck or company assigned to that spot on the roster. Any other vehicle
responding is in violation of the Town Code and therefore subject to a
fine and/or suspension. [Added 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 51-23 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-27
49A:541
§ 51-27. Consideration for delivery of disabled vehicle.
No tower shall solicit or receive any consideration, premium or other
emolument for the delivery of any damaged or disabled motor vehicle to a
body shop.
§ 51-28. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 6-6-1978 by
L.L. No. 3-1978]
§ 51-29. Procedure for hearings. [Amended 6-6-1978 by L.L. No.
3-1978]
§ 51-30. Written authorization to tow.
A. Any license or medallion issued hereunder may be suspended by the
Town Clerk for a period to be determined by the Town Clerk after a
hearing at which the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard.
[Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
B. The Town Board may revoke or suspend any license or medallion issued
hereto if the licensee shall have been convicted of a violation of any
provision of this local law or any provision of the zoning, building or fire
prevention laws, rules or regulations of the Town of Islip relating to
premises used by the licensee in connection with his towing business,
or who has made a materially false statement or misrepresentation in
his application for a license or medallion, or if the Town Board shall
determine that the licensee is for any other reason an undependable
person or is incapable of properly conducting the towing business.
A. The Town Clerk shall notify the licensee by registered mail, return
receipt requested, that charges have been made against him/her which
may warrant a suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee
may respond by letter or in person and explain the circumstances of the
allegations. If the Town Attorney determines, after hearing both sides,
that there may be cause to suspend or revoke the license he/she shall
schedule a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by him/her at a
convenient time and place for all parties. The hearing officer shall make
a recommendation to the Town Attorney who shall, in turn, make a
recommendation to the Town Board. The Town Board shall consider the
recommendation and take such action as it sees fit. [Amended
7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
B. Upon any hearing for the suspension or revocation of a license or
medallion, the licensee involved shall be entitled to be represented by
legal counsel and to present testimony or other evidence in his own
behalf as may be relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
A. No vehicle damaged in an accident or otherwise disabled shall be
removed without a written authorization signed by the owner or other
person in charge of the motor vehicle or, if no such person is present, by
the police officer in charge thereof.
§ 51-27 ISLIP CODE § 51-30
49A:542
§ 51-31. Bill for towing and related services.
B. Such authorization shall contain the following:
(1) The make, model, year and vehicle identification number of the
motor vehicle.
(2) The name and address of the owner or person in charge of the
motor vehicle, if known.
(3) The name and badge number of the police officer in charge, if
applicable.
(4) The amount charged for the towing and related services.
(5) The location to which the vehicle will be towed and stored.
C. The signed authorization must be retained by the tower for a period of
six months from the date the vehicle was towed and shall be exhibited
upon demand to the owner or person in charge of the motor vehicle and
any official of the Town or member of the Suffolk County Police
Department investigating violations of this local law.
A. A tower shall prepare a bill, the original of which shall be furnished to
the owner or the person in charge of the motor vehicle.
B. The bill shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the tower.
(2) The full name and address of the owner or the person in charge of
the motor vehicle.
(3) The name and badge number of the police officer at the scene, if
towed at the request of the Suffolk County Police Department.
(4) The make, model, year and vehicle identification number of the
motor vehicle.
(5) An itemization of the charges for towing and related services,
broken down, as follows:
(a) Towing.
(b) Storage, giving dates.
(c) Winching.
(d) Uprighting of overturned vehicle.
(e) Dollying.
(6) The tow truck medallion number and the licensee's license number,
if applicable.
§ 51-30 TERMS OF OFFICE § 51-31
49A:543
§ 51-32. Changes in ownership; other changes.
§ 51-33. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-19-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
A violation of this local law is hereby declared to be a violation, and any
person violating the same may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
less than $250 nor greater than $500.
§ 51-34. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this local
law is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this local law.
§ 51-35. Repealer.
(7) A schedule of the maximum allowable fees as prescribed by § 51-16
hereunder. [Added 3-19-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
C. The duplicate of each bill shall be retained by the tower for a period of
six months from the date of towing. The bill shall be exhibited upon
demand to the owner or person in charge of the motor vehicle and any
official of the Town or member of the Suffolk County Police Department
investigating violations of this local law.
D. Upon payment of the bill, the licensee shall acknowledge, in writing,
receipt of the same.
A. Upon the sale or other disposition of a tow truck for which a medallion
was issued, the licensee shall, within five days thereof, notify the Town
Clerk of such sale or other disposition and surrender the medallion.
B. Where a licensee changes its name, location or telephone number,
notification thereof shall be given to the Town Clerk within five days
thereof.
A. Upon the effective date of this local law, Chapter 51 of the Code of the
Town of Islip, known as the "Tow Truck Ordinance of the Town of Islip,"
is repealed.78
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, any valid and current license and
medallion issued under the Tow Truck Ordinance of the Town of Islip
shall remain in effect until September 1, 2002. [Amended 7-16-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002]
78.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 51, Tow Trucks, was adopted 5-21-1963 and subsequently
amended.
§ 51-31 ISLIP CODE § 51-36
49A:544
§ 51-36. Effective date. [Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
This chapter shall take effect September 1, 2002.
Chapter 52
TRAFFIC SAFETY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 4.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 47A.
Tow trucks — See Ch. 51.
Traffic Safety Department — See Ch. 52A.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 53.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 59.
Abandoned vehicles and vessels — See Ch. 60.
Vehicular uses on Fire Island — See Ch. 61.
§ 52-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby finds and declares it to be in the
best interests of the citizens of the Town of Islip to create and provide for
the appointment of a Traffic Safety Board.
§ 52-2. Appointment of Board.
The Board shall be known as the "Town of Islip Traffic Safety Board" and
shall consist of a minimum of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by
the Town Board for a term not exceeding two (2) years. The presiding officer
or Chairman of the Board shall be designated by the Town Board from the
members so appointed to the Board. The Town Board shall have authority
to remove any member of said Board so appointed for cause after a public
hearing if requested. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as an original appointment.
§ 52-3. Functions of Board.
The Town of Islip Traffic Safety Board shall do the following:
A. Promote and encourage street and highway traffic safety.
B. Formulate Town-wide highway safety programs and coordinate efforts
of interested parties and agencies engaged in traffic safety education.
C. Cooperate with County and state officials in the formulation and
execution of traffic safety programs and activities.
D. Coordinate and direct all local activities related to the implementation
of the state highway safety program, as approved by the Governor of
the State of New York or by his designee.
§ 51-36 TRAFFIC SAFETY BOARD § 52-3
52:545
§ 52-4. Membership of Board.
§ 52-5. Compensation.
The members of the Town of Islip Traffic Safety Board shall serve without
compensation. Subject to the provisions of Article 16A of the Executive Law
of the State of New York, the Town Board may appropriate funds to defray
the costs and expenses of the activities of the Board in the performance
of its duties set forth hereinabove, and to accept and appropriate to said
purposes funds provided to the Town of Islip pursuant to the provisions of
the Federal Highway Safety Act of 1966.
§ 52-6. When effective.
This local law shall be effective when the appropriate certified copies are
filed with the Secretary of State and the Comptroller of the State of New
York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
E. Conduct meetings within the Town whenever and wherever the Board
shall deem it advisable and invite to such meetings parties and
agencies, public and private, interested in traffic regulation control and
safety education.
F. Promote safety education for drivers and pedestrians.
G. Obtain and assemble motor vehicle acts and data and analyze, study
and consolidate such data for educational and informational purposes.
A. Members of the Board appointed pursuant to § 52-2 hereof shall be
residents of the Town of Islip, and may be private citizens or public
officials, either elected or appointed, interested in promoting and
encouraging traffic safety. Experience in the following areas is
desirable, but not mandatory:
(1) Planning and transportation.
(2) Police.
(3) Education.
(4) Highways.
(5) Legal.
(6) Medical.
B. The Director of the Department of Traffic Safety and the liaison
Councilman for the Town Board shall be voting ex officio members of
the Board.
§ 52-3 ISLIP CODE § 52-6
52:546
Chapter 52A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 53
EMPIRE ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 53-1. Purpose.
A. Cognizant of the existence within the state of areas characterized by
persistent and pervasive poverty, high unemployment, limited new job
creation, dependence on public assistance income, dilapidated and
abandoned industrial and commercial facilities, and shrinking tax base,
the New York State Legislature enacted General Municipal Law
("GML") Article 18-B. The purpose of GML Article 18-B is to target such
areas for extraordinary economic development programs to stimulate
private investment, private business development, and job creation.
Under GML Article 18-B, various incentives are available in an area that
has been designated as an Empire Zone (formerly known as Economic
Development Zone.) Such incentives are intended to promote the
development of new business and the expansion of existing businesses
within the area through the mutual cooperation of all levels of state and
local government and the business community. Further pursuant to
§ 957(d) of the GML, additional areas, not located within Empire Zone
boundaries, may be eligible to be deemed as regionally significant
projects.
B. This chapter is required to permit the Town of Islip to make an
application for designation of portions of Central Islip and Great River
as an Empire Zone as well as to designate eligible regionally significant
projects.
C. The revitalization of the Central Islip community began with a joint
project in 1982 between the Town of Islip and New York Institute of
Technology through the renovation of the former Central Islip State
Psychiatric Center, centered around a state-approved urban renewal
plan. An essential link in this project can be provided by attracting
private business and industry to the area to recreate a major selfsustaining
economic foundation upon which the Central Islip
community can base its stability.
D. The Great River parcel of the Town of Islip Empire Zone consists of the
Sunrise Business Center ("SBC") located at 3500 Sunrise Highway. SBC
is a former Grumman Electronics Division site which was abandoned by
§ 52-6 (RESERVED) § 53-1
52A:547
§ 53-2. Boundaries.
Grumman due to overall defense sector cutbacks. SBC assists in the
growth of companies at their critical stage of incubation and relies on
Empire Zone status for its viability and economic development success.
E. It is the intent of this chapter to provide the incentive necessary to
attract such private business and industry and to maintain the
connection between such growth and the human resource base of the
Central Islip and Great River communities.
A. The Empire Zone of the Town of Islip shall consist of the following
areas:
(1) Parcel 1: Suffolk County Tax Map numbers 0500054000300038000
and 0500054000300045000.
(2) Parcel 2:
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500100000200049002 0500099000100068000
0500098000300031003 0500100000100046000
0500100000200075003 0500100000100029000
0500100000200074000 0500100000200084001
0500100000200084001 0500099000200049001
0500100000200076006 0500099000200082000
0500099000200050000 0500099000200053001
0500099000200031001 0500100000200080007
0500099000400004000 0500098000200024000
0500098000200045000 0500099000200013001
0500098000200025000 0500100000200076011
0500100000200081008 0500098000100071002
0500100000200076013 0500098000300033000
0500098000200046000 0500099000400005000
0500098000200072000 0500098000200047000
0500099000400022000 0500100000200076009
0500098000100048000 0500098000200063000
0500099000100014000 0500100000200081003
0500098000200073000 0500098000200064000
0500099000100013000 0500098000200071000
0500099000100010000 0500098000200070000
0500098000300032000 0500099000100009000
0500100000200076010 0500098000300031001
§ 53-1 ISLIP CODE § 53-2
52A:548
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500098000200069000 0500098000300030002
0500098000200077000 0500098000200068000
0500098000200067001 0500098000200076000
0500098000200075000 0500122000300040002
0500098000200074000 0500100000200082000
0500122000300056000 0500098000100064000
0500122000300055000 0500098000100068000
0500119000100089001 0500120000400006000
0500120000100025000 0500120000100014000
0500120000300076000 0500119000100059000
0500119000200068000 0500119000100081000
0500119000300046000 0500207000100003003
0500119000300003000 0500120000300099002
0500098000100067000 0500120000300093003
0500098000300055000 0500120000300061000
0500120000100005000 0500120000300022000
0500120000100008000 0500120000300060000
0500120000400001000 0500120000100007000
0500120000300059000 0500120000100006000
0500120000400002000 0500120000300001000
0500120000300058000 0500120000100009000
0500120000300057000 0500120000400003000
0500120000300056000 0500120000300055000
0500120000100004000 0500120000400009000
0500120000300054000 0500120000300021000
0500120000100045001 0500120000400004000
0500120000100003000 0500120000300053000
0500120000300063000 0500120000100002000
0500120000300002000 0500120000400005000
0500207000100002001 0500120000400007000
0500120000300025000 0500120000300020000
0500120000300003000 0500120000400008000
0500120000100018001 0500119000100110000
0500119000100049000 0500120000300005001
0500120000100019001 0500119000100051000
0500207000100002002 0500120000100016000
§ 53-2 (RESERVED) § 53-2
52A:549
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500119000100052000 0500120000400023000
0500119000100053000 0500120000400024000
0500119000100097000 0500120000100010000
0500120000300074000 0500119000100054000
0500119000100055000 0500120000100022000
0500119000100056000 0500120000100023000
0500120000100013000 0500119000100116001
0500119000100057000 0500120000100015000
0500119000300067000 0500120000400025000
0500120000100024000 0500120000300075000
0500119000100058000 0500119000300066000
0500120000400026000 0500119000100114006
0500119000100064001 0500119000300045000
0500120000300077000 0500119000100083000
0500120000400040003 0500119000100114005
0500120000100026000 0500120000100027000
0500120000400027000 0500119000300068000
0500119000100098001 0500119000100067000
0500120000300078000 0500119000300065000
0500120000100028000 0500119000100065000
0500119000100093000 0500119000100068000
0500119000300044000 0500119000100092000
0500120000100029000 0500120000300079000
0500119000100066000 0500119000100091000
0500119000100090000 0500119000300023000
0500119000300063000 0500119000100082000
0500119000300069001 0500119000300001001
0500119000100086002 0500119000300043000
0500119000100072000 0500119000300001003
0500119000100086001 0500120000300088000
0500119000100085000 0500120000300087000
0500119000300022004 0500119000200091000
0500119000200071003 0500120000300086000
0500119000100084000 0500119000200069000
0500120000300089000 0500119000300024000
0500119000100079000 0500119000200040000
§ 53-2 ISLIP CODE § 53-2
52A:550
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500120000300090002 0500119000300042000
0500119000200090000 0500119000200089000
0500119000200071002 0500119000300021000
0500119000200050000 0500119000200039000
0500119000200067000 0500119000100075000
0500119000200029000 0500120000300099001
0500119000200028000 0500120000500009000
0500119000200013000 0500119000200001000
0500119000200015000 0500120000500010000
0500119000200041000 0500119000200014000
0500119000200030000 0500120000500021000
0500119000200027000 0500119000200016000
0500120000500020000 0500120000500018000
0500119000200002000 0500120000500045000
0500120000500019000 0500120000500035000
0500120000500034000 0500120000500044001
0500120000500046000 0500120000500067000
0500120000500066000 0500120000500068000
0500120000500080000 0500120000500081000
0500120000500083000 0500142000200011000
0500141000400008000 0500142000200024000
0500141000400010000 0500141000400009000
0500141000400030001 0500142000200026000
0500141000400031000 0500207000100003026
0500141000400032000 0500141000400061000
0500141000400040001 0500142000200044000
0500141000400042001 0500141000400070000
0500141000400071000 0500141000400072000
0500141000400073000 0500141000400125000
0500141000400092000 0500141000400093000
0500141000400101000 0500141000400102000
0500141000400124000 0500141000400103000
0500141000400122000 0500141000400123000
0500141000500005000 0500164000400004002
0500164000400008003 0500164000400002000
0500207000100003029 0500207000100004010
§ 53-2 (RESERVED) § 53-2
52A:551
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500164000400008002 0500164000400004001
0500164000400007001 0500164000400003000
0500187000300001000 0500187000300015001
0500164000200090001 0500187000300002002
0500207000100003028 0500207000100004006
0500187000300009000 0500207000100004008
0500187000300016000 0500206000300004000
0500187000300014000 0500187000300013000
0500207000100004016 0500207000100004007
0500206000300002000 0500207000100004011
0500207000100003025 0500207000100003042
0500206000300003000 0500207000100003040
0500207000100004012 0500206000300001003
0500207000100004013 0500207000100003037
0500207000100004017 0500206000300001002
0500207000100003038 0500099000400007001
0500099000200011000 0500100000200081005
0500099000100043000 0500099000100069000
0500099000100012000 0500099000100011000
0500098000100069000 0500098000100059000
0500098000100058000 0500120000300062000
0500120000300062000 0500120000100001000
0500119000100109000 0500119000100108000
0500119000100069000 0500119000100070000
0500119000100071000 0500119000100073000
0500119000100080000 0500119000100078000
0500119000100077000 0500119000100074000
0500119000100096001 0500119000100096002
0500098000300066004 0500099000100042002
0500099000100042001 0500187000300012004
0500187000300012003 0500187000300012002
0500207000100003041 0500099000100042000
0500098000300045000 0500098000300065000
0500098000300046000 0500098000300066003
0500098000300066002 0500207000100003035
0500119000100096000 0500165000200111000
§ 53-2 ISLIP CODE § 53-2
52A:552
§ 53-3. Designation of Zone Certification Officer.
The Zone Certification Officer of the Empire Zone in Central Islip and
Great River shall be the Chairman or a member of the Islip Economic
Development Commission, the Assessor of the Town of Islip, or the Town
Clerk of the Town of Islip. He shall exercise all powers provided in GML
Article 18-B.
§ 53-4. Composition of Empire Zone Administrative Board.
Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers
0500207000100003031 0500207000100003016
(3) Parcel 3: Suffolk County Tax Map Numbers 0500211000100009000
and 0500211000100010000.
B. Eligible regionally significant projects shall consist of the following
areas: [Amended 1-26-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010; 6-28-2010 by L.L.
No. 6-2010]
Suffolk County Tax Map numbers
0500053000100021001 0500194000200069003
0500053000100080000 0500200000200058000
0500192000100012003 0500200000200072000
0500092000200001003 0500218000100004006
0500103000200019004 0500245000100005000
0500105000200125002 0500271000300018002
0500113000200041001 0500343000100028001
0500113000200041002 0504008000200049000
0500113000200049007 0504008000200050000
0500113000300002001 0504008000200051000
0500127000300002000 0504008000200052000
0500134000200002000 0504009000100002002
0500134000200011000 0504009000100003001
0500134000500001000 0504009000100004001
0500156000300001099 0504009000100010004
0500173000100033000 0504009000100025000
0500191000200065003
A. The Empire Zone Administrative Board should be comprised of at least
12 members as follows: the Supervisor of the Town of Islip who shall
also serve as Chairman of the Board; the members of the Town Board of
the Town of Islip; the Executive Director of the Town of Islip Community
Development Agency; the Commissioner of the Town of Islip
§ 53-2 (RESERVED) § 53-4
52A:553
§ 53-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and upon the requisite filing
in the Office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 54
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Building and Housing — See
Ch. 6.
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 18.
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 21.
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Abandoned vehicles and vessels — See Ch. 60.
Department of Waste Disposal — See Ch. 63.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. 64.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 54-1. Definitions.
HOUSE TRAILER — For the purpose of this ordinance, is any vehicle so
designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of portable
accessories in such manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a
"temporary dwelling or sleeping place" for one (1) or more persons, and
having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to
be integral with or portable by said "house trailer."
TEMPORARY DWELLING OR SLEEPING PLACE — As used herein, means
the occupancy by any person or persons of a "house trailer" for a period
not in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days within a twelve-month
period, such twelve-month period to begin when the "house trailer" was
first occupied in the Town of Islip. A change in ownership or occupant shall
not affect the one-hundred-eighty-day period in any way. Any "house trailer"
which shall have been occupied more than one hundred eighty (180) days in
any twelve-month period in the Town of Islip shall no longer be considered
a "house trailer" but shall be a dwelling and must conform with the Building
Code and Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip.79[Added 4-15-58]
Department of Human Services; the Commissioner of the Town of Islip
Planning Department; a resident of the Empire Zone; a representative
of a financial institution; a representative of a local educational
institution; a representative of a labor union; a representative of a
local business; and a representative of the Central Islip Civic Council.
[Amended 1-26-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. The Empire Zone Administrative Board shall exercise the powers
provided in GML Article 18-B.
§ 53-4 ISLIP CODE § 54-1
54:554
HOUSE TRAILER PARK — For the purpose of this ordinance, is any site, lot,
field or tract of land upon which three (3) or more occupied "house trailers"
are harbored or located, whether or not a charge is made for such harboring
or locating, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such "house trailer
park."
§ 54-2. Permit required for trailer park.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall establish, maintain,
conduct or operate any house trailer park within the limits of the Town of
Islip without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Town Board of the
Town of Islip.
§ 54-3. Issuance of permits; conditions.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip is hereby authorized to grant a permit
to any person, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to engage in the
business of establishing, maintaining, conducting or operating any house
trailer park, upon compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and
other ordinances applicable thereto and upon certification thereof by the
Assessor of the Town of Islip and the Chief of Police of the Town of Islip.
The application for the permit shall state the exact location of the site, lot,
field or tract of land upon which it is proposed to establish such house
trailer park, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that
in accepting such permit he will permit entry into such house trailer park
premises and into any building, structure, trailer, vehicle or enclosure upon
such park premises at any time that a request is made by an authorized
inspector or peace officer of the Town of Islip.
§ 54-4. Parking occupied trailer on street prohibited.
No occupied house trailer shall be parked in any street, road, avenue,
boulevard or parkway in the Town of Islip.
§ 54-5. Parking occupied trailer on premises other than trailer park
prohibited.
No occupied house trailer shall be parked on any premises in the Town
of Islip other than in a house trailer park duly authorized pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided in § 54-23 of
this ordinance.
§ 54-6. Suspension, revocation or denial of permit; judicial review.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Islip may at any time, after proper
hearing, suspend or revoke any permit granted under this ordinance,
and may, as a result of such suspension or revocation, order any trailer
park closed.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 7, Building Code; and Ch. 68, Zoning.
§ 54-1 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 54-6
54:555
§ 54-7. Registration of occupants of trailer parks; maintenance of
records.
Each house trailer park shall be provided with a custodian's office where
each house trailer entering such park shall be assigned to a plot location
and each such trailer shall be furnished with a copy of the park rules and
a copy of this ordinance. Every occupant upon entering such park shall be
registered. Said registration shall include the name and address of every
occupant of said trailer; the license numbers of all units; the state issuing
such licenses; and a statement indicating the exact location at which such
house trailer was last parked, including the state, City, Town or Village
where such last parking occurred. A copy of such registry shall be kept at
the custodian's office and shall be available for inspection by any person at
all times. Said registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained,
and no registration record shall be destroyed until sixty (60) months have
elapsed following the date of such registration. The park permit and an
approved copy of the plot plan of said park shall be conspicuously posted in
the park custodian's office at all times.
§ 54-8. Drainage and sanitation of parks.
Every such house trailer park shall be well drained and kept clean and
sanitary at all times.
§ 54-9. Certification of fire-protected construction of trailers; fire
extinguishers to be provided; inspections of trailer parks. [Amended
1-16-73, effective 2-3-73]
B. A permit may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony which in the judgment of the Town Board
renders the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the operation of a
trailer park. The Town Board shall have the power to revoke any permit
if the permittee shall at any time be convicted of a misdemeanor or
felony which in the judgment of the Town Board renders the permittee
unfit or undesirable to carry on the operation of a trailer park.
C. If the permittee or applicant considers himself aggrieved by any
decision of the Town Board with respect to the suspension or revocation
of the said license or the refusal of the Town Clerk to issue such license,
he may avail himself of his right to review any such suspension or
revocation by certiorari proceedings pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Act in the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
A. Each trailer installed in the Town of Islip after the effective date of this
ordinance provision must have conspicuously displayed and
permanently affixed to it a label from a nationally recognized
independent testing laboratory certifying the fire-protected
construction of the trailer.
B. Sufficient approved hand fire extinguishers shall be provided and
installed in each trailer park custodian's office and at such other
§ 54-6 ISLIP CODE § 54-9
54:556
§ 54-10. Waste disposal.
No garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste matter of any kind shall be disposed
of anywhere except in properly covered metal containers.
§ 54-11. Washing animals or vehicles.
No animal washing, car washing or other slop-creating practices shall be
carried on at any individual house trailer site or at any building, structure,
tent, vehicle or any other place within the house trailer park not designed
and approved for such purposes.
§ 54-12. Width and maintenance of roads; approval. [Amended
8-30-55; 6-4-74]
All roads in every trailer park must be maintained in a passable and dustfree
condition at all times and shall have a minimum width of eighteen
(18) feet. Said roads shall be kept unobstructed at all times. It shall be the
duty of the individual owners of trailers to keep sidewalks, walkways and
throughways clear of snow accumulation in areas bordering their individual
trailers. Main access roads and trailer paths within the borders of the
complex shall be kept clear of snow by the trailer park owner. The condition
of the roadways in every trailer park in the Town of Islip shall be subject to
the approval or disapproval of the Superintendent of Highways of the Town
of Islip.
§ 54-13. Illumination.
Every house trailer park shall be illuminated at night.
§ 54-14. Trailer park lot requirements. [Amended 4-15-58]
Every house trailer park site shall be subdivided and marked into
rectangular shaped lots. The area of such lot shall be not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet.
Each lot shall be adjacent to a roadway, except that upon approval of the
Town Board, eighteen-foot spurs from the main roadway may be permitted.
Said spurs shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in length and not more than three
(3) trailers shall be permitted around the perimeter of said spur. A separate
parking space for visitors' cars shall be provided on the park site.
§ 54-15. Arrangement and parking of trailers and cars.
All house trailers and cars attendant therewith shall be arranged and
parked in an orderly manner in accordance with such established park rules
as are intended to safeguard the health, safety and convenience of the
locations within the trailer park as determined by the Building
Department of the Town of Islip. Inspections of parks and buildings
shall be made by the Building Department of the Town of Islip at
intervals to be determined by the Building Department.
§ 54-9 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 54-15
54:557
patrons and to promote general uniformity of appearance in the park as a
whole.
§ 54-16. Clothes-drying area.
The trailer park permittee shall provide a suitably enclosed drying area. No
trailer shall have an individual clothes-drying area.
§ 54-17. Fencing or screening.
Fencing and/or screening to protect neighboring properties shall be erected
to the satisfaction of the Islip Town Board.
§ 54-18. Reporting of communicable diseases.
It shall be the duty of every owner, operator or custodian in charge of
any house trailer parked in the Town of Islip, in case a physician is not in
attendance, to report to the Town Health Officer and the Suffolk County
Department of Health the full name, age and temporary address of every
person who is affected or suspected to be affected with any reportable
communicable disease.
§ 54-19. Individual trailer facilities.
§ 54-20. Requisites for issuance of trailer park permits; hearing.
[Amended 4-15-1958]
An applicant to the Town Board for the use of any land as a trailer park
shall first obtain from the Department of Health of the County of Suffolk a
statement, in writing, as to their approval for the establishment of proper
sanitation facilities and water supply for such proposed trailer park,
together with a plan showing clearly the extent and area to be used for such
park. In determining the suitability of such use, the Town Board shall give
consideration to the effect of the proposed park site on adjacent property,
and further, no such permits shall be granted for a trailer park in any
residence district having a higher classification than Residential D.80 No
permit shall be granted until after public hearing.
A. Every trailer shall have it own sanitary facilities and bathing and
washing facilities. All wires, pipes, conduits for all utility purposes must
be underground, except for the necessary connections to a utility
stanchion.
B. No other structures or additions shall be added to any trailer, except
that suitable awnings may be attached to a trailer.
80.Editor's Note: The Residential D district formerly existed prior to 12-12-1967. See
Appendix Ch. A78, Zoning Prior to December 12. 1967.
§ 54-15 ISLIP CODE § 54-21
54:558
§ 54-21. Ownership of trailers; renting prohibited.
Each trailer entering the park must be owned by the occupant. It is
specifically understood that no trailers shall be rented by the permittee.
§ 54-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall
establish, maintain, conduct and operate a house trailer park without a
permit, and every permittee or his agent, park attendant or any occupant of
any house trailer who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 54-23. Exceptions to application of ordinance.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to:
§ 54-24. Time for compliance; proviso. [Amended 4-15-58]
Any house trailer parks or individual house trailers now occupied or in
use at the this ordinance or any amendment thereto takes effect, which
do not conform with the provisions of this ordinance and its amendments,
must be brought to full conformity within six (6) calendar months after
this ordinance and any amendment thereto takes effect, or the use and/or
occupancy of the same must be discontinued; provided that the minimum
area of any lot in a house trailer park for which a permit was issued before
January 16, 1958 shall not be required to exceed one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet with a minimum frontage of thirty (30) feet.
§ 54-25. Severability. [Amended 4-15-58]
Should any section or provision of this ordinance or any amendment thereto
be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance or any part thereof except the
part which was declared invalid.
§ 54-26. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Any provisions of any previous ordinance or any previous ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
A. Boy Scout camps.
B. Girl Scout camps.81
81.Editor's Note: Former Subsections C and D concerning the occupancy of house trailers as
guest houses, which immediately followed, were repealed 5-7-1991.
§ 54-21 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 54-27
54:559
§ 54-27. Effective date.
This ordinance is to be in force and shall take effect on and after May 30,
1955.
Chapter 55
TRAPPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shellfish — See Ch. 44. Trawling and eel dredging — See Ch. 56.
§ 55-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board hereby finds and declares that a unique problem exists
in the Town of Islip in relation to the control and regulation of trapping
therein. Composed as it is of many diverse communities varying in
population density, the Town must, therefore, attempt to provide
appropriately for both rural and suburban concerns within its borders.
While the trapping of wildlife is provided for by state law and is justified and
appropriate in many situations, there is no doubt that in highly populated
areas this activity can and often does constitute a danger to domestic
animals and individuals. For this reason, it is hereby determined that the
Town of Islip, as the unit of government best able to flexibly regulate and
monitor this situation, should be empowered to regulate the trapping of
wildlife in said Town.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFENSE — The setting of one (1) trap.
PROPERTY — All public and private real property in the Town of Islip.
SET — The setting up, placing, depositing or leaving of any trap on any
property.
TRAP — Any device which is commonly used to snare or kill beaver, otter,
fisher, mink, muskrat, skunk or raccoon, including but not limited to
conibear and leghold traps.
§ 55-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall set a trap on any property within the Town of Islip.
§ 54-27 ISLIP CODE § 55-4
55:560
§ 55-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall,
for each and every offense, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.) or
be imprisoned for thirty (30) days, or both.
§ 55-5. Severability.
If any section, provision or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
Chapter 56
TRAWLING AND EEL DREDGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Shellfish — See Ch. 44.
§ 56-1. Trawling and dredging restricted.
Under authority granted by Chapter 535, Laws of 1930, and Article 9,
Section 130 of the Town Law, to promote the general welfare of the
community, the protection and preservation of the property of the Town of
Islip and of its inhabitants, the benefit of trade and all other matters relative
thereto, no person shall at any time engage in eel dredging or trawling by
the use of nets accompanied by cutting boards and/or chain over that land
under water owned by the Town of Islip.
§ 56-2. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.) for any such offense, and
in addition to such penalty, the person violating the same shall be deemed a
disorderly person and such violation shall constitute disorderly conduct.
§ 56-3. Repeal of prior ordinance.
The provisions of an ordinance known as "Trawling Ordinance" and which
became effective October 1, 1940 are hereby repealed as of June 1, 1945.
§ 56-4. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective on June 1, 1945.
§ 55-4 TRAWLING AND EEL DREDGING § 56-4
56:561
Chapter 57
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Control Department — See Ch.
10A.
Nature Preserve Trust — See Ch. 13.
Environmental Council — See Ch. 13A.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Protection of trees in parks — See Ch. 37, Art.
I.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 67.
Be it enacted by the Town Board of the Town
of Islip as follows:
§ 57-1. Title.
This local law shall be known as the "Tree Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 57-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this local law is to assist in enforcing, policing and
prosecuting wanton and indiscriminate theft, cutting and damage of trees
from private and public property in the Town of Islip, which deprives
individuals and others of their rightful property.
§ 57-3. Prohibited acts.
No person, firm, association, corporation or partnership shall cut, damage,
carve, dig or remove any tree, whether living or not living, standing or
downed on public or private property without the prior written consent of
the owner of said property. Any person acting to cut, damage, carve, dig or
remove a tree or trees shall display the written consent of the owner upon
demand to any person authorized to enforce the local laws of the Town of
Islip. Failure to display written consent of the owner to cut, damage, carve,
dig or remove any tree or trees upon request by enforcing authorities shall
be violation of this local law.
§ 57-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this local law shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per tree or
imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 57-5. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this local law shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the local law as a whole or
§ 56-4 ISLIP CODE § 57-5
57:562
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
Chapter 58
TRESPASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 49.
§ 58-1. Definitions. [Added 4-1-86, effective 4-20-8682]
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTER OR REMAIN UNLAWFULLY — A person "enters or remains
unlawfully" in a park when he is not licensed or privileged to do so. A
person who, regardless of his intent, enters or remains in a park which is
at the time open to the public does so with license and privilege unless
he defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated
to him by an agent of the Town of Islip. A license or privilege to enter or
remain in a park which is only partly open to the public is not a license or
privilege to enter or remain in that part of the park which is not open to the
public. A person who enters or remains upon unimproved and apparently
unused land, which is neither fenced nor otherwise enclosed in a manner
designed to exclude intruders, does so with license and privilege unless
notice against trespass is personally communicated to him by the owner
of such land or other authorized person, or unless such notice is given by
posting in a conspicuous manner.
PARK — All real property and municipal facilities owned by the Town of
Islip, including any area designated by the Town of Islip as a marina.
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
§ 58-2. Applicability. [Added 4-1-86, effective 4-20-8683]
§ 58-3. Public parks. [Amended 7-7-81; 4-1-86, effective 4-20-86]
A. A person is guilty of trespass pursuant to this Code when that person
knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a park.
B. This section shall not apply to a fire, police or peace officer or
authorized Town official or employee acting in the course of his duties.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 58-1, Unlawful intrusion or trespass,
as amended 5-17-66.
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 58-2. Notices posted.
§ 57-5 TRESPASSING § 58-3
58:563
A. No person shall pick any flowers or shrubs in a park.
B. No person shall erect a hut or other structure in a park or occupy same
therein without permission of the Town Board of the Town of Islip.
C. Hours.
(1) The following enumerated parks shall be open to the public from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., beginning Memorial Day through Labor Day
each year, and from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., beginning the day after
Labor Day through the day before Memorial Day each year:
(a) Bay Shore.
[1] Bay Shore Memorial Park.
[2] Clarissa Park.
[3] Delta Park.
[4] Kelly Park.
[5] Spur Drive Park.
(b) Bayport.
[1] Bayport Commons.
[2] Bayport Memorial Park.
[3] Bayport Beach.
(c) Bohemia.
[1] Locust Avenue Ballfield.
(d) Brentwood.
[1] Benton Park.
[2] Candlewood Memorial Park.
[3] Ellery Street Park.
[4] Freeman Avenue Park.
[5] Garnet Drive Park.
[6] Gil Hodges Ballfield.
[7] Massachusetts and Illinois Park.
[8] Michael Cacciutola Park.
[9] Noble Street Park.
[10] Pilgrim State Soccer Fields.
§ 58-3 ISLIP CODE § 58-3
58:564
[11] Ross Memorial Park.
[12] Sonia Road Park.
[13]Winnie Lane Park.
(e) Central Islip.
[1] Central Islip Hospital Fields.
[2] Lowell Avenue Park.
[3] Pine and McKinney Park.
[4] Smith and O'Kane Park.
[5] Peter Potter Park.
(f) East Islip.
[1] Country Village Ballfields.
[2] East Islip Memorial Park.
[3] Little League of the Islips.
[4] Westbrook Farms.
(g) Great River.
[1] Great River Fishing Dock.
[2] North Great River Memorial Park.
(h) Hauppauge.
[1] Bretton Woods Park.
[2] Northfield Woods Park.
(i) Holbrook.
[1] Alex DiGuardia Park.
[2] Michael Buckley Park.
[3] Pearl Street Park.
(j) Islip.
[1] Commack Road Park.
[2] Islip Beach.
[3] Pinkerton Memorial Park.
[4] Rifle Range.
§ 58-3 TRESPASSING § 58-3
58:565
(k) Islip Terrace.
[1] Beaverdam Park.
(l) Oakdale.
[1] Locust Avenue Park.
[2] Oakdale Memorial Park.
[3] Robert Duggan Park.
[4] Tulip Avenue Park.
(m) Sayville.
[1] Candee Avenue Park.
[2] Division Avenue Park.
[3] Gillette Park.
[4] Rotary Park.
[5] Sayville Beach.
[6] Sparrow Memorial Park.
[7] Yonda Park.
(n) West Islip.
[1] Keith Lane Park.
[2] Parkway Lawns Park.
[3] Sequams Park.
(2) At all other times the above-listed parks shall be closed to the
public.
D. In addition to being open to the public during the same hours as those
parks listed in Subsection C of this section, all Town parks not
enumerated in Subsection C shall be open solely to persons
participating in activities sponsored, approved or permitted by any
Town Commissioner or his authorized agent, during the period such
activities are being conducted.
E. The fact that a parking lot in any park is illuminated at any time shall
not be an indication that such parking lot or park is then open to the
public.
F. The Commissioner of any Town department having control of and
authority over a park may make rules and regulations designating areas
which are closed to the public and governing the use of all areas of such
parks.
§ 58-3 ISLIP CODE § 58-3
58:566
§ 58-4. Public highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, erect or
occupy within the bounds of any street or road of the Town of Islip any
structure without authorization.
§ 58-5. Parking areas and travelways at railroad stations and
airport terminals. [Added 5-5-1964; amended 2-6-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person in any motor vehicle to park, stand or
cruise, to offer or solicit to carry passengers for hire, in any parking area,
travelway or building at any railroad station or airport terminal in the Town
of Islip, unless a written lease or agreement to do so has been entered into
with the railroad and/or the Town of Islip.
§ 58-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 58-7. When effective.84
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
G. In addition to the penalties provided in § 58-6, any person who fails to
comply with Subsection A, B, C or D of this section or who disregards
the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Subsection F of this
section may be prohibited from reentering the park for a twelve-hour
period or from remaining in the park.
A. The violation of any provision of this ordinance is an offense.
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violation of any
provision hereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
fifteen (15) days, or both, for a second or subsequent offense.
[Amended 10-19-71]
C. Each day upon which any violation of this ordinance shall continue shall
be a separate violation hereof.
84.Editor's Note: Former § 58-7, Severability, was repealed 1-1-86, effective 4-20-86. Said
ordinance also renumbered former § 58-8. When effective, as § 58-7.
§ 58-3 TRESPASSING § 58-7
58:567
Chapter 59
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 60
ABANDONED AND IMPOUNDED PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 29.
Removal of impounded boats — See Ch. 37,
Article II.
Abandonment of shopping carts — See Ch. 45.
Tow trucks — See Ch. 51.
§ 58-7 ISLIP CODE § 58-7
58:568
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 60-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise noted, the words in this chapter have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — As defined in § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
BOAT — A vessel, ship, raft or any other floating craft.
IMPOUNDED BOAT — A boat removed pursuant to Chapter 37, Article II,
of the Code of the Town of Islip.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — A vehicle removed pursuant to Chapter 6, § 6-1,
of the Uniform Code of Traffic Ordinances of the Town of Islip.[Amended
10-17-78 by L.L. No. 6, 1978]
OWNER — The person actually holding title to a vehicle or boat.
UNCLAIMED VEHICLE — Abandoned or impounded vehicles which are not
redeemed within the time permitted by the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated or driven upon a highway, except
devices propelled by muscular power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks, and snowmobiles.
VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW — The New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law, § 1224, and any amendments thereto.
§ 60-1 TRESPASSING § 60-1
58:569

ARTICLE II
Vehicles: Removal, Storage and Disposal
§ 60-2. Removal, storage and disposition of abandoned vehicles.
Abandoned vehicles shall be removed, stored and disposed of in accordance
with the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 60-3. Storage and disposition of impounded vehicles.
Impounded vehicles shall be stored and disposed of as an abandoned
vehicle in accordance with the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 60-4. Conversion of unclaimed vehicles to public use.
The Town may convert to its own use, in any calendar year, the maximum
number of unclaimed vehicles permitted by the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 60-5. Redemption.
An abandoned or removed vehicle may be redeemed up to the time
ownership of the vehicle vests in the Town pursuant to the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, except that, in the discretion of the Town Clerk, the vehicle
may be redeemed any time prior to sale of the vehicle or its conversion to
Town use upon payment of any additional charges that the Town may have
incurred with respect to the vehicle.
§ 60-6. Removal and storage charges. [Amended 3-2-76; 10-17-78
by L.L. No. 6, 1978]
A. The last owner or person entitled to possession of an abandoned vehicle
may redeem the vehicle up to the time permitted in § 60-5 upon
submission of proof of ownership or entitlement and payment to the
Town Clerk of all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the
Town for removal and storage of said vehicle.
B. The Commissioner of Aviation and Transportation shall establish a
schedule of charges for impounded vehicles.
§ 60-2 TRESPASSING § 60-6
58:571

ARTICLE III
Boats: Storage and Disposal
§ 60-7. Storage.
The Town may store impounded boats in a suitable place at the expense of
the owner.
§ 60-8. Charges for impounded boats.
§ 60-9. Notification to owner.
§ 60-10. Redemption.
The owner of the boat or person entitled to possession of a removed boat
may redeem it any time prior to sale upon submission of adequate proof of
ownership or entitlement and payment of all charges.
§ 60-11. Sale.
A. All reasonable and necessary expenses for impounding boats, including
without limitation the cost for removal and storage, shall be a charge
against the boat, and if the owner thereof fails or refuses to claim the
boat and reimburse the Town for all charges within the time permitted
by § 60-11, the Town may sell the boat, and the proceeds of such sale,
less costs, shall be held by the Town, without interest, for the benefit of
the owner for a period of five (5) years. If not claimed within such fiveyear
period, proceeds shall be paid into the Town's general fund.
B. The last owner of an impounded boat shall be liable to the Town for all
reasonable and necessary expenses for impounding his boat.
C. The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Control shall
establish a schedule of charges for impounded boats. [Amended
4-6-82]
A. Except for boats governed by § 60-11C, the Town shall make an inquiry
concerning the last owner of the impounded boat as follows:
(1) With registration numbers affixed, to the jurisdiction which issued
such numbers.
(2) With no registration numbers affixed, to the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles and the United States Coast Guard.
B. The Town shall notify the last owner and any lienholder and mortgagee,
if known, that the boat in question has been removed and that, if
unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction thirty (30) days from the date
such notice was mailed. In addition, in the Town Clerk's discretion, the
Town Clerk may cause notice of removal to be published in a newspaper
addressed "To Whom It May Concern" requiring the redemption
thereof.
§ 60-7 TRESPASSING § 60-11
58:573
§ 60-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this ordinance.
A. Except for boats governed by § 60-11B and C, the Town may sell an
impounded boat thirty (30) days after notification is mailed to the owner
in accordance with § 60-9B.
B. If, as a result of the inquiry made pursuant to § 60-9, the owner is not
known, the Town may sell the impounded boat thirty (30) days after its
removal.
C. A boat having, at the time of removal, taking into consideration its
condition, a wholesale value of one hundred dollars ($100.) or less, and
not suitable for operation on the water, may be sold or otherwise
disposed of immediately.
D. The sale of a removed boat shall be at a public sale, with notice of such
sale being posted conspicuously in at least three (3) places in the Town
at least six (6) days before the date of sale. The Town Clerk may, in the
Town Clerk's discretion, give other publicity to such sale or delay the
sale in the interest of justice.
§ 60-11 ISLIP CODE § 60-12
58:574
ARTICLE IV
Vehicles Parked for Sale or Display
[Added 10-1-8585]
§ 60-13. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLES — Include all motor vehicles capable of registration under the
New York Vehicle and Traffic Law, as well as off-road or all terrain vehicles,
trailers, carts, boats or any other item capable of or outfitted to travel on
roads or highways.
§ 60-14. Parking of vehicles for sale restricted. [Amended
9-11-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001; 8-11-2009 by 10-2009]
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle for purposes of sale within the right-ofway
or within 100 feet of the right of way of any of the following highways,
or within the right-of-way or within 100 feet of the right of way of any street
intersecting the following highways for a distance of 250 feet from said
intersection, within the Town of Islip, unless otherwise authorized to do so
as provided in this Code:
(1) State Route 27A (Montauk Highway) and County Route 85.
(2) State Route 27 (Sunrise Highway), including service roads.
(3) State Route 111.
(4) Southern State Parkway.
(5) Spur Drive North and Spur Drive South.
(6) Union Boulevard.
(7) Carleton Avenue.
(8) Brentwood Road.
(9) Veterans Memorial Highway.
(10) Commack Road.
(11) Fifth Avenue — Wicks Road.
(12) Lakeland Avenue.
(13) Johnson Avenue.
(14) State Route 97.
(15) Suffolk Avenue.
85.Editor's Note: Said ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 10-20-85.
§ 60-13 TRESPASSING § 60-14
58:575
§ 60-15. Presumption of intent to sell.
The display, on or about the vehicle, of any sign, sticker, writing or other
indication that the vehicle is for sale shall be presumptive evidence that said
vehicle is parked or displayed for purposes of sale. This presumption shall
be rebuttable.
§ 60-16. Exceptions.
The display of a vehicle for sale by a registered owner along that part of
a street or highway designated in § 60-14. which abuts the residence of
said owner is specifically excepted from the prohibitions of this article. The
production of proof of ownership and residence at the subject location shall
be an affirmative defense. This exception shall not apply to wholesale or
retail dealers as defined by the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(16) Motor Parkway.
(17) Wheeler Road.
(18) Lowell Avenue.
(19) Connetquot Avenue.
(20) Middle Road.
(21) Higbie Lane.
(22) Udall Road.
(23) Candlewood Road.
(24) Pineaire Drive.
(25) Crooked Hill Road.
(26) LI Expressway Service Roads.
(27) Rosevale Avenue.
(28) Ocean Avenue.
(29) Calebs Path.
(30) Grand Boulevard.
(31) Bay Shore Road.
(32) Broadway Avenue.
(33) Joshuas Path Road.
(34)Washington Avenue.
(35) Old Nicols Road.
§ 60-14 ISLIP CODE § 60-17
58:576
§ 60-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No.
7-2013]
Any person, corporation or partnership violating the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine, or both a fine and imprisonment under the
following schedule:
§ 60-18. Construal of provisions.
Each day said vehicle is parked or displayed in violation of § 60-14 shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and in addition, any vehicle so
parked or displayed in violation of § 60-14 for a period of more than 24
hours shall be considered an abandoned vehicle pursuant to Articles I and
II of this chapter and § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
A. For a first offense, a fine of not less than $150 and no more than $500.
B. For a second and subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $500 and no
more than $1,000 and a period of incarceration not to exceed 15 days.
§ 60-17 TRESPASSING § 60-18
58:577
Chapter 60A
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 59.
Abandoned and impounded property — See
Ch. 60.
Use of vehicles on Fire Island — See Ch. 61.
§ 60A-1. Purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip recognizes the potential adverse impact
on the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of
Islip and to property within the Town by the use of off-road vehicles and,
therefore, deems it appropriate to control the use of said vehicles.
§ 60A-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this local law, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — Any motorcycle or motor vehicle not equipped in
conformity for registration under § 401, § 410, § 411-b or § 2261 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, including but not limited to vehicles manufactured
for operation primarily on off-highway trails or for off-highway competition.
This definition shall not include farm equipment used and operated for
agricultural purposes, snowmobiles or police, fire or safety vehicles used
and operated in an official capacity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, parking
facilities or any other areas dedicated or commonly used by the public.
§ 60A-3. Operation on public property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate an off-road vehicle upon any public property
within the Town of Islip unless otherwise permitted by law.
§ 60A-4. Operation on private property restricted.
It shall be unlawful to operate an unregistered, limited-use motor vehicle
upon private property without the express consent of the owner of said
property to operate said vehicle at that time and place.
§ 60A-5. Presumptive evidence.
A. The failure of the operator of an off-road vehicle to produce or display
written consent of the owner of the private property on which he is
operating shall be presumptive evidence that the operator does not
§ 60-18 ISLIP CODE § 60A-5
60A:578
§ 60A-6. Permit required; registration and permit fee.
§ 60A-7. Permit holder responsible for use of vehicle.
The holder of an off-road vehicle permit shall be strictly responsible for the
use and operation of the vehicle by any persons under sixteen (16) years of
age, and any summons for the illegal operation of the vehicle by a person
under sixteen (16) years of age shall be issued to the permit holder. It
shall be an affirmative defense to this section that the vehicle was stolen,
and such theft reported to the Police Department, at the time of the illegal
operation.
§ 60A-8. Impoundment.
have the consent of the owner to operate said vehicle on said private
property.
B. The failure of the operator of an off-road vehicle to produce or display a
valid permit or decal shall be presumptive evidence that the vehicle is
unregistered.
C. These presumptions shall be rebuttable.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle in any
place other than the property of the operator within the Town of Islip
unless a permit has been issued for the vehicle.
B. The Town Clerk of the Town of Islip shall issue a permit to the owner of
the vehicle upon receiving proof of the age of the owner, who shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age, and payment of the required fee. The
permit shall contain a brief description of the vehicle and its
identification number or frame number.
C. Upon the issuance of the permit, the Town Clerk shall also issue a
numbered decal which shall be conspicuously displayed on the front or
rear fender of the vehicle or, if no fender exists, on the frame of the
vehicle itself.
D. The fee for registration and permit of an off-road vehicle shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.).
A. Any off-road vehicle operated in violation of this chapter may be
immediately impounded. The Town of Islip shall store such impounded
vehicles in a suitable secure location. No impounded vehicle may be
released until a valid permit is displayed or obtained and until all
storage costs and fees have been paid. The permit holder shall be
responsible for the payment of all such costs and fees.
B. Any vehicle not redeemed within thirty (30) days shall be considered an
abandoned vehicle under the provisions of § 1224 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
§ 60A-5 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 60A-9
60A:579
§ 60A-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any operator or permit holder, as defined in § 60A-7, who shall violate any of
the provisions of this local law shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.).
§ 60A-10. Conflicts with state law.
Should any section or portion of this chapter be in conflict with the laws of
the State of New York applicable to the operation, registration, ownership
or control of off-road vehicles, then, in that instance, said laws of the State
of New York shall prevail.
§ 60A-11. Severability.
The provisions of this local law are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall, for any reason,
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this local law, but they shall remain in effect, it being the
legislative intent that this local law shall stand, notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
§ 60A-12. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect on January 1, 1986.
Chapter 61
VEHICULAR USES: FIRE ISLAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of licenses and permits — See Ch.
31.
Parks, swimming pools, marinas, boats and
waterways — See Ch. 37.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 49.
Tow trucks — See Ch. 51.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 53.
Abandoned vehicles and vessels — See Ch. 60.
§ 61-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Every ambulance or vehicle used
as an ambulance, and every motor vehicle operated by the Police
Department, Fire Department, County or Deputy County Fire Coordinator,
County or Assistant County Fire Marshal, sheriff or a regularly paid deputy
§ 60A-9 ISLIP CODE § 61-1
60A:580
sheriff when engaged in the performance of his duties, or by a public utility
company.
BOARD — The "Board" shall be construed to mean the Board of
Commissioners appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Islip which
shall act as an adviser to the Supervisor or his designee in the issuance of
driving permits.[Amended 3-15-1977]
BRIEF AND OCCASIONAL ABSENCES — Absent from one's Fire Island
residence for no more than a total number of 60 days during the permitted
driving period for year-round residents each year, commencing on the first
Tuesday of September following Labor Day and ending on the last day
of June on which driving is allowed as determined by the National Park
Service, with no more than 30 consecutive days at any one time.[Added
2–5–2008]
BUILDING CONTRACTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle owned or
operated by or on behalf of an individual, partnership or corporation while
in use for landscaping or construction within the several established
communities on Fire Island.
CONSTRUCTION AND BUSINESS VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle other
than a public utility vehicle or essential service vehicle involved in
construction, maintenance and repair of structures on Fire Island or the
transportation of materials and supplies to retail business establishments
on the island.[Added 1-5-1988]
DUNE CROSSING — An accessway over a primary or transverse dune
designated and marked as a "dune crossing."
ESSENTIAL SERVICE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle other than a public
utility vehicle, whose use on Fire Island is essential to the continued use of
residences on the island. This may include vehicles used for the following
purposes, while in use for such purposes:[Added 1-5-1988]
FIRE ISLAND — All real property on Fire Island in the Town of Islip
whose southerly boundary is the low-water mark on the ocean front, whose
easterly boundary is the easterly boundary of the Town of Islip, whose
northerly boundary is the low-water mark of the Great South Bay, and
whose westerly boundary is the westerly boundary of the Town of Islip,
excluding, however, land lying within the boundary of any incorporated
Village and lands contained within the Fire Island National Seashore.
MAINLAND — The land of Long Island, New York.[Added 1-5-1988]
MOTOR VEHICLE — A device which is self-propelled by internal
combustion or electrical energy and in, upon or by which any person or
material is or may be transported on land.[Amended 1-5-1988]
MOTOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE — A vehicle or bus available for hire.
A. Transporting heating fuel and bottled gas.
B. Sanitation or refuse removal.
§ 61-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 61-1
60A:581
OFFICIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle while in use for official business of
the United States Government, the State of New York, the County of Suffolk
and of towns, villages and communities situated on Fire Island, or while in
use for hearse, ambulance, fire or other emergency or disaster purposes.
PART-TIME RESIDENTS — Those persons who reside on Fire Island
continuously for fewer than 12 months of the year.[Added 1-5-1988]
PUBLIC UTILITY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle owned or operated by a
public utility or a public service company enfranchised or licensed to supply
Fire Island residents with electricity, water, telephone or bottled gas, or
other public utility service while in use for supplying such services.
SCHOOL BUS — Any motor vehicle owned or operated by or on behalf of a
school district, or other public or private entity maintaining elementary or
secondary schools, while in use for transporting elementary or secondary
school children of Fire Island residents and their teachers to and from
school activities.
SERVICE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle owned or operated by or on behalf
of an individual, partnership or corporation while in use for furnishing Fire
Island residents' maintenance or repair services, including but not limited
to installation or repair of household appliances, plumbing, carpentry and
painting.
YEAR-ROUND RESIDENTS — Those persons who are legally domiciled
on Fire Island and who, in addition, physically reside in their fixed and
permanent homes on the island continuously, except for brief and occasional
absences, for 12 months of the year.[Added 1-5-1988]
§ 61-1.1. Legislative intent. [Added 3-15-1977]
A. The preservation of the Great South Beach, otherwise known as "Fire
Island," is of paramount importance to the citizens of the Town of Islip.
Although referred to as an island, it is in reality a barrier sandbar
approximately 31 miles long and only 200 yards to 1/2 mile wide. This
barrier sandbar is the only buffer between the Atlantic Ocean and the
South Shore of Long Island. The barrier beach not only protects the
South Shore of Long Island, but by its existence creates the Great South
Bay whose unique ecological characteristics make it one of the prime
hard clam and oyster producing areas in the world. The harvesting of
these clams and oysters is a major industry within the Town. Finally, the
preservation of the unique character of the barrier beach in the center
of the densest metropolitan area in the United States is of paramount
importance not only to the citizens of the Town of Islip, but also to the
thousands of metropolitan New Yorkers who use the island as a refuge
from the pressures of urban society.
B. The proliferation of motor vehicles on the barrier beach runs counter to
the public policy of the Town of Islip and is detrimental to the
preservation of the barrier beach. The limitation of the use of motor
vehicles on the island will promote the health, safety and general
§ 61-1 ISLIP CODE § 61-1.1
60A:582
§ 61-2. Permit requirements. [Amended 2-13-1973; 3-15-1977]
welfare of the community, including the protection and preservation of
the property of the Town.
A. No motor vehicle shall be operated on or across Fire Island except
under permit issued by the Supervisor or his designee and except for
the following vehicles:
(1) Official vehicles.
(2) School buses operating during the school calendar year on school
business only or when said vehicles are in need of emergency
repair during such time.
B. The Supervisor or his designee is authorized to establish a system of
permits consistent with the requirements of these regulations. Any
person, firm, corporation or partnership may apply to the Supervisor or
his designee for a permit, using a form to be provided for that purpose.
Before granting the permit, the Supervisor or his designee shall
consider whether or not the nature and extent of the intended use is
consistent with the purposes of the regulations in this part, which are to
protect Fire Island and interests therein and to protect the health,
welfare, safety and convenience of members of the public using Fire
Island. On this basis, the Supervisor or his designee may approve the
application, deny the application or grant the application with
appropriate limitations and restrictions.
C. Permits may be issued for periods of one day to one year, depending on
the reasonable requirements of the applicant.
D. No permit shall be issued for any motor vehicle having a manufacturer's
rated capacity in excess of one ton, provided that application may be
made to the Supervisor or his designee for a special trip permit for a
vehicle of greater capacity to carry heavier loads for which water
transportation is not available or feasible.
E. No permit shall be issued for any motor vehicle not equipped, in the
judgment of the Supervisor or his designee, to travel over sand, unless
such vehicle use will be restricted to on island travel only and limited to
improved walkways. [Amended 1-5-1988]
F. Special permits may be issued to those persons who have satisfied the
Supervisor or his designee that, by reason of their advanced age or
infirmity, they require the use of a motor vehicle.
G. Permits shall be carried by the operator of a vehicle on Fire Island at all
times and displayed upon request.
H. All applicants for year-round resident permits must submit a sworn
affidavit that their twelve-month sole residency is on Fire Island.
[Added 2-13-1973; amended 1-5-1988]
§ 61-1.1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 61-3
60A:583
§ 61-3. Supervisor or his designee. [Amended 5-4-1972; 2-13-1973;
12-18-1973; 3-15-1977]
§ 61-4. Authorized and prohibited travel. [Amended 2-13-197386]
A. The Town Board hereby delegates the power to issue permits to the
Supervisor or to someone designated by him. If the Supervisor shall
designate such a person, that person shall be directly answerable to the
Supervisor. The Supervisor or his designee may employ such persons as
a court reporter, clerks and a secretary, as are necessary, to hear
applications for permission to drive on the barrier beach. The
Supervisor shall also have the power, with the consent of the Town
Board, to pay anyone appointed as his designee a reasonable amount
not to exceed $4,500 per year.
B. The Town Board shall also appoint a Board of Commissioners who shall
act in an advisory capacity to both the Town Board and the Supervisor
or his designee. This Board shall review applications and permits and
have the power to make recommendations to the Supervisor or his
designee. However, such recommendations may only be advisory, and
any decision of the Supervisor or his designee shall be final.
C. There shall be five members of the Board. All members shall be
appointed for a term of two years, commencing January 1. [Amended
1-5-1988]
D. The Supervisor or his designee may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. He shall have the power to hold such hearings
as he sees fit, for the purpose of ascertaining the necessity for any
permit requested. The fact that any individual, partnership or
corporation is making an application for a permit must be published in a
local paper having circulation within the Town of Islip. A list of permit
holders must be published in a paper having local circulation within the
Town of Islip. From time to time there may be received requests for
permits when there is ferry service to Fire Island. If the applicant is
able to demonstrate that the request is of an emergency nature, the
Supervisor or his designee may issue letter permits. [Amended
1-5-1988]
E. The Supervisor or his designee shall have the power to make
reasonable rules and regulations for his conduct and the enforcement
of this ordinance and shall have the power to set a limit on the total
number of permits to be issued.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, travel on Fire
Island by motor vehicle is permitted as follows:
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally contained two Subsection As, the first of which
applied to the year 1973 and which has since been deleted. The second and current
Subsection A was prefaced by the phrase "For the year beginning May 15, 1974."
§ 61-3 ISLIP CODE § 61-4
60A:584
§ 61-5. Rules for operation of vehicles.
(1) From May 15 through June 14 inclusive: driving at any hour daily,
but not from 8:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. Saturday, Sunday and
Memorial Day weekend.
(2) From June 15 through September 15 inclusive: no driving
whatsoever.
(3) From September 16 through October 15 inclusive: daily at any
hour, but not from 8:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. Saturday and
Sunday.
(4) From October 16 through May 14 inclusive: daily at any hour.
B. One truck shall be designated by the Long Island Lighting Company
and zone permits issued to the New York Telephone Company to answer
service calls between June 15 and September 15 inclusive. At all other
times during the year, each company may apply for those permits which
it feels are necessary, and the Supervisor or his designee shall grant
such number of permits as it feels are necessary to serve the needs of
the Fire Island community. There shall also be granted an appropriate
amount of permit to individuals or corporations who are engaged in the
collection and disposal of refuse. [Amended 3-15-1977]
C. Travel on Fire Island by service vehicles is restricted to providing
service to owners and occupants thereon.
D. Travel on Fire Island by all other motor vehicles is prohibited.
A. So far as practicable, motor vehicles shall be operated only on the
beach in established tracks. When two motor vehicles approach from
opposite directions in the same track, both operators shall reduce
speed and the operator with the water to his left shall yield the right-ofway
by turning out of the track to the right.
B. No motor vehicles shall be operated on any portion of a dune except at
posted dune crossings.
C. No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than eight
miles per hour nor, in any event, at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing nor in a manner which unreasonably
endangers pedestrians or other users of Fire Island. Upon approaching
or passing within 100 feet of a person or persons on the beach or when
passing through or over any authorized dune crossing, speed shall be
reduced to no greater than five miles per hour. [Amended 7-3-1984;
5-2-2000]
D. In an emergency the Supervisor or his designee may suspend, for such
period or periods as he shall deem advisable, any or all of the foregoing
restrictions on motor vehicle travel, and he may announce such
§ 61-4 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 61-5
60A:585
§ 61-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-13-1973]
§ 61-7. Establishment of affirmative defense.
Each of the exemptions delineated in § 61-4 shall be an affirmative defense
to any prosecution initiated pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance,
and the defendant has the burden of establishing such affirmative defense
by a preponderance of the evidence.
§ 61-8. Severability.
The invalidation of any section or provision of this ordinance by any court
of competent jurisdiction shall not invalidate any other section or provision
hereof.
§ 61-9. When effective; repealer.
This ordinance is to take effect and be in force immediately and supersedes
the Beach Buggy Ordinance of May 1965, as amended, which ordinance and
amendments thereto are rescinded.
Chapter 62
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
suspension by whatever means are available. In the event of high winds
and waves, storms or other adverse weather conditions, the Supervisor
or his designee may close all or any portion of Fire Island to motor
vehicle travel for such period as he shall deem advisable in the interests
of public safety. [Amended 3-15-1977]
E. Every property owner to whom a permit is issued must have adequate
space upon his property to park his vehicles. No person shall be
permitted to park his vehicle other than at his residence. This rule shall
not apply to commercial permits. [Added 2-13-1973]
A. Any violation of this ordinance shall be deemed an offense punishable
by the following fines: [Amended 3-15-1977]
(1) First offense: mandatory fine of $25 and/or 30 days' suspension of
the permit issued by the Supervisor or his designee.
(2) Second offense: mandatory fine of $100 and/or up to 60 days'
suspension of the permit issued by the Supervisor or his designee.
(3) Third offense: mandatory three-year suspension of the permit
issued by the Supervisor or his designee.
B. Upon conviction of any violation which occurred between June 15 and
September 15, any suspension of the permit may be imposed on the
following year between June 15 and September 15.
§ 61-5 ISLIP CODE § 62-1
60A:586
§ 62-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Salaries and Compensation"
§ 62-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTED OFFICIAL — The Town of Islip Supervisor, Town of Islip
Councilman and/or Councilwoman, Islip Town Clerk and Town of Islip
Receiver of Taxes.
§ 62-3. Legislative findings.
In order to maintain an equitable basis for compensating the elected
officials of the Town of Islip, the Town Board finds and determines that a
permanent salary schedule should be established and set forth herein.
§ 62-4. Salary schedule.
§ 62-5. Salary of Islip Town Clerk for 2016 fiscal year.
§ 62-6. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 62-7. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect until at least 45 days after its adoption, nor
until approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors
of the Town of Islip voting on a proposition for its approval if, within 45
days after its adoption, there is filed with the Islip Town Clerk a petition
protesting against such law in conformity with the provisions of Municipal
A. Commencing on January 1, 2017, the salary of all Town of Islip elected
officials, as defined herein, shall be increased annually by an amount
equal to the lesser of 4% or the amount of increase in the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) for the New York - Northern New Jersey - Long Island
Region published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor for the twelve-month period ending in June of the
preceding year.
A. The Town Board hereby determines that it would be equitable to
increase the salary of the Islip Town Clerk for the 2016 fiscal year.
B. Commencing on the effective date of this chapter, the annual salary for
the Islip Town Clerk for the 2016 fiscal year shall be $85,000.
§ 62-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 62-7
60A:587
Home Rule Law § 24, Subdivision 2h, and upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 63
(RESERVED)
Chapter 64
WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Building and Housing — See
Ch. 6.
Building Code — See Ch. 7.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 18.
Housing standards — See Ch. 27.
Licensing of plumbers — See Ch. 40.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 54.
Department of Waste Disposal — See Ch. 63.
Water pollution — See Ch. 66.
§ 62-7 ISLIP CODE § 62-7
63:588
ARTICLE I
Brentwood Water District
[Adopted 5-28-35]
§ 64-1. Superintendent: appointment, powers and duties.
There shall be appointed for the Brentwood Water District, in the same
manner and for the same term as other Town employees, a Superintendent
of Water Supply, who, on behalf of the Town Board, shall have general
supervision of the operation of the water system in said district, issue all
permits required hereby, read meters, render bills for water furnished or
other service given, collect all accounts due and owing to the district, and,
on or before the tenth day of each month, make report to the Town Board,
by filing the same with the Town Clerk, of all moneys received by him during
the previous month, specifying the name of the person or corporation for
whose account the same has been paid and the purpose of such payment,
giving such further information as may be helpful to the Board in properly
conducting the affairs of the district. On or before the said tenth day of each
month, the said Superintendent shall turn over to the Supervisor all moneys
received by him during the previous month, together with a copy of his said
report. The said Superintendentt shall also make report at such other times
as may be required by the provisions of the Town Law.
§ 64-2. Deposits of money.
All moneys received by the said Superintendent on behalf of the district
shall forthwith be deposited in such banks or trust, companies as the Town
Board may from time to time direct.
§ 64-3. Audit and payment of claims and charges.
Claims and charges against the district shall be audited and paid in the
same manner as Town charges.
§ 64-4. Superintendent to give bond for faithful performance of
duties.
The said Superintendent shall give bond for the faithful performance of his
duties and for rendering a just and true account of all moneys received by
him on behalf of the district, in such sum as the Town Board may from time
to time direct. The premium of such bond shall be a district charge.
§ 64-5. Meters: uniformity of make.
Permanent water service shall be rendered by meter only. In order that
there may be a uniformity of make and design and to give the greatest
efficiency in operation and maintenance, all meters shall be of such make
and type as from time to time may be approved by the Board and shall be
procured from the district.
§ 64-1 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-6
64:589
§ 64-6. Permit to use water supplies; applications.
§ 64-7. Authorization to make repairs, additions, alterations.
No person shall make any attachment to or connection with any of the pipes
or mains of the district, nor make any repairs, additions or alterations to the
service pipes, except on the consumer's side of the meter, unless he be an
employee of the district or a person or corporation authorized so to do by
the Town Board.
§ 64-8. List of authorized persons on file.
A list of persons authorized as provided in § 64-7 shall be on file in the office
of the district.
§ 64-9. Application to perform work; bond.
Any person or corporation may make application to the Town Board for
the purposes set forth in § 64-7. Such application shall be accompanied by
a bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.), with one (1) or more
sureties acceptable to the Board, conditioned that he, she or it will comply
with these regulations, rules and ordinances, will pay to the district all fees,
penalties or other charges required hereby in consequence of the work
undertaken, and that he, she or it will restore openings made in streets,
roads, lanes and other public places and pavement thereon and therein
to the same standard of condition as before the work started, and keep
and maintain the same in such condition for a period of one (1) year after
the work has been completed, and in case of failure so to do, will pay
to the proper authority in the premises the cost of putting the same in
such condition. The Town Board may, in its discretion, grant or deny such
application. Such permission, so given, may be revoked by the Town Board
at any time.
§ 64-10. Work for which permit required.
No person shall tap any main or distributing pipe or make or interfere
with any connection with the water system unless under the direction of
A. No person or corporation shall use the water supplies by the district for
any purpose whatsoever without having first obtained a permit upon
written application thereof, after having first paid the charges
pertaining to the introduction of water to the premises.
B. All applications for introduction of water to any premises or for the use
of water shall be made upon a blank furnished by the district for such
purpose and shall be signed by the owner or his, her or its duly
authorized agent. Such application shall contain a statement of all uses
for which water is desired, and a use of water for any purpose other
than mentioned in the application shall be sufficient cause to justify
discontinuance of water service. Application for additional uses may be
made at any time and permit may be granted therefor.
§ 64-6 ISLIP CODE § 64-10
64:590
and in the presence of the Superintendent, or unless he be an employee
of the district or unless specific permission in each case be given by the
district. Nor shall any person make any alterations or additions in and
about water pipes, other than on the consumer's side of the meter, unless a
written permit shall have been given by the district upon written application
therefor.
§ 64-11. Opening streets or public places.
No street or public place shall be opened by any person for the purpose
of making a connection with the mains or for the laying of water pipes or
fixtures unless permission shall have been granted by the authority having
jurisdiction therein.
§ 64-12. Restoration; adequate protection for open trenches.
Whenever any street or public place shall have been opened for the purpose
of making a connection with the mains or for the laying of water pipes
or fixtures, the applicant shall have proper regard for public safety and
convenience, and said street or place shall be restored to its original
condition as soon as practicable. Open trenches shall be guarded with
barricades, and sufficient warning lights or flares shall be displayed at
night.
§ 64-13. Laying of service pipes; installation of meters.
Service pipes shall be laid at least four (4) feet below the surface of the
ground at all points. The curb cock shall be installed in the sidewalk space,
close to the curbline. The meter shall be installed within the building to be
served, as close as practicable to the point where the service pipe enters,
unless otherwise directed or permitted by the district, and shall be set with
the inlet and outlet in a horizontal line with the register on top and shall be
so located as to be readily accessible at all times for reading, inspection or
repair. A stop valve shall be provided within the building on the inlet side
of the meter. Provision shall be made to prevent hot water from reaching
the meter. No red or white lead or joint compound shall be used on joints
between the main and the meter. No tee or other fitting through which
water can be taken will be permitted on the service pipe between the main
and the meter. Meters may be set outside of buildings in underground pits
only by special permission of the district, and in such cases the construction
of the pit and the method of setting the meter shall conform to directions
which will be furnished by the district for each specific instance.
§ 64-14. Service pipes to be sufficiently buried.
In the event that a change in ground elevation leaves a service pipe
insufficiently buried or results in the curb box projecting above the ground
or being covered with earth, the consumer shall promptly lower or raise his
service pipe and curb box to conform to the new ground elevation. In case
the consumer fails or neglects to make such alterations promptly, the supply
§ 64-10 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-14
64:591
of water will be shut off until the alterations are completed, and a charge of
four dollars ($4.) will be made to cover the labor and expense by the district
resulting from the consumer's failure to do so.
§ 64-15. Service pipes, meters and appurtenances to be in good
repair.
Service pipes and meters and the appurtenances thereto shall be kept
in good repair and protected from the frost by the consumer at his own
expense.
§ 64-16. Stop or waste cocks required.
A stop or waste cock shall be provided within the building, so located that
all piping on the consumer's side of the meter can be drained whenever
necessary.
§ 64-17. Closing or vacancy: notice.
In case a house or other building is to be closed or become vacant, notice
thereof should be given the district in order that meter may be read and
curb cock closed. Where such notice is not given and pipes burst from
freezing or other cause, the value of water lost by reason thereof, as
estimated by the District Superintendent, together with the additional sum
of four dollars ($4.) to cover labor and expense to the district, shall be added
to the next bill and be paid in like manner as regular water charges.
§ 64-18. New connections: closing of curb cocks.
Where a new connection is made with street mains and where new
extensions or attachments are made in unoccupied houses, the curb cock
shall be closed by the person making the connection, extension or
attachment. Notice of the completion of the work shall be given the district
and the curb cock shall not again be opened until the work has been
inspected and approved by the district and the meter read. Pipes and
connections between the main and meter shall not be covered until so
inspected and approved.
§ 64-19. Faulty meters to be repaired; testing and inspections.
A. Where a water meter fails to register the correct quantity of water
delivered through it or where it otherwise becomes out of order or in
need of repair, notice thereof shall be given to the district. Another
meter will then be loaned and installed during the time required for
testing and repair. Where repairs are found necessary, the same shall
be made by the district and the cost thereof borne by the consumer.
When, in the opinion of the Superintendent of the district, a meter
becomes unsuitable for further use, it shall be replaced by another at
the consumer's expense.
§ 64-14 ISLIP CODE § 64-19
64:592
§ 64-20. Fire hydrants.
§ 64-21. Turned-off water: permission to turn on.
Where water has been turned off by direction of the district, it shall not be
again turned on without the permission of the district.
§ 64-22. Water service charges. [Amended 12-16-1969; 4-3-1973;
5-20-1975; 11-18-1975; 3-7-1978; 9-5-1978; 12-19-1978;
12-16-1980; 1-19-1982; 12-16-1986; 11-16-1993]
The following charges for water service are hereby established:
B. No charge shall be made for inspection and testing of meters found to
be out of order when such have been duly reported; otherwise a charge
of six dollars ($6.) per meter shall be made to the consumer in addition
to the cost of repairing such meter. [Amended 12-16-1980]
A. No person shall open, interfere with or draw water from any fire
hydrant in the district without a permit from the district therefor,
except that hydrants may be opened by or on the order of any member
of a Fire Department or any Fire Commissioner within the district in
case of fire, for the purpose of attaching thereto fire hose and
equipment, where a contract for the purpose has been entered into with
the fire district.
B. Whenever a hydrant has been opened and used, notification of such fact
shall be promptly given to the district.
C. No tools or implements shall be used to open hydrants except such as
are furnished by the district or by a Fire Department operating within
the district.
D. The annual fire hydrant rental charge is forty-six dollars and eighty
cents ($46.80). [Added 4-3-197387]
A. The minimum charges and the corresponding water allowances for
each quarter year for metered service shall be:
Size of Meter
(inches) Minimum Charge
Water Allowance
(gallons)
5/8 $6.25 5,000
3/4 $10.00 8,000
1 $15.00 12,000
1 1/2 $27.50 22,000
2 $50.00 40,000
3 $125.00 100,000
87.Editor's Note: Effective 4-21-1973.
§ 64-19 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-22
64:593
§ 64-23. Automatic fire sprinkler systems. [Added 3-31-1964;
amended 4-3-1973; 12-16-1980; 12-16-1986; 11-16-1993]
§ 64-24. Bills: when due, payable. [Amended 12-16-1980]
Size of Meter
(inches) Minimum Charge
Water Allowance
(gallons)
4 $156.25 125,000
B. Bills will be rendered quarterannually in accordance with the foregoing
minimum charges and the following schedule of rates:
Number of Gallons Charge
First 5,000 $6.25 minimum charge
Over 5,000 $1.25 per 1,000 gallons
A. Whenever a sprinkler system shall be installed in any structure within
the limits of the district, the owner of such premises shall pay to the
district, for the privilege of maintaining such sprinkler system and for
the supply of water thereto, charges in accordance with the following
schedule:
Size of Connection
(inches) Annual Demand Charges
2 $50.00
3 $112.50
4 $200.00
6 $450.00
8 $800.00
10 $1,250.00
B. Sprinkler systems shall not be supplied through regular meters but
shall be supplied through a regular service provided with a check valve
on the main service and a five-eighths-inch bypass meter. In no case
shall the size of the sprinkler system main on private property be larger
than the connection to the district main.
A. Bills for water service shall become due and payable to the district at its
office upon receipt thereof. If such bills are not paid within forty-five
(45) days from the date rendered, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
amount of such bill will be added thereto. If such bill remains unpaid for
a period of seventy-five (75) days from the date rendered, water service
shall be discontinued until such bill, together with the penalty and the
sum of six dollars ($6.) to cover expense of discontinuance and
restoration of service, is paid. [Amended 12-6-1988]
§ 64-22 ISLIP CODE § 64-24
64:594
§ 64-25. Rents, charges and penalties to be lien upon real property.
§ 64-26. Discontinuance of service: notice required.
Notice in writing delivered to the district office at least ten (10) days before
the quarterly billing date shall be required in all cases of applications for
discontinuance of water service; otherwise the consumer shall be liable for
the minimum charge for the following quarter year.
§ 64-27. Separate meters; single meter serving multiple occupancy
or use.
Each dwelling or building or parts thereof having unrelated occupancy or
distinctive use shall, at the option of the district, have a separate meter.
Where water is supplied through a single meter for more than one (1)
such occupancy or distinctive use, the minimum charge shall be the regular
charge for such meter multiplied by the number of such occupanices or
distinctive uses, and in order to determine the charge to be made for water
used where there is more than one (1) such occupancy or use served by a
single meter, the total amount of water delivered as registered by the meter
shall be divided by the number of such occupancies or distinctive uses, and
the result shall be deemed to be the amount of water delivered for each
such occupancy or distinctive use and shall be charged for as if the quantity
of water furnished each such occupancy or use was through a separate
meter.
B. A return item service charge of six dollars ($6.) shall be added to any
bill paid with checks, drafts or other means returned to the Brentwood
Water District because of insufficient funds, closed account or other
reasons deemed valid by the Superintendent or authorized agents of
the Brentwood Water District.
A. Water rents and charges and penalties thereon shall be a lien upon the
real property upon which the water is used, and on or before the day
when, under the Town Law, preliminary estimates of expenditures are
required to be submitted, the Superintendent shall file with the Town
Clerk a statement showing all water rents and charges, with penalties
thereon, unpaid for more than sixty (60) days, which said statement
shall contain a brief description of the property to which the water was
supplied or upon which charges were incurred, the name of the owner
liable to pay the same, so far as may be known, and the amount
chargeable to each.
B. Such rents, charges and penalties shall not be collected by the
Superintendent of the district after the filing of such statement with the
Town Clerk but may thereafter be paid to the Supervisor until such time
as a statement of such unpaid water rents, charges and penalties is
submitted to the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of levying the
same as a tax against the property affected.
§ 64-24 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-28
64:595
§ 64-28. Use of water in construction of buildings.
§ 64-29. Application for use of water for construction purposes.
A. When water is required for use in connection with building
construction, application shall be made to the district therefor. Where
the owner of the premises is not the applicant, deposit of such sum as
the Superintendent of the district shall deem sufficient to pay for water
to be used and charges attendant thereon shall be paid in advance to
the district. Where, after installation and commencement of use of
water, in the opinion of the Superintendent, more water is used or will
be used than is covered by the deposit, he may then require a further
deposit, in default of which he may discontinue service when the
amount of water charges and other district charges equals the amount
of the deposit. After completion of the work, upon claim duly made
therefor to the Town Board, any surplus of the deposit over and above
the amount of the water charges and other expenses attendant thereon
shall be refunded to the applicant. Charges for this purpose shall be the
same as provided herein for permanent service, except that if meter is
returned to the district in good and serviceable condition, the cost
thereof to the applicant will be refunded.
B. Installation, unless otherwise permitted by the district, shall conform to
the rules and regulations herein provided for permanent service.
A. Persons or corporations desiring to use water for construction purposes
other than mentioned in § 64-28 shall make application to the district
therefor, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the object
and purpose of the use of water, the quantity estimated to be needed,
and shall give such other information as the Superintendent shall
require. If such application is granted, the supply of water shall be
furnished in such manner as the district shall allow, and the water rates
shall be as in these rules established, except that there shall be no
minimum charge. A meter shall be furnished by the district, for the use
of which a reasonable charge will be made by the district, and where
the Superintendent shall deem it advisable, an inspector appointed by
the Town Board shall be maintained on the work at a wage not to
exceed six dollars ($6.) a day, to be paid by such applicant. Where water
for such purpose is taken from a hydrant, provision shall be made for
the protection of the meter and for quick disconnection in case such
hydrant or hydrants are needed to extinguish any fire.
B. No such application shall be granted unless a bond, in such sum as the
Superintendent shall deem sufficient, approved as to sureties and form
by a majority of the members of the Town Board, shall be delivered to
the district to indemnify it for any damage which may be suffered by it
to its water system, gate boxes, meters, valves or fire hydrants by
reason of the construction contemplated.
C. No such application shall be granted unless a bond shall be delivered to
the district, approved as to amount, sureties and form by a majority of
§ 64-28 ISLIP CODE § 64-29
64:596
§ 64-30. Taking water from service connection for construction
purposes.
Except with the permission of the district, water for construction purposes
shall not be taken from any service connection used for any other purpose,
whether or not on the same premises, or from any main or hydrant.
§ 64-31. Removal of meters; water to be shut off for violations of
provisions.
Whenever any of the provisions of these rules, regulations and ordinances
are violated, the water supply may, in the discretion of the Superintendent,
be shut off and the meter removed.
§ 64-32. Cross-connection control and authority to enter buildings
for inspections. [Amended 7-1-75]
the members of the Town Board, indemnifying and saving harmless the
district and the Town of Islip from damages to property or damages
resulting from death of any person or injuries suffered by any person by
reason of the construction work done for which such water is used.
D. The provisions of § 64-28, insofar as it provided for the deposit of money
to secure payment of water charges and insofar as it provides for
reimbursement of surplus deposit, shall apply to the use of water for the
purposes contemplated by this section, except that no deposit shall be
required of the state or any municipal corporation, or any district,
bureau or department thereof, where the work is being done by its own
employees and where the purposes for which the water is used has
been duly authorized, in which event bills for water charges shall be
rendered at such times as the Superintendent shall deem advisable.
E. The bond under this section shall not be required where the water is
being furnished to the Town of Islip or its Highway Department for work
being done by its employees.
A. There shall be no installations or use of interconnections, crossconnections
or other means of allowing water from any source other
than the supply wells of the district to enter the distribution system
except in the case of emergency interconnection authorized by the
Superintendent.
B. There shall be no installations or use of connections for swimming pools
or for underground lawn or irrigation sprinkler systems unless such
connections or systems shall be equipped with cross-connection control
devices approved by the district and installed according to district
requirements.
C. No plumbing fixtures and other water outlets in public, industrial or
commercial buildings which may cause contamination of the district
water supply through cross-connections may be installed in the district
§ 64-29 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-32
64:597
§ 64-33. District: interpretation of word.
Wherever it is referred to herein that permission be granted by or that an
application be made to or that an act be done by or that an act be approved
by the district, it shall mean the Superintendent of Water Supply of the
district.
§ 64-34. Service pipes, fittings, meter specifications.
unless they are equipped with cross-connection control devices
approved by the district.
D. No sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries, plating
establishments and other situations which could potentially cause
contamination of the district water supply shall be permitted to exist
unless they are equipped with a reduced-pressure back-flow preventer
or air gap on the service line as a condition of water service.
E. The Superintendent of the district or his authorized agents shall have
full power to enter the premises of any consumer in the district, at all
reasonable hours, to read meters; to examine fixtures, plumbing and
manner of using the water; or to inspect said buildings or premises to
ensure compliance with Subsections A through D hereof.
F. If any violation of Subsections A through D hereof is discovered, the
Superintendent shall notify the owner of the premises or his authorized
agent, in writing, directing him to correct, within a reasonable time,
any plumbing installed contrary to or in violation of this ordinance and
which may cause the contamination of the district water supply or
otherwise adversely affect the public health.
A. Service pipes and fittings, corporation cocks, curb cocks, curb boxes,
meter settings and meter pit covers shall conform to such standards
and shall be of such make and type as the Town Board shall adopt, and
shall be of such size as the Superintendent deems proper. Service pipes
for the street main to the meter, less than two (2) inches in diameter,
shall be of pure, seamless, soft-tempered copper tubing with bronze
fitting. Tubing shall be of the following thickness:
Normal Pipe Size
(inches)
Outside
Diameter of
Tubing
(inches)
Gauge
(B.W.G.)
3/4 7/8 16
1 1 1/8 16
1 1/4 1 3/8 16
1 1/2 1 5/8 15
§ 64-32 ISLIP CODE § 64-34
64:598
§ 64-35. Superintendent authorized to purchase material.
The Superintendent is authorized on behalf of the district to purchase such
material as is required where such material is not on hand and is needed
for service installation for which a deposit has been made as required by
§ 64-34.
§ 64-36. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of any of the provisions of §§ 64-6A, 64-7, 64-10, 64-11,
64-20A and C, 64-21 and 64-30 herein shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.) or by
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both.
§ 64-37. Right to amend, change rules and regulations.
The right is reserved to change and amend these rules, regulations and
ordinances, to make special rates, variations and contracts in all proper
cases, or to turn off the water supply without notice in case of extensions,
repairs or other necessity, without liability for damages for lack of water, or
for any damage which may result from the turning off of the water supply.
§ 64-38. When effective.
These rules, regulations and ordinances shall become effective immediately.
B. Meters, corporation cocks, curb cocks and boxes, meter settings and
meter pit covers will be furnished by the district at prices to be fixed by
the Superintendent, not exceeding ten percent (10%) above cost.
C. A charge of three dollars ($3.) will be made for tapping the main and
inserting the corporation cock.
D. Service pipes two (2) inches in diameter and larger shall be Universal
cast-iron pipe. Type T. Class 150, connected to a tee in the main with a
gate valve and box close to the main, except as otherwise approved by
the Superintendent.
E. The tee, valve and box and such other fittings as may be necessary for
such connection shall be furnished by the district and shall be installed
by the district or under the supervision or direction of the
Superintendent, and the cost thereof, plus ten percent (10%) to cover
carrying charges and overhead, shall be paid by the applicant.
F. Before the connection is made, applicant shall deposit with the district
such sum as the Superintendent shall deem sufficient for the
aforementioned purposes. Upon the completion of the work, any
balance which may remain in favor of the applicant shall be refunded
upon claim duly made to the Town Board therefor.
§ 64-34 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-38
64:599

ARTICLE II
Fair Harbor Water District
[Adopted 4-3-62]
§ 64-39. Superintendent: appointment, powers and duties; right of
Board to make contracts and leases.
There shall be appointed by the Town Board for the Fair Harbor Water
District a Superintendent, who, on behalf of the Town Board, shall have
general charge of the maintenance and operation of the water system in
said district and keep a record thereof and shall issue all permits required
hereby, render bills for the water furnished or other service given, collect
all accounts due and owing to the district and promptly deposit all receipts
in such bank or trust company as the Town Board from time to time may
direct, and, on or before the tenth day of each month, make report to the
Town Board, by filing the same with the Town Clerk, of all moneys received
by him during the previous month, specifying the name of the person or
corporation for whose account the same has been paid and the purpose
of such payment, giving such further information as may be helpful to or
requested by the Board in properly conducting the affairs of the district.
The salary of the Superintendent and other employees shall be as fixed by
the Town Board. The Superintendent shall also make report at such other
times as may be required by the provisions of the Town Law. Such additional
employees as may be needed by the Superintendent shall be employed by
the Town Board, except that in the case of emergency the Superintendent
may employ such persons and incur on behalf of the district such expense as
the occasion necessitates. The Town Board may make contracts and leases
for any part or all of any work, labor, services, utilities, materials or space
for offices or storage required by the district.
§ 64-40. Audit and payment of claims and charges.
Claims, debts and charges shall be submitted to the Comptroller of the
Town of Islip upon a voucher form furnished by the district, with a
certificate by the creditor as to the correctness of the obligation and that it
is due and owing, and after the same shall have been audited and approved
for payment by the Town Comptroller, shall be paid in the same manner as
other Town charges out of funds credited to the Fair Harbor Water District.
§ 64-41. Superintendent to give bond for faithful performance of
duties.
The Superintendent shall have a bond for the faithful performance of his
duties and for rendering a just and true account of all moneys received by
him on behalf of the district, in such sum as the Town Board may from time
to time direct. The premium of such bond shall be a charge on the district.
§ 64-39 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-42
64:601
§ 64-42. Seasonal and part-seasonal water service.
Seasonal or part-seasonal water service will be available from April 1 to
November 10 inclusive.
§ 64-43. Use of water: permit required, application.
§ 64-44. Attachments, repairs, additions, alterations restricted.
Except the original installation of the service pipe between the water main
and the property line, no person shall make any attachment to or connection
with any of the pipes or mains of the district, nor make any repairs,
additions or alterations to the service pipes, except on the consumer's
property, unless he be an employee of the district or a person or corporation
authorized so to do by the Town Board or Superintendent in the event of an
emergency.
§ 64-45. Laying of service lines.
Unless otherwise permitted by the Superintendent because of local
conditions, such as elevation of the house or contour of the terrain, service
pipes shall be laid at least two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the surface
of the ground at the property line and not more than one and one-half (1 1/
2) feet at the building line. Service pipes and appurtenances thereto on
the consumer's side of the property line shall be kept in good repair at
consumer's expense. For protection of the district water supply and in the
interest of public health, the district will not permit its mains or service to
be connected on any premises with pipes or equipment connected with any
other source of water supply.
§ 64-46. District to assume pipes and fixtures; nonliability; cock
stops; joints.
A. No person or corporation shall use the water supplied by the district for
any purpose whatsoever without having obtained a permit upon written
application therefor, after having first paid the charges pertaining to
the introduction of water to the premises.
B. All applications for introduction of water to any premises or for the use
of water shall be made upon a blank furnished by the district for such
purpose and shall be signed by the owner or his, her or its agent. Such
application shall contain a statement of all uses for which water is
desired, and a use of water for any purpose other than mentioned in the
application shall be sufficient cause to justify the discontinuance of
water service. Application for additional uses may be made at any time
to the Superintendent and permit may be granted therefor, provided it
complies with existing rules and regulations.
A. Upon the installation of a new service or the reinstatement of an
existing service, the district will assume that the pipes and fixtures
which the service will supply are in proper order to receive same, and
§ 64-42 ISLIP CODE § 64-46
64:602
§ 64-47. Closing or vacancy: notice to shut off water.
In case a house or other building is to be closed or become vacant, notice
thereof should be given to the district in order that the supply may be
shut off. Where such notice is not given and pipes burst from freezing or
other cause, the value of water lost by reason thereof, as estimated by the
Superintendent, shall be added to the next bill and be paid in like manner
as regular water charges.
§ 64-48. Closing of curb stops during connections.
Where a new connection is made to a main and where new extensions or
attachments are made in unoccupied houses, the curb stop shall be closed
by the Superintendent of the district. Notice of the completion of the work
shall be given the district and the curb stop shall not again be opened until
the work has been inspected and approved by the Superintendent. Pipes
and connection between the main and the property line shall not be covered
until so inspected and approved.
§ 64-49. Fire hydrants.
the district will not be liable for any accident, breakage, malfunction,
leakage or any damages resulting therefrom arising out of the
furnishing or supplying of water or out of the failure to supply the same.
B. A stop or waste cock shall be provided on the consumer's side of the
property line, so located that all piping on the consumer's side of the
property line can be drained whenever necessary. Provision shall be
made to prevent hot water from reaching the water main.
C. No red or white lead or joint compound shall be used on joints and no
sweat joint shall be used between the main and the water main. No tee
or other fitting through which water can be taken will be permitted on
the service pipe between the main and the property line.
A. No person shall open, interfere with or draw water from any fire
hydrant in the district without a permit therefor from the
Superintendent, except that, in case of fire, hydrants may be opened by
or on the order of any member of a Fire Department or any Fire
Commissioner within the district for the purpose of attaching thereto
fire hose and equipment where a contract for that purpose has been
entered into with the fire district.
B. Whenever a hydrant has been opened and used, notification of such fact
shall be promptly given to the district.
C. No tools or implements shall be used to open hydrants except such as
are furnished by the district or by a Fire Department operating within
the district.
§ 64-46 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-50
64:603
§ 64-50. Turned-off water: permission to turn on.
Where water has been turned off for any purpose by direction of the district,
it shall not be again turned on until directed by the Superintendent or
employee of the district.
§ 64-51. Charges for water and water service installation. [Amended
1-19-71; 7-12-71; 4-5-77; 1-19-8288]
Charges for water service shall be established by resolution of the Town
Board of the Town of Islip and may be amended or altered by said Town
Board thereafter by resolution after a public hearing. Bills will be rendered
annually. The minimum charge shall be one hundred twelve dollars and
fifty cents ($112.50) per house, one hundred eighty dollars ($180.) for
duplex apartments and one hundred eighty dollars ($180.) for bars and
luncheonettes.
§ 64-52. Minimum charge payable with application for service.
The minimum charge shall be due and payable with the application for
water service; plat fee is payable in advance.
§ 64-53. Rents, charges and penalties to be lien upon real property.
§ 64-54. Discontinuance or commencement of service: notice.
Notice, in writing, shall be delivered to the Water District office at least
ten (10) days before the date upon which water service is desired to be
commenced or to be discontinued.
§ 64-55. Use of water for construction purposes.
A. Water charges and penalties thereon shall be a lien upon the real
property upon which the water is used; and on or before the day when,
under the Town Law, preliminary estimates of expenditures are
required to be submitted, the Superintendent shall file with the Town
Clerk a statement showing all water charges with penalties thereon
unpaid for more than sixty (60) days, which said statement shall contain
a brief description of the property to which the water was supplied or
upon which charges were incurred, the name of the owner liable to pay
the same, so far as may be known, and the amount chargeable to each.
B. Such charges and penalties shall not be collected by the
Superintendent of the district after filing of such statement with the
Town Clerk, but may thereafter be paid to the Comptroller of the Town
until such time as a statement of such unpaid water charges and
penalties is submitted to the Board of Supervisors of the County of
Suffolk for the purpose of levying the same as a tax against the property
affected.
88.Editor's Note: This amendment takes effect 2-7-82.
§ 64-50 ISLIP CODE § 64-55
64:604
§ 64-56. Shut-off for violations of provisions.
Whenever any of the provisions of these rules, regulations and ordinance
are violated, the water supply may, in the discretion of the Superintendent,
be shut off.
§ 64-57. Cross-connection control and authority to enter buildings
for inspections. [Amended 7-1-75]
A. When water is required for use in building construction, application
shall be made to the district therefor in the same manner as
hereinabove provided for permanent service. The charge shall be
determined by the Superintendent.
B. Except with the permission of the district, water for construction
purposes shall not be taken from any service connection used for any
other purpose, whether or not on the same premises, or from any main
or hydrant.
A. There shall be no installations or use of interconnections, crossconnections
or other means of allowing water from any source other
than the supply wells of the district to enter the distribution system
except in the case of emergency interconnection authorized by the
Superintendent.
B. There shall be no installations or use of connections for swimming pools
or for underground lawn or irrigation sprinkler systems unless such
connections or systems shall be equipped with cross-connection control
devices approved by the district and installed according to district
requirements.
C. No plumbing fixtures and other water outlets in public, industrial or
commercial buildings which may cause contamination of the district
water supply through cross-connections may be installed in the district
unless they are equipped with cross-connection control devices
approved by the district.
D. No sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries, plating
establishments and other situations which could potentially cause
contamination of the district water supply shall be permitted to exist
unless they are equipped with a reduced-pressure back-flow preventer
or air gap on the service line as a condition of water service.
E. The Superintendent of the district or his authorized agents shall have
full power to enter the premises of any consumer in the district, at all
reasonable hours, to read meters; to examine fixtures, plumbing and
manner of using the water; or to inspect said buildings or premises to
ensure compliance with Subsections A through D hereof.
F. If any violation of Subsections A through D hereof is discovered, the
Superintendent shall notify the owner of the premises or his authorized
agent, in writing, directing him to correct within a reasonable time, any
§ 64-55 WATER DISTRICTS: RULES AND § 64-57
64:605
§ 64-58. District: interpretation of word.
Wherever it is referred to herein that permission be granted by or that an
application be made to or that an act be done by or that an act be approved
by the district, it shall mean the Superintendent of the district.
§ 64-59. Tap specifications.
All taps shall be three-fourths (3/4) inch off the four-inch and six-inch mains.
Upon application to the Superintendent, a consumer may apply for a larger
tap off a six-inch main, provided that the applicant can show that the normal
three-fourths-inch tap will not provide him with adequate water. Where a
one-inch service pipe is used, there shall be an additional charge of fifteen
dollars ($15.) for tapping.
§ 64-60. Service pipes and fittings, cocks, curb stops: conformance
to standards.
Service pipes and fittings, corporation cocks, curb stops and curb boxes
shall conform to such standards and shall be of such make and type as the
Town Board shall adopt and shall be of such size as the Superintendent
deems proper. Service pipes from the curb stop to the house shall be of
pure, seamless, soft-tempered copper tubing with bronze fittings.
§ 64-61. Right to change and amend rules and regulations.
The right is reserved to change and amend these rules, regulations and
ordinance, to make special rates, variations and contracts in all proper
cases, or to turn off the water supply without notice in case of emergency
without liability for damages for lack of water or for any damage which may
result from the turning off of the water supply.
§ 64-62. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of the foregoing shall be an offense
punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.) or by imprisonment
not exceeding ten (10) days, or by both.
§ 64-63. When effective.
This ordinance is to take effect and be in force immediately.
plumbing installed contrary to or in violation of this ordinance, and
which may cause the contamination of the district water supply, or
otherwise adversely affect the public health.
§ 64-57 ISLIP CODE § 64-63
64:606
Chapter 65
(RESERVED)
Chapter 66
WATER QUALITY
§ 66-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip finds that the Administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency has determined that the
aquifer system underlying Nassau and Suffolk Counties is the principal
source of drinking water for these counties, and that if the aquifer system
was contaminated, it would create a significant hazard to public health.
The Board also finds that hydrocarbon products and other toxic chemicals
are stored within this aquifer system in large numbers of underground
storage facilities which are aged, corroded and leaking, at an alarmingly
increasing frequency. The Board further finds that the discharge of such
liquids underground via leaks or above ground via spills contaminates the
aquifer and drinking water, causes the accumulation of volatile vapors in
the vicinity of such discharges, destroys life forms in surface waterways and
requires enormous expenditures in cleanup operations. Finally, the Board
finds that prevention of such discharges is imperative for the health and
safety of all the citizens of the Town of Islip.
§ 66-2. Intent.
The purposes of this local law are to protect the Town's aquifer system from
contamination by hazardous substances, to protect lives and property from
injury and destruction by explosive vapors emitted from volatile liquids and
to protect the Town's waterways and all their life forms from contamination
and destruction by toxic chemicals. The local law is further intended to
provide for:
A. Construction standards and inspection procedures for the storage of
liquids which present a hazard to the Town's waterways or aquifer
system.
B. The inventory of all existing storage systems containing such liquids by
size, composition, age and content.
C. Regular testing of existing liquid storage systems.
D. Replacement of liquid storage systems when their continued use or
presence endangers the health and safety of the public or the Town's
natural resources.
E. Retrieval of expenses incurred by the Town of Islip in achieving
compliance when the owner of the property containing a hazardous
system fails to comply with the provisions of this local law.
§ 64-63 (RESERVED) § 66-3
65:607
§ 66-3. Title and applicability.
This local law shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Quality Law"
and applies to all new and existing liquid storage systems which contain or
are designed to contain hazardous liquids.
§ 66-4. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein; words used in the singular are deemed to include
the plural and vice versa:
AQUIFER — All subsurface water within the Town of Islip.
FAILURE — Any leak, split, blockage, malfunction, improper installation or
similar occurrence which can or does result in a discharge of contaminant
out of the storage system.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — All liquid hydrocarbon products, including
but not limited to gasoline, fuel oil and diesel oil, and any other toxic and
corrosive chemicals, sewage, industrial waste, radioactive materials or any
substance injurious to the environment, the aquifer or waterways. This also
includes solid materials which, if exposed to water, will partially dissolve,
forming a hazardous liquid.
IMPERMEABLE MATERIAL — A layer of natural and/or man-made material
of sufficient thickness, density and composition to prevent the discharge
into the underlying groundwater of any hazardous substances for a period
of at least as long as the maximum anticipated time during which the
hazardous substances will be in contact with the material.
LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEM — Any combination of tanks, barrels,
transmission pipes, vents and pipe fittings which are used or designed to be
used for the storage and/or transmission of hazardous substances, except
a sewage treatment system approved by the Suffolk County Department of
Health.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation or
any and all combinations of individuals acting in concert, as well as
individuals.
WATERWAYS — All surface waters, fresh and salt waters, within the Town
of Islip.
§ 66-5. Enforcement authorization.
This local law shall be enforced by the Director of the Town of Islip Building
Division and the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Control
or their appointed agents. The Building Director, who hereafter shall be
referred to as the "Building Inspector," is hereby authorized to make
inspections of all types of liquid storage systems throughout the Town, to
solicit and maintain inventory of such systems and to ensure that such
systems conform to the provisions of the local law and to adopt rules and
regulations to enforce and carry out the intents of this local law.
§ 66-3 ISLIP CODE § 66-6
66:608
§ 66-6. Discharge of hazardous substances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge hazardous substances upon the surface
or into the subsurface land, aquifer or waterway, anywhere in the Town of
Islip, by whatever method such discharge may occur, except the discharge
of sewage into approved disposal systems. Unlawful discharge includes but
is not limited to:
§ 66-7. Consequences of discharge.
Should the discharge of hazardous substances from a system with a
capacity of one thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons or more occur as
described in this local law, the responsible person, in addition to any other
penalty as authorized in this local law, will be required to take immediate
action to reclaim the discharged material, restore the environment in
accordance with New York State laws and repair any physical damage
caused by the spill, explosion or cleanup operations.
§ 66-8. Registration of liquid storage systems.
Any person owning a hazardous liquid storage system with a capacity of
one thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons or more must register with the
Town of Islip Building Division by providing a site plan of the property and
a complete description of the system, including the location, number, size,
composition, type of liquid being stored, and date of original installation
of underground tanks and transmission pipes. Such registry must be done
within one (1) year from the effective date of this local law on forms
prescribed by the Building Inspector.
§ 66-9. Permit and notification requirements.
A. Failure of underground liquid storage tanks, pipes or connections.
B. Failure of aboveground liquid storage systems.
C. Disposal in landfills, drainage systems, any waterways or on the land
surface.
D. Spills which occur during transport on public or private property.
E. Disposal or storage of contaminated material, including but not limited
to soil, sand or gravel, anywhere in the Town of Islip.
A. It shall be unlawful to install or replace any liquid storage system
without first securing a Town of Islip permit for the same and paying a
permit fee as established by the Town Board. The permit request shall
be prepared on forms prescribed by the Building Inspector and shall
include any information required by him, including the manufacturer's
installation instructions.
B. It shall be unlawful to repair any leak in a liquid storage system without
notifying the Building Inspector within twenty-four (24) hours of
§ 66-6 WATER QUALITY § 66-9
66:609
§ 66-10. New construction of liquid storage systems.
All storage systems which receive a permit after the effective date of this
local law shall comply with the following construction, installation and
testing specifications:
discovering the leak. No permit or notification is required for
mechanical repairs.
A. Underground systems.
(1) All underground liquid storage systems shall be of double-wall
construction, equipped with a failure detection system and
protected both internally and externally from corrosion and
structural failure. Noncorrosive tanks and transmission pipes
approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories may be used in lieu of
double-wall construction. Other storage systems which meet the
safety performance of a double-walled system, as approved by the
Building Inspector, may be used.
(2) Installation must be done strictly in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications or in accordance with installation
procedures approved by the Building Inspector. Construction may
proceed from stage to stage, only upon approval by the Building
Inspector.
(3) The entire system shall be tested before it is covered as required by
the Building Inspector. If a failure is detected, work may not
proceed until the failure is repaired and the system is retested and
no additional failures are found. The system must again be tested
within one (1) year after the system is operational and every ten
(10) years thereafter, in a manner prescribed by the Building
Inspector.
(4) The installation of new underground tanks for the storage of fuel
oil, which have a capacity of less than one thousand one hundred
(1,100) gallons, is exempt from the new construction provisions of
the Water Quality Law, § 66-10 of the Code of the Town of Islip.
[Added 3-4-80 by L.L. No. 3, 1980]
B. Aboveground installations with a capacity of one thousand one hundred
(1,100) gallons or more.
(1) Aboveground liquid storage systems do not require double-wall
construction, but must be placed within drainage collection areas
sized and designed to capture and hold the entire contents of the
largest tank of the storage system and to facilitate the recovery of
any spillage in the event of failure. Such drainage areas shall be
constructed of impermeable material.
(2) Aboveground storage of solid material which can produce a
hazardous liquid when it comes into contact with water must also
§ 66-9 ISLIP CODE § 66-10
66:610
§ 66-11. Testing of existing systems.
be stored within a drainage area designed to collect the rain runoff
and to recover the dissolved material. Such material may be
permanently roofed in lieu of a drainage collection system, but the
material must still be stored on a solid surface impermeable to any
liquid produced from the material.
C. Aboveground systems and aboveground parts of underground systems
must be reasonably protected from damage by motor vehicles, trucks
and vandalism.
A. Every underground liquid storage system existing which does not
conform on the effective date of this local law and has a capacity of one
thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons or more must be tested for
failure, using the final test in the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) No. 329 or other test of equivalent or superior accuracy as
approved by the Building Inspector and in accordance with the
following schedule. Such testing must be performed by a qualified
professional testing service doing business in New York State, and the
results must be presented to the Building Inspector in a signed and
notarized report before December 31 of the year indicated in the
schedule.
B. Retesting shall be done in accordance with the same schedule or as
required by the Building Inspector.
§ 66-10 WATER QUALITY § 66-11
66:611
§ 66-12. Replacement or removal of existing underground systems.
Any replacement of underground liquid storage systems in whole or in
part, as directed by the Building Inspector, must conform to specifications
for new construction. All existing underground systems with capacities of
one thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons or more, regardless of their
age, which do not comply with the provisions of this local law for new
construction must be replaced within fifteen (15) years from the effective
date of this local law or earlier as provided herein.
§ 66-13. Notice of appeal.
Anyone who wishes to appeal the Building Inspector's directive, where such
directive was based on his judgment, requiring the replacement of a system,
must file a written request for a hearing with the Commissioner of Planning
and Development within ten (10) days of receipt of the directive. Failure to
do so will be considered as an agreement to perform the directed work.
§ 66-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any applicable provision of this
local law or failing to comply with a lawful order of the Building Inspector
under this local law, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.), or
be subject to imprisonment for not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both, for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the Building Inspector may
declare the liquid storage system as a public nuisance or an immediate
hazard as provided for in Chapter 9 of the Code of the Town of Islip. Such
declaration may result in the Town of Islip performing all the required work,
including but not limited to the removal of the tanks, and annexing all the
costs incurred by the Town to the tax bill of the person whose property
contains the nuisance or hazard.
C. If failure is detected, that part of the system which failed must be
pumped out immediately and cannot be reused until the system is
repaired or replaced as provided for in this local law. Recovery of the
contaminant shall proceed in accordance with state law, as enforced by
the New York State Department of Transportation.
A. Any underground liquid storage system which fails but is less than ten
(10) years old may be repaired at the direction of the Building Inspector
and in accordance with specifications approved by him. Any system
which fails and which is ten (10) years old or more must be replaced in
accordance with this local law.
B. Any underground liquid storage system which has not been in continual
use for a period of one (1) year and which does not comply with the
specifications of this local law for new construction must be removed
within sixty (60) days of notification by the Building Inspector.
§ 66-11 ISLIP CODE § 66-15
66:612
§ 66-15. Severability.
Each section and every part of each section of this local law is hereby
declared independent of every other section or part hereof, and the finding
or holding of any section or part hereof to be void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect any other section or part thereof.
§ 66-16. When effective.
This local law shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 67
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Control Department — See Ch.
10A.
Nature preserve trust — See Ch. 13.
Environmental Council — See Ch. 13A.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 13B.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
15.
Ladders on bulkheads — See Ch. 30.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 31.
Shellfish — See Ch. 44.
Water quality — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 68.
§ 66-15 WATER QUALITY § 66-16
66:613

ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 67-1. Findings.
§ 67-2. Intent.
It is the intent of the Town Board to protect the citizens of the Town of Islip
by providing for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use
of its watercourses, coastal wetlands and tidal marshes in order to minimize
their disturbance; prevent damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation, salt
water intrusion, loss of fish, shellfish or other beneficial marine organisms,
aquatic wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitat
thereof, the danger of flood and storm tide damage and pollution; to
otherwise protect the quality of watercourses, coastal wetlands, tidal
waters, marshes, shorelines, watersheds and water recharge areas,
underground water reserves, beaches and natural drainage systems for
their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public uses
and values; and further to protect the Town's potable fresh water supplies
from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution and misuse or
mismanagement. Therefore, the Town Board declares that regulation of the
watercourses, coastal wetlands and tidal marshes of Islip Town is essential
A. The Town Board of Islip finds that rapid growth, the spread of
development and increasing demands upon natural resources are
encroaching upon, despoiling, polluting or eliminating many of its
watercourses, coastal wetlands, tidal marshes and other natural
resources and processes associated therewith which, if preserved and
maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute
important physical, social, aesthetic, recreational and economic assets
to existing a future residents of the Town.
B. The Town Board of the Town of Islip finds that the Connetquot River,
from its headwaters to the Great South Bay, is a unique recreational
river area. The State of New York has designated a portion of this river,
from its headwaters to Sunrise Highway, a recreational river, thereby
ensuring the preservation and restoration of its natural scenic
preservation and restoration of its natural scenic and recreational
qualities. Although the State of New York has not included that portion
of the river south of Sunrise Highway in its designation, the Town Board
of the Town of Islip finds that this portion possesses remarkable beauty,
remains relatively unspoiled by development and is an invaluable
recreational facility. The preservation and restoration of the natural
scenic and recreational qualities of this portion of the river is
important. Upland and waterborne development which materially
affects the existing condition, use or appearance of the river south of
Sunrise Highway should only be permitted under regulations that will
prevent adverse effects upon its scenic and recreational qualities.
[Added 2-7-89 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
§ 67-1 WATER QUALITY § 67-2
66:615
to the health, safety, economic and general welfare of the people of Islip
Town, and for their interest.
§ 67-2 ISLIP CODE § 67-2
66:616
ARTICLE II
Title
§ 67-3. Title.
This local law shall be known and may be cited as the "Coastal and Interior
Wetlands Law of the Town of Islip."
§ 67-3 WATER QUALITY § 67-3
66:617

ARTICLE III
Definitions
[Amended 3-6-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
§ 67-4. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein.
AQUIFER — All subsurface water within the Town of Islip.
BANKS — That land area immediately adjacent to, and which slopes toward,
the bed of a watercourse, and which is necessary to maintain the integrity of
a watercourse. For purposes of this local law, a bank shall not be considered
to extend more than 50 feet horizontally from the mean high-water line.
BED — That land area of a watercourse covered by water at a mean high
water.
BOUNDARIES OF A WETLAND — The outer limit of vegetation specified by
the definitions of "freshwater wetlands" and "tidal marsh" below.
COASTAL WETLANDS — All lands and submerged lands bordering on or
within the Town boundaries which are covered by tidal waters permanently
or intermittently from normal or peak-lunar tides.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Planning and Development.[Added
2-7-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — The land and waters in the Town of Islip
(including but not limited to those lands and waters as shown on the
Freshwater Wetlands Map prepared by or for the State of New York and
filed with the Suffolk County Clerk, as such map may from time to time be
amended) which contain any or all of the following:
Lands and submerged lands, commonly called "marshes," "swamps,"
"sloughs," "bogs" and "flats," supporting aquatic or semiaquatic
vegetation of the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(Acer rubrum), willows (Salix spp.), swamp white oak (Quercus
bicolor), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica) and sweet gum (Liquidambar
styraciflua).
(1)
Wetland shrubs which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), pepperbush
(Clethra alnifolia), swamp honeysuckle (Rhododendron viscosum)
and spicebush (Lindera benzoin).
(2)
A.
§ 67-4 WATER QUALITY § 67-4
66:619
INTERTIDAL ZONE — Those tidal marshes and coastal wetlands regularly
covered and exposed by normal tidal water action; the area between mean
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
spp.), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus spp.),
arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria spp.),
reed (Phragmites communis), wild rice (Zizania aquatica), bur
reeds (Sagittaria spp.), purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria),
swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water plantain
(Alisma plantagoaquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating leaved vegetation, including, among others, water
lily (Nymphaea odorata), water shield (Brasenia schreberi) and
spatterdock (Nuphar spp.).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemna spp.), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and watermeal
(Wolffia spp.).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a
competitive advantage over other open land vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex spp.), rushes (Juncus spp.), cattails
(Typha spp.), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), reed canary grass
(Phalaris arundinace), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus)
and spike rush (Eleocharis spp.).
(6)
Bog mat vegetation, including, among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum spp.), pitcher plant (Sarrancenia purpurea) and
cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium oxycoccos).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamoziton spp.), naiads (Najas spp.), bladderworts (Utricularia
spp.), wild celery (Vallisneria americana), coontail (Ceratophyllum
demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum spp.), muskgrass
(Chara), stonewort (Nitella spp.), waterweeds (Elodea spp.) and
water smartweed (Polygonum amphibium).
(8)
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do
not exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six feet, and provided
further that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention.
B.
Lands and waters enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as set
forth herein in Subsection A above and dead vegetation as set forth in
Subsection B above, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation.
C.
The waters overlying the areas set forth in Subsections A and B above
and the lands underlying those in Subsection C above.
D.
§ 67-4 ISLIP CODE § 67-4
66:620
low water and mean high water, including the low marsh cordrass (Spartina
alterniflora).
MATERIAL — Includes but is not limited to soil, sand, gravel, clay, bog, peat,
mud, debris and refuse or any other material, organic or inorganic.
MEAN HIGH WATER — Approximate average highwater level for a given
body of water at a given location.
MEAN LOW WATER — Approximate average low-water level for a given
body of water at a given location.
OPERATION — Use or activity, removal, deposition or construction
operations, or all of these.
OTHER WATERCOURSES — All water bodies other than tidal waters,
including freshwater streams, marshes, swamps, bogs, vernal ponds, ponds
and lakes.
PEAK-LUNAR TIDES — Those excessively high tides or spring tides caused
by lunar gravitational phenomena.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
POLLUTE — To contribute directly or indirectly, intentionally or
accidentally, to such contamination, or other alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties, of the aquifer or any tidal waters or other
watercourses within the Town of Islip, including change in temperature,
taste, color, turbidity or odor of the waters, or such discharge of any liquid,
gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any waters of the Town
as will or is likely to unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment
of life and property or to render such waters harmful, detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses, or
to property, plants, wildlife or other animal life, fish or other aquatic life.
REMOVE — Includes dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline or blast, or in any
manner disturb.
STREAM — A watercourse, or portion thereof, within which or upon which
the flow of water is ordinarily confined due to existing topography, including
the bed and banks thereof, which shall be considered to extend a minimum
distance of 50 feet from the mean highwater mark. Small ponds or lakes
with a surface area at mean low-water level of 10 acres or less and located
in the course of a "stream" shall be considered part of the "stream."
TIDAL MARSH — Those coastal wetlands inundated by tidal waters from
normal tidal action and/or peak-lunar tides, exhibiting salt-marsh peat at
their undisturbed surface and upon which grows some or all of the following
indigenous vegetation: salt-meadow grass (Spartina patens), spike-grass
(Distichlie spicata), black grass (Juncus gerardi), cordgrass (Spartina
alterniflora), saltworts (Salicornia sp.), sea lavender (Limonium
carolinanus), sand spurrey (Spergularia marina), tall cordgrass (Spartina
§ 67-4 WATER QUALITY § 67-4
66:621
pectinata), high-tide brush (Iva frutescens), ditch reed (Phragmites
communis), groundseltree (Baccharis halimifolia), cattails (Typha
augustifolia), spike rush (Eleocharis rostellata), chairmaker's rush (Scirpus
americanus), bent grass (Argostis polustria) and sweet grass (Hierochloe
odorata).
TIDAL WATERS — All waters bordering on or within the Town boundaries
subject to fluctuations in depth from storm, peak-lunar or normal tidal
action and shall include, but is not limited to, all brackish and saltwaters of
streams, ponds, canals, rivers, creeks, estuaries, bays, sounds inlets and the
ocean and may include certain freshwaters.[Amended 2-7-1989 by L.L.
No. 1-1989]
UNITED STATES COAST AND GEODETIC SURVEY — Those elevations
established on contour maps of the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey.
UPLAND — All lands at elevations above the most landward edge of the
tidal marsh and/or above peak-lunar tides or peak storm of record.
WATERCOURSES — All water bodies other than tidal water, including
freshwater streams, marshes, swamps, bogs, vernal ponds, ponds and lakes.
§ 67-4 ISLIP CODE § 67-4
66:622
ARTICLE IV
Acts Requiring Permit
§ 67-5. Permit required for certain acts. [Amended 3-6-84 by L.L.
No. 4, 1984]
§ 67-6. Removal of soil; certain construction. [Amended 12-12-2006
by L.L. No. 7-2006]
The deposition or removal of sand, gravel or any materials and construction
of groins, docks, bulkheads, boathouses, dwellings, roads or other
A. Except as hereinafter provided, except as they are governed by Chapter
47 of this Code,89 it shall be unlawful for any person, without obtaining
a written permit therefor issued by the Town of Islip Department of
Planning and Development (hereinafter referred to as the
"Department"), to:
(1) Place, dump, deposit or permit to be placed, dumped or deposited
soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill of any kind, either
directly or indirectly, into, within or upon any tidal waters or other
watercourses, coastal wetlands, freshwater wetlands or tidal
marshes of the Town of Islip.
(2) Dig, dredge, excavate, remove soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or
other aggregate, directly or indirectly, from any submerged lands,
tidal waters or other watercourses, coastal wetlands, freshwater
wetlands, or tidal marshes.
(3) Erect or place any structure, road, piling or other obstruction,
whether or not changing the ebb flow of the water, into, within or
upon any tidal waters or other watercourses, coastal wetlands,
freshwater wetlands or tidal marshes of the Town of Islip.
(4) Pollute in any form, including but not limited to installation of a
septic tank, running of a sewer outfall and discharge of any sewage
treatment effluent or other liquid wastes into or so as to drain into,
any tidal waters or other watercourses, coastal wetlands,
freshwater water wetlands or tidal marshes of the Town of Islip.
(5) Engage in any activity which substantially impairs any of the
several functions served by the coastal wetlands, freshwater
wetlands, tidal marshes or other watercourses or the benefits
derived therefrom, which are set forth in § 67-2 of this local law.
B. These activities are subject to regulation, whether or not they occur
upon the wetland or watercourses itself, if they impinge upon or
otherwise substantially affect the wetlands or watercourse.
89.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 47, Freshwater Streams, was repealed 12-12-2006 by L.L. No.
6-2006.
§ 67-5 WATER QUALITY § 67-6
66:623
improvements within or near the coastal wetlands, tidal marshes or
watercourses shall be regulated by the provisions of this local law.
§ 67-7. Water products.
The deposition or removal of natural products of the watercourses, tidal
waters, coastal wetlands and submerged lands by commercial or
recreational fishing, shellfishing, aquaculture, hunting or trapping
operations shall be excepted from the provisions of this local law where
otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
§ 67-8. Uses subject to permit.90 [Added 5-28-2008 by L.L. No.
10-200891]
The following activities and uses are permissible if done pursuant to terms
and conditions of a permit issued by the Department:
A. The building and locating of groins, docks, bulkheads, moorings, boat
launching or landing sites and marinas.
B. Temporary storage of materials.
C. (Reserved)
D. Commercial or private recreation facilities consistent with this local law
as determined by the Department.
E. Dams and other water control devices, dredging or diversion of water
levels or circulation or changes in a watercourse to improve hazardous
navigation conditions, or for the improvement of fish, shellfish or
wildlife habitat, recreation facilities or drainage improvements deemed
to be consistent with the intent and objectives of this local law by the
Department.
F. Driveways and roads where alternative means of access are proven to
be impractical in the considered judgment of the Department.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 67-8, Boat anchorage or mooring, was repealed 2-7-1989 by L.L.
No. 1-1989.
91.Editor's Note: This local law also amended the title of Art. IV, which was formerly
“Prohibited Acts.”
§ 67-6 ISLIP CODE § 67-8
66:624
ARTICLE V
Acts and Uses Not Requiring Permit
§ 67-9. (Reserved)92
§ 67-10. Uses not requiring permit.
The following operations do not require a permit from the Department if
they do not involve doing any of the acts proscribed in Article IV:
§ 67-11. (Reserved)93
§ 67-12. Manner of use.
All uses and operations permitted or approved by special permit shall
be conducted in such a manner as will cause the least possible damage
and encroachment or interference with natural resources, vegetation and
A. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife.
B. Outdoor recreation, including play and sporting areas, field trails,
nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping,
boating, waterskiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing, where
otherwise legally permitted and regulated by other regulatory
agencies.
C. Operation of dams and other water control devices, including
temporary alteration or diversion of water levels or circulation for
emergency maintenance or aquaculture purposes.
D. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops.
E. Uses accessory to residential or other permitted primary uses adjoining
lands or waters, provided that they are consistent with the intent and
objectives of this local law.
F. Accessory buildings to main structures; additions. Accessory buildings
and structures, including, but not limited to, pools, sheds, detached
garages, walls, fences, and additions to dwellings or main structures
with a certificate of occupancy will require a permit from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation as directed by the
Department of Planning and Development and a Town of Islip building
permit, where applicable. A Town of Islip wetlands and watercourses
permit will not be necessary for said accessory structures. [Added
12-12-2006 by L.L. No. 7-2006; amended 5-28-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008]
92.Editor's Note: Former § 67-9, Permits required, was repealed 5-28-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008. This local law also amended the title of Art. V, which was formerly “Permitted
Acts.”
93.Editor's Note: Former § 67-11, Uses subject to permit, was repealed 5-28-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008.
§ 67-9 WATER QUALITY § 67-12
66:625
natural processes within the watercourses, coastal wetlands and tidal
marshes.
§ 67-13. Valuation of lands; easements.
The valuation placed on lands affected by this local law for purposes of real
estate taxation shall take into account and be limited by the limitation on
future use of such land, provided that the landowner grants to the Town
a permanent scenic or conservation easement to run with the land. Such
easement shall not necessarily include public access, but shall give to the
Town all development and management rights upon the land subject to
the easement. The value of such easement shall be a legal income tax
deduction subject to Internal Revenue Code, Statutes and Rulings, Section
170, Charitable, etc., Contributions and Gifts.
§ 67-12 ISLIP CODE § 67-13
66:626
ARTICLE VI
Permit Procedures
§ 67-14. Applications.
All applications for a permit to do any of the acts permitted or prohibited by
Articles IV and V of this local law shall be in writing and duly acknowledged
upon forms prescribed by and containing the information required by the
Department.
§ 67-15. Other permits.
This local law does not obviate the necessity for the applicant to obtain any
consent, permit or permission required by any other local, state or federal
agency, before the applicant may proceed with operations and/or activities
authorized by a permit issued by the Department.
§ 67-16. Enforcing authority.
The Department is hereby delegated the authority to implement the
provisions of this local law and shall promulgate such rules and regulations,
subject to prior approval of the Town Board, as may be necessary for such
implementation.
§ 67-17. (Reserved)94
94.Editor's Note: Former § 67-17, Rules and regulations to be consistent with other local
laws, was repealed 5-28-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008.
§ 67-14 WATER QUALITY § 67-17
66:627

ARTICLE VII
Administration of Permit Application
§ 67-18. Permit application evaluation procedures.
Applications for permits under this local law shall be reviewed in accord
with and pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 13B-5 through § 13B-14
inclusive, of Chapter 13B of the Code of the Town of Islip, entitled
"Environmental Quality Review," also known as "Local Law No. 2 of 1980,"
which chapter and local law is made a part hereof and incorporated herein
by reference.
§ 67-19. Duration of permit. [Amended 5-28-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008]
Permits issued by the Department shall be valid for the term and/or period
of time indicated upon the face of the permit. The expiration dates of
permits issued hereunder shall be determined by the Commissioner of the
Department. In no event shall a permit have any validity upon the expiration
of 10 years from the date of its first issuance.
§ 67-20. Procedures upon denial or approval.
If the permit application is denied or approved:
§ 67-21. Action by Town following court decision.
Based upon proceedings and the decision of the court in the event a taking
is declared, the Town may, within the time specified by the court, elect to:
A. Any decision of the Department regarding a permit application shall be
judicially reviewable.
B. Any owner of land within 100 feet of the applicant's property may sue to
challenge the approval and issuance of a permit.
C. If the permit is denied or approved with conditions unacceptable to the
applicant after public hearing, the applicant may appeal to the
appropriate court under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. Institute condemnation proceedings to acquire the applicant's land in
fee by purchase at fair market value.
B. Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions.
C. Invalidate all conditions and the application of this law to the plaintiff's
land and grant a permit without conditions.
§ 67-18 WATER QUALITY § 67-22
66:629
§ 67-22. Display of permit.
The permit applicant or his agent proceeding with operations approved
shall carry on his person or have readily available the approved permit and
show same to any agency or agent of the Town of Islip whenever requested.
§ 67-23. Operations subject to inspection.
Operations conducted under permit shall be open to inspection at any time
by any agency or agent of Islip Town.
§ 67-22 ISLIP CODE § 67-23
66:630
ARTICLE VIII
Compliance Procedures
§ 67-24. Performance bond.
The permit applicant, upon approval of a permit, shall file with the Division
of Building and Housing a performance bond, if required, in an amount and
with sureties and in a form approved by the Department.
A. The bond and sureties shall be conditioned on compliance with all
provisions of this local law and conditions imposed on permit approval.
B. The applicant shall certify that he has public liability insurance against
liability which might result from proposed operations or use, covering
any and all damage which might occur within three years of completion
of such operations.
C. The applicant shall also submit to the Department an affidavit which
indemnifies and saves harmless the Town or any agency or agent
thereof from any claims arising out of or connected with operations
under the permit and from all acts, omissions, commissions or
negligence on the part of the applicant, his agents or employees.
D. The Department shall reserve the right to require a permit or license
for any operations or uses permitted in the watercourses, floodplain
lands, watershed lands, water recharge areas or natural drainage
systems of the Town.
§ 67-24 WATER QUALITY § 67-24
66:631

ARTICLE IX
Penalties and Corrective Action
§ 67-25. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or entity found violating any provision of
this local law or conditions imposed by the Department upon an
approval permit shall be served with a written notice at the direction of
the Department, stating the nature of the violation and providing a
specified time within which the violation shall cease and within which
satisfactory corrective action shall have been taken by the violator.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this local law shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by fine
or imprisonment, or both. Fines may be up to $1,000, and imprisonment
may be for 30 days or less.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who shall continue such
violation beyond the time limit specified by the Department shall be
guilty of another offense and, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an
amount not to exceed $1,000 for each offense or be imprisoned for 30
days, or both.
D. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense under this
local law.
E. In the event that any person, firm, corporation or entity shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit specified by the Department, the
Town Board shall direct the Town Attorney to apply to the Supreme
Court in the 10th Judicial District for an order directing that the
violation be corrected or removed and that all costs and expenses
incurred by the Town of Islip in connection with the proceeding,
including the actual costs of correction or removal, shall be assessed
against the offender.
F. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating the provisions of this
local law shall become liable to the Town for any expense or loss or
damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation.
G. In the event that any person, firm, corporation or entity shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit specified by the Department, which
violation exists in whole or in part on any tidal waters, the Town Board
shall direct after a public hearing, with at least seven days' notice to the
violator, that the violation be corrected or removed. Upon failure to
comply, the Town shall correct or remove the violation. All costs
incurred shall be assessed against the upland to which the violation
contains no indication of ownership, the violation shall be immediately
corrected or removed by the Harbor Master. [Added 2-7-89 by L.L.
No. 1-1989]
§ 67-25 WATER QUALITY § 67-25
66:633

ARTICLE X
Existing or Prior Conditions
§ 67-26. Continuance restricted.
Any structures, dwellings, construction or operations existing within a
watercourse, coastal wetland or tidal marsh prior to the effective date of
this local law shall be exempt from this local law and permitted to continue,
provided that:
A. No new construction, structures, dwellings or operations will be
permitted after the effective date of this local law, except by permit as
provided herein.
B. Where damage or hazardous conditions exist, the landowner may be
required by the Town Board to repair such damage or remedy such
hazardous conditions as the Town Board may direct.
§ 67-26 WATER QUALITY § 67-26
66:635

ARTICLE XI
Repealer; Severability
§ 67-27. Repealer.
All ordinances and local laws or parts of ordinances and local laws in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 67-28. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part or provision of
this local law shall not affect the validity of any other part of this local law
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 67-27 WATER QUALITY § 67-28
66:637

ARTICLE XII
Effective Date
§ 67-29. When effective.
This local law is enacted under the provisions of Article 9 of the New York
State Constitution, the Town Law and the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York. This local law shall take effect when the appropriate
certified copies hereof are filed with the Secretary of State and the
Comptroller of the State of New York pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law.95
95.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Gillnetting, which immediately followed this section, was
declared unconstitutional by the New York State Supreme Court 5-20-1974 and was
therefore removed from the Code.
§ 67-29 WATER QUALITY § 67-29
66:639
Chapter 68
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of aircraft — See Ch. 3B.
Keeping of animals — See Ch. 12.
Excavations — See Ch. 15.
Junkyards — See Ch. 29.
Racetracks — See Ch. 42.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 54.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. 64.
Wetlands — See Ch. 67.
Zoning prior to December 12, 1967 — See Ch.
A78.
§ 67-29 ISLIP CODE § 67-29
66:640
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 68-1. Purposes and considerations.
§ 68-2. Nature of regulations.
In promulgating said purposes, this ordinance regulates and restricts the
height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the
percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other
open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes.
§ 68-3. Word usage and definitions.
A. For the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals and the
general welfare of the community of the Town of Islip, and in
accordance with a comprehensive plan, this ordinance is designed to
lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, flood, panic
and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid
undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision
of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements.
B. This ordinance is adopted with reasonable consideration, among other
things, as to the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town
of Islip.
A. Usage.
(1) For the purposes of this ordinance, unless the context indicates to
the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "lot" includes the word "plot,"
and the word "building" includes structures, but shall not include
any boundary fence or a boardwalk giving access to a structure in a
Residence BAA District, provided that said boardwalk is not more
than four feet in width and not closer to any side line than four feet.
The word "shall" is always mandatory. The words "used" or
"occupied" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or
intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
[Amended 4-8-1997]
(2) All frontages, depths, widths and areas shall be net, measured to or
from the side streets, alleys or rights-of-way.
(3) The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation,
company, partnership or individual.
§ 68-1 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:641
(4) The word "Town" shall mean the Town of Islip.
(5) The term "Town Board" shall mean the Town Board of the Town of
Islip; the term "Planning Board" shall mean the Planning Board of
said Town; the term "Board of Appeals" shall mean the Board of
Appeals of said Town: the term "Commissioner of Planning" shall
mean the Commissioner of Planning and Development of the Town
of Islip; the term "Town Clerk" shall mean the Town Clerk of the
Town of Islip. [Amended 12-17-2019]
B. Definitions.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure
or use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building
or use and located on the same lot with such principal building or use.
Accessory buildings may not be used for habitable purposes, including,
but not limited to, living, sleeping, eating or cooking. All accessory
buildings shall be limited to one story in height. Accessory structures
shall maintain the same dimensional requirements as those required for
accessory buildings. Accessory buildings connected to a main structure
with walkways, decking, or breezeways shall not be not be used for
habitable purposes, including but not limited to living, sleeping, eating,
or cooking.[Amended 9-12-2000; 1-14-2003]
ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY TURBINE — An assemblage of towers,
poles, structures or devices attached thereto, used to convert wind
energy into electrical or mechanical energy in order to supplement an
existingpower source of a primary permitted structure. Accessory wind
energy turbines shall be subject to the regulations found in § 68-420.9
of this ordinance or in any other explicit regulation found within each
zoning district section contained herein. Structures or devices which
provide power to any other dwelling or structure located on a
separateproperty are not considered part of this definition.[Added
12-2-2008]
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility licensed by New York State
which provides a structured, supervised program of meals, health,
social and related support services to elderly or other adults requiring
supervision, but which does not provide overnight occupancy.96[Added
2-25-1992; amended 4-8-1997]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, RENTAL UNITS — The adjusted gross
annual income for occupants of affordable one-bedroom units shall not
exceed 80% of the current median family income for the Nassau-Suffolk
Fair Market Rent Area as published annually by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD MF") for a
family size of two, and the cost of monthly rent plus utilities for each of
the affordable units shall not exceed 30% of 80% of median income for
a family size of two. Rents must either include utilities (heat, electricity
96.Editor's Note: The former definition of "affordable housing," added 4-8-1997, and which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-1-2013.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:642
and water), or must be reduced in accordance with the most current
utility schedule available from the Islip Housing Authority. Affordable
studio units shall be subject to the same requirements based on the
current HUD MFI for a family of one, affordable two-bedroom units
shall be subject to the same requirements based on the current HUD
MFI for a family of three, and affordable three-bedroom units shall be
subject to the same requirements based on the current HUD MFI for a
family of four. The property owner or management company shall enter
into a contract with a not-for-profit HUD Certified Housing Counseling
Agency to review and certify compliance with the above provisions.
This contract must be provided prior to issuance of rental permit(s)
and upon request to the Town of lslip Planning Department.[Added
5-21-2013; amended 2-28-2017; 7-25-2017]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, SALE UNITS — The initial sales price of
each sale housing unit shall not exceed a multiple (two times for a
one-bedroom unit and three times for a two-bedroom unit) of 100% of
the estimated median family income for the sale year for the Nassau-
Suffolk, New York HUD Metro FMR Area as determined by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"). The
Town Board in its discretion may permit by Town Board resolution
a range of affordability levels for a particular project, provided that
the average level of affordability complies with this requirement. In
addition, each individual purchasing family's income shall not exceed
100% of the estimated median family income for the sale year for the
Nassau-Suffolk, NY HUD Metro FMR Area as determined by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), as
adjusted for family size. Subsequent purchasers of such units shall have
at the time of purchase an income at or below 100% of the median
income for the Nassau-Suffolk primary statistical area as defined by the
federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. The property
owner shall enter into a contract with a not-for-profit HUD Certified
Housing Counseling Agency to review and certify compliance with the
above provisions. This contract must be provided prior to the issuance
of certificate(s) of occupancy and upon request to the Town of Islip
Planning Department. Nothing herein shall limit the Town Board's
ability to require a mitigation fee in lieu of construction of affordable
housing in accordance with provisions of New York State Town Law. To
insure continued compliance with this legislation, and as a condition of
a change of zone or subdivision approval pursuant to New York State
Town Law, all affordable sale units shall be subject to covenants and
restrictions that run with the land, and restrict the sale and resale
of such units in accordance with the above requirements.[Added
5-21-2013; amended 2-28-2017]
AMBULETTE — A vehicle primarily responsible for transporting people
for medical purposes in nonemergency situations that is approved by
the New York Department of Transportation. Said vehicle shall not be
construed as a taxi.[Added 6-8-2010]
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:643
ANIMAL CARE CENTER — An establishment whose primary service
is the boarding of dogs and cats, inclusive of day care, grooming,
veterinary care and behavior training. An animal care center shall
be located a minimum distance of 500 feet from any residential use
or zone. Outside activity shall be located a minimum distance of 500
feet from any residential use or zone. The accessory sale of animal
care products, including, but not limited to, food, toys, and cleaning
products, shall be clearly incidental and limited to 10% of the overall
gross floor area or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less.[Added
4-8-1997; amended 2-28-2017]
APARTMENT — An entirely self-contained dwelling unit containing
complete housekeeping facilities, including cooking facilities, for only
one family. An apartment shall have no enclosed space in common
with any other dwelling or apartment other than vestibules, entrances
hallways or porches.[Added 4-8-1997]
APARTMENT HOUSE OR GARDEN APARTMENT (APARTMENTS) — A
building or buildings arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by
two or more individuals or families living independently of each other
in apartments.[Amended 4-8-1997]
ASSEMBLY AND SOCIAL RECREATION HALL — A center, excluding
game rooms, game centers, or bars, taverns or nightclubs, as defined
herein, in which people assemble, where the purposes of assembly
are amusement, entertainment, education, recreation, socialization,
relaxation, association or communication, or any similar purpose or
purposes. Such establishment may serve beverages or allow their
consumption on the premises as accessory to the primary assembly
use.97[Added 8-19-1980; amended 6-8-2010]
AUCTION HOUSE — A building, site, or portion of a site used for
auctioning of real, personal and intellectual property at scheduled
auction events wherein bids for the items are solicited and accepted
to effectuate the sale thereof. Auction houses shall not include any
business that engages in retail sale of items at set prices to the general
public. An auction house that, as an accessory use, engages in outdoor
storage of vehicles, boats or heavy equipment shall not be considered
a violation of § 68-338R, which prohibits outdoor storage of vehicles,
but shall require a special permit from the Planning Board, as set forth
below in § 68-340.1.[Added 12-17-2019]
AUTOMOBILE PARKING FIELD — A lot used solely for the parking of
registered automobiles. An automobile parking field shall only be used
in conjunction with a permitted use which is adjacent to or directly
across the street from the parking field and, provided that a site plan
is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board or its designee
indicating compliance with all Town standards.[Added 4-8-1997]
97.Editor's Note: The former definition of "assembly hall," added 4-18-1979, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-19-1980.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:644
BAR, TAVERN OR NIGHTCLUB — An establishment principally
engaged in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption, subject to regulatory authority of the New York State
Liquor Authority and consisting of one or more of the following
characteristics: age restrictions or cover charges for admission;
dancing, music provided by live entertainment, disc jockeys, jukeboxes
or the like; and hours of operation which extend beyond the normal
dining times for dinner. The accessory or incidental sale of foods or
snacks shall not entitle such a use to be considered restaurant or minor
restaurant use under other provisions of this Code, but the permanent
or temporary removal or relocation of tables and chairs from such
an establishment to permit any of the aforesaid characteristics shall
constitute the creation of a bar, tavern, or nightclub use. Production
of a limited amount of beer on-premises, for both on- and off-premises
consumption, shall be permitted as a use clearly accessory to a bar,
tavern, or nightclub, not to exceed 25% of the gross floor area of
the establishment, subject to the limitations of a restaurant brewer
license issued by the New York State Liquor Authority. Spent grain from
the brewing process shall be stored in rodent proof containers until
disposed of off site.[Added 4-8-1997; amended 2-28-2017]
BASEMENT — The lowest level of a structure when there is more
than 50% of the lowest level above average grade. For the purposes of
determining the percent above grade, the basement shall be measured
from the first-floor elevation (F.F.El.) to the basement floor. A basement
shall be counted as gross floor area.[Added 1-14-2003]
BAY ISLAND — Any of the islands located within that portion of the
Great South Bay owned by the Town of Islip or the federal government,
including but not limited to Captree Island(s), Sexton Island,
Havemeyer Island, East Fire Island and West Fire Island.[Added
6-8-2010]
BILLIARD HALL — A business primarily engaged in the renting of more
than one billiard table on an hourly or per-use basis. This definition
shall not apply to businesses whose primary use is a restaurant, or
bar, tavern or nightclub, that offers billiard tables as an accessory
use.[Added 6-8-2010]
BOAT — Any vessel used on the water or capable of being used as
a means of transportation, except a kayak, canoe, rowboat, personal
watercraft or specialty prop-craft.[Added 2-24-2009]
BOAT BERTH — A place or structure built along or at an angle from the
shore of navigable water for the mooring of boats.[Added 5-6-1980]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
When separated by a party wall without openings, it shall be deemed a
separate "building."
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum cross-sectional
areas of the buildings on the lot, excluding cornices, eaves or gutters
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:645
projecting not more than 18 inches, steps, open terraces or other
features of an ornamental character.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The point of the main building nearest
to the street property line of the lot.[Added 9-11-2001]
BUILDING HEIGHT — Unless otherwise stated, the vertical distance
from the average grade of the ground at the base of the structure,
or the average grade at the street, whichever is less, to the highest
point of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires and similar permitted
projections shall not be included in the height For detached structures
in conforming locations accessory to single-family dwellings, the height
shall be measured from the average of the four corners of the structure.
For any single-family residential and any structure(s) accessory thereto,
within an area of special flood hazard pursuant to Article XL of this
chapter, building height shall be measured from the average grade
of the ground at the base of the structure or the minimum elevation
necessary to meet the prerequisites for federal flood insurance as
determined by the National Flood Insurance Program/FEMA shown
on any applicable Flood Insurance Rate Map. The Commissioner of
Planning, or the Commissioner's designee, shall be responsible for
any interpretations concerning average grade and/or base flood
elevation.[Amended 4-18-1978; 4-8-1997; 3-5-2013; 12-17-2019]
CAFETERIA — An accessory food service use located within a permitted
principal use consisting of self-service tray lines wherein patrons select
from a range of prepared or prepackaged food items and subsequently
pay for said items at a cashier prior to entering the primary dining area.
This definition shall not be construed to include minor restaurants,
restaurants or fast-food restaurants as defined herein. Cafeterias shall
only be permitted as accessory to a permitted principal use and must
be located within the same structure as the permitted principal use.
Cafeterias shall not provide food service to the general public, and
patrons shall consist only of those working in or visiting the permitted
principal use. Waiter or table service shall be prohibited in connection
with a cafeteria use.[Added 5-2-2000]
CANOPY — An accessory structure, subject to zoning district and
arterial highway setback requirements, without sidewalls or drops for
at least 75% of its perimeter, and supported by columns or posts or
attached to a building, used to provide shelter from the elements.
Canopies may include shelters over gasoline pump island(s) or service
depots. Permanent canopies accessory to retail fuel service stations
shall be exempt from Article XXXIX, Tents and Canopies, but must still
observe all pertinent requirements of the Town of Islip Zoning Code,
inclusive of, but not limited to, Articles XXVII and XXII and all New
York State Building and Fire Code requirements.[Added 8-25-1987;
amended 1-14-2003; 2-28-2017]
CANOPY SIGN — A secondary wall sign that identifies a single service,
graphic or symbol in individual channel letters or block design located
on the fascia of the permitted canopy.[Added 1-14-2003]
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:646
CAR WASH (MOTOR VEHICLE WASH) — A building or part of a
building used for the washing of motor vehicles. A car wash shall
provide queuing for at least 12 cars.[Added 4-8-1997; amended
12-17-2019]
CELLAR — The lowest level of a structure when there is less than
50% of the lowest level above average grade. For the purposes of
determining the percent below grade, the cellar shall be measured
from the first-floor elevation (F.F.E1.) to the cellar floor. A cellar shall
be counted as gross floor area as required under the definition of
gross floor area. A cellar shall not be used for permanent habitable
space activities, including sleeping and cooking.[Added 1-14-2003;
amended 4-5-2005]
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — Any premises that provides care for six
or more children during the day or evening hours and where tuition,
fees or other forms of compensation are charged regardless of whether
or not the facility is licensed by any state or other governmental agency.
A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required in connection with
any day-care center operated within a residential zone. This definition
does not include day camps, registered nursery schools, kindergartens,
after-school religious instruction programs or residential day care
licensed by New York State.[Added 4-8-1997; amended 11-19-2019]
COLLATERAL LOAN BROKER — Any person, partnership or
corporation:[Added 6-23-2009]
COMMERCIAL BILLBOARDS — Any outdoor sign attached to a pole or
post or posts safely embedded in the ground, which is larger than an
advertising sign.
CONVENIENCE MARKET — A retail establishment which sells food and
beverages, prepackaged or packaged within the establishment and in a
ready to consume state and which may also sell newspapers, magazines
and/or other sundries of a convenience nature, and which is open at
least 15 hours per day. A retail establishment commonly referred to as
a "supermarket" with a minimum gross floor area of 25,000 square feet
shall not be included as a part of this definition.[Added 9-16-1986;
amended 4-8-1997]
CRAFT TRADE SHOP — Establishments for custom work and for
making articles to be sold at retail on the subject parcel intended for
the general public and not for wholesale, including, but not limited
Loaning money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or
(1)
Dealing in the purchasing of personal property on condition of
selling it back at a stipulated price; or
(2)
Designated or doing business as a furniture storage warehouseman
and loaning and advancing money upon goods, wares or
merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
(3)
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:647
to, artist, artisan, baker, confectioner, decorator, dressmaker, furrier,
glassmaker, ironsmith, milliner, printer, or photographer. This definition
shall not apply to those uses explicitly defined within this section,
industrial manufacturing, mass production or for the brewing and
distilling of alcoholic beverages.[Added 12-17-2019]
DANCE HALL — A public hall in which people assemble, where the
main purpose of assembly is dancing to musical accompaniment, live or
recorded. Such establishment may serve alcoholic beverages. It must
have conspicuously posted on the premises a certificate of compliance
with the State Labor Law assembly provisions and must comply with
the Town of Islip Fire Prevention Code.98
DECKS/PATIOS — A single or multilevel open, flat, floored structure,
without a roof or other enclosed structure, composed of wood, metal,
masonry or similar material. "Decks and patios" shall be set back
in accordance with the schedule of setback requirements identified
in § 68-407. Decks and patios which contain roofs or other enclosed
structures shall conform to the minimum setback requirements of the
main structure, or as indicated in § 68-407, whichever is
greater.99[Added 3-24-1992]
DELICATESSEN — A retail-type establishment which sells food and
beverages, prepackaged or packaged within the establishment and in
a ready-to-consume state, which is open no more than 15 hours a
day, and which utilizes a minimum of 50% of the floor area open to
customers for the display of sundries and foodstuffs for sale. Cooking
facilities may be permitted on site for the preparation and service
of food. The addition of seating to the facility changes the use to a
minor restaurant or restaurant use as appropriate.[Added 4-5-2005;
amended 9-19-2017]
DOCK — A wharf or portion of a wharf extending along the shoreline
and generally connected with the uplands throughout its
length.100[Added 12-12-2006]
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively for residential purposes
and arranged or intended to be occupied by one individual or one family
only.[Added 4-8-1997]
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A building(s) arranged, designed for and
occupied by two or more families living independently of each other
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Fire Prevention Code. The former definition of "day-care
center," added 8-19-1980, as amended 2-7-1984, which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-8-1997. See now "child day-care center." The former definition
of "deck" added 9-4-1984, which also followed, was repealed 5-7-1985.
99.Editor's Note: The former definition of "decorative pond" which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-14-2003.
100. Editor's Note: The definition of "dog kennel," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 8-14-2007. See now "kennel."
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:648
in separate dwelling units.101[Amended 1-16-1990; amended
4-8-1997]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof arranged,
designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently
of each other with separate cooking facilities. A boardinghouse,
furnished-room house, dormitory, rooming house, tourist house or
fraternity house is a building in which there are less than 30 sleeping
rooms occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with or without
meals and in which there are provided such services as are incidental
to its use as a temporary residence, and is a "multiple dwelling"; a
dwelling occupied by one or two families with five or more transient
boarders, roomers or lodgers in one or both households.102
DWELLING, SINGLE OR ONE-FAMILY — A building designed
exclusively for residential purposes and arranged or intended to be
occupied by one individual or one family only. A single or one-family
dwelling shall not have a separate entrance leading to a separated
living space which contains a stove, kitchen and/or attached plumbing
fixtures.[Amended 12-12-2006; 6-8-2010]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building arranged, designed for or
occupied exclusively as a home or residence for not more than two
families living independently of each other.[Amended 1-7-1986]
FAMILY — — One or more persons, whether or not related to each
other by blood, marriage or adoption, all occupying a single, whole,
legal single or one-family dwelling unit as a traditional family or the
functional equivalent of a traditional family, having access to and
utilizing the whole of such dwelling unit, including but not limited to all
rooms and housekeeping facilities, in common.[Amended 4-8-1997]
In determining whether individuals are living together as the
functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria
must be present:
The group is one which in structure and function resembles a
traditional family unit; and
(a)
The occupants must share the entire single or one-family
dwelling unit and live and cook together as a single
housekeeping unit. A unit in which the various occupants act
as separate roomers may not be deemed to be occupied by the
functional equivalent of a traditional family; and
(b)
The occupants share expenses for food, rent, ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses; and
(c)
(1)
101. Editor's Note: A second definition of "attached dwelling," added 1-16-1990, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-14-2003.
102. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "dwelling, semiattached," added 1-16-1990, and
"dwelling, senior-citizen-shared," added 10-2-1984, were repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:649
The occupancy is permanent and stable. Evidence of such
permanence and stability includes, but is not limited to:
The presence of minor children regularly residing in the
household who are enrolled in local schools;
[1]
Members of the household have the same address for
purposes of voter registration, drivers' licenses, motor
vehicle registration, filing of taxes and delivery of mail;
[2]
[3] Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a year
or more whether in the current dwelling unit or in other
dwelling units; and
[4]
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the
members of the household.
[5]
(d)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the
occupants are the functional equivalent of a family.
(e)
It shall be presumed that a single or one-family dwelling unit is
occupied by more than one family if it contains more than one
kitchen or any of those items listed below, found to exist by the
Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development,
his designee or any person authorized to enforce or investigate
violations of Chapter 68 of the Code of the Town of Islip or any
laws, codes, rules and regulations of the State of New York:
[Amended 12-12-2006]
The occupancy at issue is not permanent and stable as defined
hereinabove;
(a)
(b) More than one mailbox, mail slot or P.O. address;
More than one doorbell or doorway on the same side of the
dwelling unit, unless shown on plans approved by the Building
Division. [Amended 12-17-2019]
(c)
(d) More than one gas meter;
(e) More than one electric meter;
(f) More than one connecting line for cable television service;
Separate entrances for segregated parts of the dwelling unit
including but not limited to bedrooms;
(g)
Partitions or internal doors with locks which may serve to
bar access between segregated portions of the dwelling unit,
including but not limited to bedrooms;
(h)
(2)
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:650
FARMERS' MARKET — Any buildings, structure or area in which more
than five transient or part-time vendors offer for sale to the public
goods, wares, merchandise or foods; or any building, structure or area
in which goods, wares, merchandise or foods are offered for sale by
more than three vendors to the public for a total number of hours per
week which is less than the total number of hours per week which
permanent vendors of comparable goods, wares, merchandise or foods
offer to the public; or any building, structure or area in which sales to
the public by more than three vendors are contemplated on less than
five full business days per week.
FERRY TERMINAL, SLIP, LANDING, OR FACILITY — A parcel of land
used for the taking on or discharging of passengers and/or cargo for
travel from or return to the parcel of land or other parcels of land
by a marine vessel with or without a fee. The operation or mooring
of any gambling or casino vessel in connection with said parcel shall
not be included as part of this definition.[Added 4-5-2005; amended
12-12-2006]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of a structure
divided by the total lot area.104[Added 10-6-1987]
GAMBLING VESSEL — Any ferry, sightseeing, excursion, sport fishing
or passenger ocean vessel that operates a shipboard gambling or casino
business subject to regulation under Part IV, Regulatory Local Laws,
Chapter 310, of the Suffolk County Administrative Code or any
successor or preemptive legislation.[Added 12-12-2006]
Separate written or oral leases or rental arrangements,
payments or agreements for portions of the dwelling unit
among its owner(s) and occupants;
(i)
The inability of any occupant to have lawful access to all parts
of the dwelling unit; or
(j)
(k) (Reserved)
A dwelling shall not have a separate entrance leading to a
separated living space which contains a stove, kitchen sink
and/or attached plumbing fixtures.
(l)
A separate entrance leading directly to a separated living
space containing a bathroom.103
(m)
All of the foregoing may be rebutted by evidence presented to
the Code Enforcement Official, as defined in § 68-649 of the Town
Code, or any court of competent jurisdiction. [Added 5-22-2007]
(3)
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, providing opportunity to rebut the foregoing, was
repealed 12-12-2006. The former definition of "family day-care home," added 2-7-1984,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-8-1997.
104. Editor's Note: The former definition of "food and beverage service establishment," added
11-14-1995, which immediately followed, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:651
GAME CENTER — A hall which contains three or fewer pinball
machines, electronic video-screen games, foosball games, air hockey
games, skeebowls or any other similar games or machines for the use of
which fees are paid directly into the machine or to any operator.[Added
8-19-1980, amended 12-15-1981]
GAME ROOM — A hall which contains four or more pinball machines,
electronic video-screen games, foosball games, air hockey games,
skeebowls or any other similar games or machines for the use of which
fees are paid directly into the machine or to any operator.[Added
8-19-1980, amended 12-15-1981]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, or a part of a principal
building, for the private use of the owner or tenant of the lot on
which the private garage exists. The use of a private garage shall be
limited to a permitted accessory use as defined by the Islip Town Code.
The maximum height of any garage door shall be eight feet.[Added
4-8-1997105; amended 1-14-2003]
GASOLINE (FUEL) SERVICE STATION — A building or part of a
building designed and used for the sale of gasoline and/or other auto
related fuels with or without the retail sale of motor vehicle related
products. Gasoline service stations may also include the operation of
a convenience store and/or a vehicle repair shop as an accessory use
subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board after
due public hearing.[Added 4-8-1997; amended 6-8-2010]
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The total floor area, including all levels
or stories, of a structure as measured from the exterior faces of the
walls.[Amended 4-8-1997; 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005; 12-12-2006;
9-11-2007; 5-28-2008; 6-8-2010]
Gross floor area shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Primary buildings/structures.
Accessory buildings/structures, except as described below.
[Amended 10-25-2011]
(b)
(c) Basements as defined herein.
(d) Mezzanines as defined herein.
(e) Storage space.
Floor space utilized for mechanical equipment with structural
headroom of seven feet six inches or more.
(f)
All ground-level covered or enclosed porches, patios and
decks, except those exempted below.
(g)
(1)
105. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "garage, public" and "garden apartments," which
immediately followed, were repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:652
Area under a gable, hip, gambrel or similar-type roof where
there exists a floor-to-ceiling height of four feet six inches or
more.
(h)
Cellars, basements, storage space or occupied space for
nonresidential uses.
(i)
(j) Decks located on Fire Island.
The following structures shall not contribute towards gross floor
area:
(a) Residential cellars as defined herein.
Decks not located on Fire Island, provided that they are
accessory to a permitted principal use and are not roofed over,
covered or enclosed.
(b)
Covered, unenclosed residential porches located in any portion
of a front yard and which do not extend more than six feet from
the front wall of the dwelling.
(c)
Any decorative or cantilevered architectural element
protruding from any structure when not contributing more
than 25% of the facial area of the wall of said building.
(d)
Cloth or similar fabric awnings attached to buildings for
decorative purposes and which do not contain any signage or
wording. Said awnings shall not expand the functional floor
area of any use, including but not limited to public assembly,
inventory storage, or shielding or screening of HVAC
equipment.
(e)
Enclosures designed to conceal rooftop wireless
communication facilities, provided enclosure does not serve
any other purpose or use. [Added 3-8-2011]
(f)
Residential accessory structures not containing any plumbing
fixtures and which are smaller than or equal to 499 square
feet or 249 square feet if said structure is located within
the Residence BAA District. [Added 10-25-2011; amended
8-5-2014]
(g)
Decks located on Fire Island, provided that they are accessory
to a permitted principal use and are not roofed over, covered or
enclosed and which are a maximum of five feet above average
grade. For the purposes of this section, average grade shall
be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the
ground to the bottom of the lowest horizontal joist member
at each external corner of said deck and taking the average
thereof. [Added 10-25-2011]
(h)
(2)
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:653
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a building for living, recreation,
sleeping, eating or cooking.[Added 12-12-2006]
HARBOR AREAS — All navigable creeks, rivers, canals, etc., which
flow or open into the Great South Bay as defined in § 37-51.[Added
6-12-2007]
HEALTH CLUB — An indoor facility whose predominant use involves
such activities as court games, swimming pools, physical exercise
equipment, locker rooms, jacuzzi and/or sauna.[Added 4-8-1997]
HEAVY CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES EMERGENCY VEHICLES AND
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Those vehicles and/or equipment commonly
used during construction, building maintenance, emergency response,
demolition of utilities, buildings, or structures or with the excavation
of earth, sand, or other construction materials. Such vehicles and
equipment shall include, but not be limited to, commercial-grade
tractors, backhoes, front-end loaders, forklifts, bulldozers, ambulances,
first responder vehicles, fire trucks, and scissor lifts. Inclusion of and
additions to vehicles and equipment that fall under this definition shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board. This
definition shall not be construed to include motor vehicle dealerships as
defined by this chapter.106[Added 9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003]
HOME OCCUPATION — An office activity conducted within a singlefamily
residence in a single-family residential district by the residents
thereof as an accessory use within the main dwelling that does not
change the character of the building as a residence or the character
of the site as a residential plot. The activity may employ a maximum
of one nonresident and shall not occupy more than 15% of the gross
floor area of the residence, unless a variance is issued by the New
York State Department of State in which case a maximum of 25%
of the gross floor area may be permitted; in no case more than 500
square feet. Parking for the home occupation use shall be installed,
landbanked or screened from view pursuant to the direction of the
Commissioner of Planning and Development or the Commissioner's
designee. The following uses shall be considered home occupations:
the office of a single physician, dentist, chiropractor, lawyer, architect,
engineer, surveyor, accountant, financial planner, insurance agent or
tutor, provided that instruction is limited to a single pupil at one time.
Other similar uses, which do not alter the character of the house as
Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, bay windows, and
fireplaces which extend no more than 24 inches from the
exterior walls of a building. [Added 8-5-2014]
(i)
Area beneath staircases in single-family and two-family
dwellings. [Added 2-28-2017]
(j)
(k) Permanent canopies over fuel dispensers. [Added 9-19-2017]
106. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "home day care," which immediately followed, was
repealed 11-19-2019. See now the definition of "residential day care."
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:654
a residence, may only be permitted after the review and approval of
the Board of Appeals. In no case shall the following uses be deemed
permitted home occupations; bars, taverns, nightclubs, restaurants,
minor restaurants, fast-food restaurants, convenience markets,
veterinarian, dance studio, real estate broker, musical instruction
groups, art or photo galleries, funeral parlor/home, barbershops,
beauty parlors, adult homes, nursing homes, tattoo parlor, any use
involving outside storage, including the outside storage of registered
vehicles, outside display or any retail use.[Added 10-3-1978;
amended 12-9-1997; 12-12-2006; 12-17-2019]
HOSPITAL — A facility duly licensed and approved by the New York
State Department of Health or federal agency having jurisdiction that
is engaged in providing health care and related activities consisting
of inpatient and outpatient facilities, including but not limited to:
operating rooms, emergency rooms, patient rooms, treatment areas
and related medical, clinical and support facilities; clinics; nursing,
educational and research facilities; offices for medical, professional and
administrative staff; meeting and conference areas; laboratories; and
accessory uses such as helipads, cafeterias, snack shops, gift shops,
flower shops, newsstands and similar uses.[Added 10-16-2018]
HOTEL — A building or a group of buildings designed, intended or
used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for travelers
and consisting of individual units. Accommodations are offered to the
general public on a daily rate and may include additional services,
such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities as an
accessory use within a principal structure.107[Amended 4-8-1997]
INDUSTRIAL ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY TURBINE — An assemblage
of towers, poles, structures or devices attached thereto, used to convert
wind energy into electrical or mechanical energy in order to
supplement an existing power source of a primary permitted structure
located only within an Industrial 1 District, Industrial 2 District, or
Industrial Corridor District and which fully complies with the
requirements listed in § 68-420.10 of this chapter.108[Added
9-29-2009]
KITCHEN — An area within a building which contains a sink, a
refrigerator and an element utilized for heating or cooking of
consumable goods.[Added 12-12-2006]
LIVE-WORK UNIT — An integrated housing unit and work space,
occupied and utilized by a single-family household in a structure that
has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint
residential occupancy and work activity for the primary use. The
maximum square footage for living space shall be limited to
2,000.[Added 12-17-2019]
107. Editor's Note: The former definition of "leisure park," added 4-7-1981, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-8-1997.
108. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "kennel," amended 8-14-2007, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 2-28-2017.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:655
LOT — A parcel of land, exclusive of street areas, used or designed
to be used by one use or building or by a related group of uses or
buildings and the accessory uses or buildings customarily incident
thereto, including open spaces as are required by this ordinance.
Upland only shall be termed land; neither land under water, shore,
strand nor beach shall be deemed land for the purpose of this
ordinance.
LOT AREA — The total area measured inside all the lot lines, leaving
out the underwater portion.
LOT, CORNER — A lot with frontage on two or more intersecting
streets.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot extending from one street to another street or
right-of-way, having frontage on two streets or right-of-ways where the
lot frontages do not intersect.[Amended 12-17-2019]
MARINA OR MARINE WHARF — A structure built or maintained for
the purpose of providing, as a principal use, secure moorings for boats
and offering, as accessory uses, supply, repair and other boat-related
facilities. The operation or mooring of any gambling or casino vessel
shall not be included as part of this definition.109[Amended 5-6-1980;
12-12-2006]
MEZZANINE — An intermediate level or levels between the floor and
ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than 1/
3 of the area of the room or space in which the level or levels are
located.[Added 12-12-2006]
MINI-STORAGE WAREHOUSE — A multiunit structure wherein each
unit is used for personal storage of goods which are not intended for
transport, distribution or resale. Each such unit is further intended
to be accessed by a primary lessee through a single door only. No
habitation or long-term or daily occupancy of such units shall be
considered part of this definition.[Added 6-8-2010]
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building in which residential uses are
permitted to exist simultaneously with legally permitted commercial
uses.110[Added 1-6-1981, amended 4-8-1997]
MOTOCROSS TRACK — An off-road dirt or mud track on a closed
course that includes turns, hills and jumps for the outdoor recreational
use by riders of off-road all-terrain vehicles, off-highway motorcycles or
other wheeled vehicles that are propelled by a force other than human
energy.[Added 9-19-2017]
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERSHIP — A building or a part of a building or
a lot of a part of a lot used for the sale, rental, lease, display or storage
of new or used vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles,
109. Editor's Note: The former definition of "minor food service establishment," added
11-14-1995, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-8-1997.
110. Editor's Note: The former definition of "motel," amended 6-22-1971, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-8-1997. See now "hotel (motel)."
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:656
vans, trucks, trailers, buses, campers, recreational vehicles or boats
or any vehicle required to be registered with the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles. This definition shall not be construed
to include heavy construction vehicles, emergency vehicles and related
equipment. Motor vehicle dealerships may also include vehicle repair
and/or a car wash facility as accessory uses subject to the issuance of
a special permit from the Planning Board after due public hearing. A
car wash shall provide a queue for at least 12 cars, unless modified
by the Planning Board.111[Added 4-8-1997; amended 9-11-2001;
1-14-2003; 5-21-2013; 12-17-2019]
MUSEUM — A building, place or institution devoted to the acquisition,
conservation, study, exhibition and educational interpretation of objects
having scientific, historical or artistic value.[Added 6-8-2010]
NEW STRUCTURE — Any structure constructed from a foundation or
any existing structure, the floor area of which is increased by 50% of
the floor area of the existing structure or more, or altered by more than
50% of the existing structure prior to alteration.[Added 4-5-2005;
amended 12-12-2006; 5-15-2018]
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building, structure, land
or water area lawfully existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter, or any amendments thereto affecting such use, which does not
conform to the provisions of the use district in which it is situated. This
definition shall not apply to structures that maintain a valid certificate
of occupancy or certificate of compliance and are being used for the
permitted uses of the district within which they are located. Structures
in this category shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the
district in which they are located and the provisions of § 68-17E and
F.[Amended 4-21-1998; 9-11-2001; 1-14-2003]
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space in a building used for bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility is not considered habitable
space but will be included in the floor area ratio (FAR) calculation
unless located in a cellar. Recreation rooms located in a cellar will not
be considered habitable space. Nonhabitable space in a cellar will not
be included in the floor area ratio (FAR) calculation but will require
egress and ceiling height as per NYS Codes.[Added 12-12-2006]
OFFICE — A building or a portion of a building wherein services
are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or
clerical operations.[Added 4-8-1997]
OFFICE, MEDICAL — An office, where the services performed within
are of a medical or therapeutic nature, and are conducted by or under
the supervision of a professional licensed by the New York State
Education Department.[Added 2-28-2017]
111. Editor's Note: The former definition of "motor vehicle and repair service," added 4-8-1997,
and which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:657
OFFICIAL MAP — A physical or electronic graphic representation of
that part of the Town outside the limits of any incorporated city or
village, showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out,
adopted and established by law, and drainage systems may also be
shown on such map. Such map shall show the location and width of
streets and highways, drainage systems, zoning district boundaries,
or any other meaningful and certifiable geographic information. Such
map shall be derived from any legal and legitimate supporting
documentation and may be updated at any time based on said
documentation and by authorization of the Commissioner of Planning.
Any copy derived from the Official Map, whether of physical or
electronic form, may be subject to certification by the Commissioner of
Planning or his designee.[Added 5-28-2008]
OUTDOOR/OUTSIDE DISPLAY — The location of goods, materials,
merchandise or equipment other than in an enclosed building, located
within the front yard, second front yard or side yard and intended
for public viewing. Displays shall be located within 15 feet of any
retail structure and shall not be permitted overnight. The display of
any vehicle for sale or storage shall not be considered part of this
definition.[Added 4-21-1998; amended 6-8-2010]
OUTDOOR STORAGE — Any overnight storage located other than in
an enclosed building or structure which meets the New York State
Fire and Building Code. Said storage consists of a primary inventory
of goods for any commercial operation and is not whether or not it is
intended for public viewing and/or for retail uses.[Added 4-8-1997;
amended 9-11-2001; 1-14-2003; 5-20-2003; 4-5-2005; 6-8-2010;
10-25-2011]
PARCEL — All the land contiguously owned, bounded by property
lines.[Added 6-5-1979]
PARKING GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, or a part of a
principal building, for the private use of the owner or occupant of a
principal building situated on the same lot of the principal building for
the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or
repair. Each level of a parking garage shall be included in determining
the floor area ratio of the parcel.[Added 4-8-1997]
PARKING GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or structure or a part of a
building or structure used for the storage of automotive vehicles, with
no facilities for motor vehicle repair or service, operated as a business
enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or
operator for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles. Each
level of a parking garage shall be included in determining the floor area
ratio of the parcel.[Added 4-8-1997]
PARKING, OFF-STREET — The area of a lot or building used or
designed to be used for the purpose of accessory parking of vehicles.
Such area shall be on or part of the same lot on which the principal use
is located.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:658
PARKING SPACE — The space required for each motor vehicle intended
or required to be parked in an off-street parking area. For the size
parking space required, refer to § 68-408.[Amended 10-7-1974]
PERMITTED USE — Any use maintainable as a matter of right and
expressly listed under the permitted uses section in this chapter within
a given zoning district. For the purposes of this definition, a legal
nonconforming use shall not be considered a permitted use, despite the
fact that it may be allowed to continue.[Added 10-13-2010]
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A business primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his/
her personal goods or apparel, including but not limited to barber
and beauty shops, dog grooming, tailor, dressmaker, shoe repair,
photographer, psychic reader and the like. This definition shall not
apply to those uses explicitly defined within this section or to
laundromats, dry cleaners or medical offices.[Added 6-8-2010]
PERSONAL TRAILER — Any device mounted upon wheels and
incapable of locomotion under its own power, which is normally
connected to a motorized unit, for transporting or hauling boats,
homes, automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, equipment,
and other materials, as well as other recreational trailers.[Added
7-19-2011]
PORCH, UNENCLOSED — A roof supported by columns or pillars, the
sides of which shall not be enclosed with screens, windows, jalousies or
bulkhead, except that a railing with pickets not over 32 inches in height
may be installed between columns or pillars.[Added 9-11-2001]
PREMISES — Land with or without buildings and structures thereon.
RENEWABLE ENERGY — Energy derived from natural processes that
replenish at a faster rate than they are consumed. This includes but
is not limited to solar, wind, geothermal, tidal and hydro.[Added
5-15-2018]
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM — A dwelling or dwellings in which
residents have exclusive ownership of particular dwelling units and,
in addition, an interest in the common elements associated with the
building or buildings in which the particular dwelling unit is located
as defined by the laws, codes, rules and regulations of the State of
New York. Interval or time-sharing forms of ownership and use shall be
deemed included in this definition.[Added 4-8-1997]
RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE — A dwelling or dwellings in which
residents have an ownership interest in the entity which owns the
building(s) and, in addition, a lease or occupancy agreement which
entitles the residents to occupy a particular dwelling unit within the
building(s) as defined by the laws, codes, rules and regulations of the
State of New York. Interval or time-sharing forms of ownership and use
shall be deemed included in this definition.[Added 4-8-1997]
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:659
RESIDENTIAL DAY CARE — Shall be defined to include either of the
following:[Added 11-19-2019]
RESTAURANT — An establishment engaged in the sale of prepared
food intended for immediate consumption either on premises or off
premises or both on premises and off premises and which is otherwise
not defined as a fast-food restaurant, minor restaurant, accessory
restaurant or bar, tavern or nightclub. A restaurant shall not include
a drive-through window, and the sale, service and consumption of
alcoholic beverages shall be clearly accessory to the food service
use.112[Added 4-8-1997; amended 6-8-2010]
RESTAURANT, ACCESSORY — An establishment engaged in the sale
of prepared food intended for immediate consumption off premises
that shares common commercial space with an approved convenience
Family Day-Care Home, shall mean a program caring for children
for more than three hours per day and from three to six children in
a single-family residence. A family day-care provider may, however,
care for seven or eight children at any one time if no more than six
of the children are less than school age and school-aged children
care is primarily before or after the period such children are
ordinarily in school, during school, during school lunch periods, on
school lunch periods, on school holidays, or during those periods
of the year in which school is not in session in accordance with
the regulations of the New York State Social Services Department
and the New York State Social Services Department inspects such
home to determine whether the provider can care adequately for
seven or eight children.
(1)
Group Family Day-Care Home, shall mean a program caring for
children for more than three hours per day per child in which child
day care is provided in a single-family residence for seven to 10
children of all ages, or up to 12 children where all of such children
are over two years of age, except for those programs operating as
a family day-care home (See definition for "family day-care home
above"). A group family day-care home provider may provide child
day-care services to two additional children if such children receive
services only before or after the period such children are ordinarily
in school or during school lunch periods, or school holidays. or
during those periods of the year in which school is not in session.
There shall be one caregiver for every two children under two
years of age in the group family day-care home. A group family
day-care home must have at least one assistant to the operator
present when child day-care is being provided to seven or more
children. This assistant shall be selected by the group family day
care home operator and shall meet the qualifications established
for such position by the regulations of the New York State Social
Services Department.
(2)
112. Editor's Note: A former definition of "restaurant" was repealed 11-14-1995.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:660
market as an accessory use to a gasoline service station and with a
maximum square footage of 400 square feet, exclusive of a waiting area
for patrons, within the convenience market containing no seating. An
accessory restaurant shall not include a drive-through window.[Added
6-8-2010]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods and or beverages in ready-to-consume
individual servings, for consumption either inside or outside the
restaurant building or for carry-out, and whose design or method of
operation includes a drive-up or drive-through service or offers curb
service.[Added 4-8-1997]
RESTAURANT, MINOR — An establishment engaged in the sale of
prepared food intended for immediate consumption either on premises
or off premises or both on premises and off premises, containing a
maximum gross floor area of 2,000 square feet, and a maximum of 16
seats available for customer use. The sale, service and consumption of
beverages shall be accessory to the food service use, and any alcoholic
beverages sold, served or consumed shall be limited to beer and wine
and shall not include service from a bar or similar dispensing structure.
A minor restaurant shall not include a drive-up or drive-through facility
and shall not otherwise be defined as a bar, tavern or nightclub, fast
food restaurant, restaurant, convenience market or
delicatessen.[Added 4-8-1997; amended 12-17-2019]
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any type of antenna, dish antenna or related
receiving equipment that is capable of receiving radio or television
signals directly from satellites located in a geo-stationary orbit above
the earth.[Added 6-3-1986]
SEASONAL RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A membership community
or neighborhood of single-family dwellings, with ancillary common
buildings or facilities that provide for the recreation of its members,
located on property owned or managed by an organization or
corporation which shall have responsibility for all roads and common
areas. Said community is intended for occupancy between the period of
April 1 to November 30 only.[Added 10-3-1989; amended 6-7-2016]
SHOPPING CENTER — Two or more retail businesses or service uses
on a single site with common parking facilities.113[Added 4-8-1997]
SHOWROOM — Any portion of a commercial or industrial building
or unit used primarily for the display of demonstration models and/or
goods. An inventory of said items is stored in larger quantities and/
or in bulk in a separate warehousing portion of said building or unit
which is not directly accessible to shopping patrons. The use of any
showroom space must be clearly accessory to, or shall be incidental
to, the primary use of the commercial or industrial building. Any sales
occurring within a showroom shall be primarily bulk purchases or
113. Editor's Note: A former definition of "shopping center," added 5-6-1975, was repealed
10-6-1992.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:661
of large items. A showroom may not occupy more than 25% of the
gross floor area of the building or unit in which it is located.[Added
6-8-2010]
SIGN — Any structure, device or display consisting of, but not limited
to, any letter, symbol, trademark, model, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, light decoration, illustration, representation or combination
thereof used for the purpose of advertisement, announcement,
identification or other attention-directing intent. A "sign" does not
include the flag, pennant or insignia of a governmental or religious
institution and does not include any display of a court or official public
notices.114[Added 6-5-1979]
SINGLE-USER BULK RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A building occupied
by no more than one business establishment with a minimum gross
floor area of 100,000 square feet offering products for sale to retail
and wholesale customers with a warehouse-style interior building finish
and offering products for sale as multipacks and institutional-sized
items.115[Added 10-6-1992; amended 9-12-2000]
STORAGE — The location of goods, merchandise, unregistered motor
vehicles, registered or unregistered unattached trailers, shipping
containers, equipment, materials, debris, and/or any other items either
in an enclosed structure or outside of an enclosed structure.[Amended
9-21-1982; 7-7-1987; 12-19-1989; 4-5-2005]
STORAGE SHED — A structure without electrical or plumbing services,
not exceeding 144 square feet in area and not extending more than
eight feet above the property grade, used only for the storage of items
customarily incidental to the principal use and located separately on
the same plot with such principal use.[Added 5-7-1985; amended
9-11-2001; 6-8-2010]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor next above. For the top
story of a building, the story shall be measured from the upper surface
of the highest floor to the interior surface of the roof at the peak. If
the interior height of the top story exceeds four feet six inches, then it
shall be considered as a story on submitted plans. Mezzanines shall be
defined and regulated under the New York State Building Code and the
provisions of this ordinance.[Amended 1-14-2003]
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means
of access to abutting properties. Boardwalks on the Great South Beach
shall be deemed to be "streets" for the purposes of this ordinance.
Neither tidal nor nontidal waters, nor the shores, strands nor beaches
along same shall be deemed "streets" for the purpose of this ordinance.
114. Editor's Note: The definitions of "sign, advertising," "sign, directional," and "sign, facial,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 6-5-1979.
115. Editor's Note: The former definition of "social recreation center," which immediately
followed, was repealed 8-19-1980. The term was removed from this section 10-13-2010.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:662
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
STRUCTURE, COMMERCIAL — Any residential structure containing
more than two attached dwelling units, regardless of height of said
structure(s), and all other primary structures not used as a detached
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.[Added 12-15-2009]
SUITE — That portion of a dwelling consisting of one or more living
rooms and occupied by members of a family, which group of rooms is
separated from all other groups within a dwelling.
SUPERIOR ARCHITECTURE — Exterior building elevations which meet
the following minimum criteria:[Added 5-15-2018]
SUPPLY HOUSE OR WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A business or
establishment with a warehouse-style interior building finish wherein
goods, wares, merchandise, produce, commodities or similar articles
are offered for sale, redistribution, or sold only in bulk or large
quantities to wholesalers, merchants and retailers, or to institutions,
industrial or business uses. A wholesale distribution business or
establishment, or supply house, does not include any establishment or
business wherein goods, wares, merchandise, produce, commodities or
similar articles are offered for sale or sold to the general public or to the
ultimate consumer. Any business wherein goods, wares, merchandise,
produce, commodities or similar articles are offered for sale and that
distributes advertisements to residential addresses shall create a
rebuttable presumption that the business is a retail store or
shop.[Added 6-19-2012]
TAXI OFFICE — A premises, or any part of a premises, which is utilized
for general taxi office administration, radio dispatching or
communication with taxi vehicles. The function of a taxi office is strictly
limited to the daily business operations of a taxi business and shall
not include other functions otherwise attributed to a taxi station as
Utilization of higher quality exterior finish materials, including but
not limited to stone, brick, glass, tile, metal panels, or fiber cement
siding.
(1)
Incorporation of elements of vertical interruption and variation of
facade depth.
(2)
Use of stucco or concrete block limited to accent bands not
exceeding 10% of facade area.
(3)
(4) A minimum of 15% of facade area dedicated to window openings.
Screening of roof-mounted equipment in context with building
facade treatments.
(5)
Incorporation of horizontal distinguishing elements along the base
and top of the facade (e.g., substantial coping element, cornice,
decorative parapet, stacked stone or brick base, etc.).
(6)
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:663
defined later. The transience of taxi vehicles, the outdoor storage of
taxi vehicles and the pickup/dropoff of passengers is strictly prohibited.
An ambulette office shall not be considered a taxi office.[Added
1-14-2003; amended 6-8-2010]
TAXI STATION — A premises, or any part of a premises, which is
utilized for taxi office administration as defined above as well as the
pickup/dropoff of passengers and the storage of taxi vehicles. Taxi
stations must provide a waiting room to accommodate passengers.
Such room shall not contain less than five chairs and shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable building
codes. An ambulette office shall not be considered a taxi station.[Added
1-14-2003; amended 6-8-2010]
TENT — A structure, enclosure or shelter, subject to zoning district
and arterial highway setback requirements for accessory structures,
constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by any manner
except by air or the contents that it protects.[Added 2-28-2017]
THEATER, COMMUNITY — A building(s) devoted to showing motion
pictures or live performances on one or more screens or stages within
the building(s) on a paid-admission basis. In a community theater,
the total number of seats or the maximum permitted occupancy, as
determined by the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and
Development or his/her designee, shall not exceed 1,200.[Added
4-8-1997; amended 8-5-2014]
THEATER, REGIONAL — A buildings devoted to showing motion
pictures on one or more screens within the buildings on a paid
admission basis where the total number of seats or maximum permitted
occupancy, as determined by the Commissioner of the Department
of Planning and Development or his designee, exceeds 1,200.[Added
4-8-1997]
THRIFT SHOP — A store selling secondhand clothes and/or secondhand
household goods to raise funds for a charitable institution.[Added
12-17-2019]
TRANSFER STATION/RECYCLING CENTER — Any combination of
structure, machinery and facilities used for the off-loading of solid
waste from collection vehicles, the recovery of recyclables from said
solid waste and the reloading of nonrecyclable solid waste into vehicles
for disposal.[Added 3-15-1988]
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building or part of a building, other
than a private garage, used for the storage, care, repair, servicing,
customizing or refinishing of motor vehicles, whether or not accessory
or incidental to another use, including, but not limited to, both minor
and major mechanical overhauling, paint and body work. The term
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-3
66:664
"motor vehicles" shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, campers, trailers, recreational vehicles,
recreational watercraft and similarly related vehicles or any vehicle
classified as a motor vehicle pursuant to the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles. A vehicle repair shop may store up
to five registered, noncommercial vehicles outside overnight provided
they are located 50 feet from any street, are not listed for sale, do
not require body work, and are patron vehicles that will be worked on
and not for long-term storage. Operations solely devoted to automotive
audio and/or video installations or window tinting, occurring inside a
building only, and which do not involve the use of any vehicle lift, shall
not be considered part of this definition.[Added 4-8-1997; amended
6-8-2010; 10-25-2011]
VENDING MACHINE — A structure which is an automatic mechanical
device which disperses articles or materials of value to the public and
which is activated by the insertion of a coin, coins, token or tokens. It
shall not include a telephone or telephone booth.
VESSEL — Any floating craft.[Added 2-24-2009]
WALL — Any assembly of materials, not a fence or building, constructed
for the purpose of boundary identification or delineation, security,
obstruction, defense, screening, retention of any grading, fill, or other
material, and/or the enclosure of any storage system. Walls include, but
are not limited to, retaining walls, attenuation walls, bulkheads, and sea
walls.[Added 1-14-2003]
WALL, RETAINING — A wall, the primary function of which is the
retention of soil, and needed as an engineered interface between
changes in land elevation.[Added 2-28-2017]
WAREHOUSE — A building or enclosure for the storage of goods and
merchandise. A mini-storage warehouse shall not be included in this
definition.[Added 6-8-2010]
YARD, COURT — That part of a yard not the front yard, lying between
any part of a building or buildings and the front yard setback line.
YARD, PRIMARY FRONT — The space between the property line
adjacent to the street and the nearest part of any building exhibiting
the front door.[Amended 12-17-2019]
YARD, REAR — The open space of a lot opposite the front yard, or
opposite the primary front yard in the case of corner lots, and parallel
to the street line. All lots shall maintain a rear yard with the exception
of through lots which shall maintain a primary front yard setback
adjacent to each street line.[Added 4-8-1997]
YARD, SIDE — Open space on the same lot with the main building
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
through from the street or from the front yard to the rear yard of the
lot. Any lot line not a street line or a rear line shall be deemed a side
line.
§ 68-3 WATER QUALITY § 68-3
66:665
§ 68-4. Interpretation and application of ordinance.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience or the general welfare.
§ 68-5. Setback requirements for through lots.
§ 68-6. Diminishing lot or yard areas.
The lot or yard areas required by this ordinance for a particular building
or use shall not be diminished below the minimum requirements and shall
not be included as a part of the required lot or yard areas of any other
building or use. If the lot or yard areas required by this ordinance for a
particular building or use are diminished below the minimum requirements,
the continued existence of such building or use shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. The lot or yard areas of buildings or uses existing
at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall not be diminished below
the requirements herein provided for buildings hereafter erected or uses
undertaken, and such required areas shall not be included as a part of the
required areas of any building hereafter erected or uses undertaken.
§ 68-7. Completion of structures.
Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in the plans,
construction or designed use of a building for which a building permit has
been issued and actually under construction, to the extent of having created
a vested interest thereby, at the time of the adoption of this codification or at
the time of the adoption of any amendment hereto, provided the entire work
under such permit is completed within two years from the date of adoption
of the legislative enactment.
§ 68-8. Lapse of permits. [Amended 4-8-1997]
Abandonment of project for which authorization, approval or special permit
is granted. Any building permit authorized, approved or granted by
authorization of a special permit by the Town Board shall become null and
void if said building permit has not been secured within 12 months from the
YARD, THROUGH LOT FRONT — The space between the property line
adjacent to the street or right-of-way which is not the primary front
yard.[Added 12-17-2019]
A. Two street frontages other than a corner. A front yard setback shall be
required on both street frontages of a through lot.
B. Three street frontages, including one or more corners. A front yard
setback shall be required on both street frontages of the through lot,
and in addition there shall be a front yard setback facing the side street
of at least the minimum number of feet required for a corner lot in the
zoning classification in which the premises are located.
§ 68-3 ISLIP CODE § 68-8
66:666
date of such authorization, approval or special permit and work commenced
thereunder and completed within 24 months from the date of the issuance
of said permit, or the lot or premises used for the purposes granted by the
said authorization, approval or special permit within 12 months from the
date of order or decision of said Town Board.
§ 68-9. Opening of unofficial highways. [Amended 6-8-2010]
No unofficial highway located on real estate subdivision maps that have not
been approved by the Planning Board shall be opened or improved until a
permit for sale has been obtained from the Building Division after Planning
Board and Highway Department approval. Application for permit to open or
improve an unofficial highway may be obtained from the Building Division
and shall be filed with the Chief Building Inspector on a form prescribed
by him, together with a bond sufficient in form and amount to insure the
performance of the proposed work. All fees for permits to open or improve
roads shall be collected by the Chief Building Inspector or his designee.
§ 68-10. Waste pipes emptying into waterways.
No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used
which shall include any pipe, conduit or other device which carries or is
intended to carry any industrial waste fluids or effluent of any kind from any
sewage treatment, collection or disposal system, if said effluent in said pipe,
conduit or other device shall run or flow directly into any stream, river, lake,
pond, bay or other waterway.
§ 68-8 WATER QUALITY § 68-10
66:667

ARTICLE II
Use Districts
§ 68-11. Designation of districts. [Amended 10-14-1969; 8-1-1972;
8-29-1989; 9-11-2001]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Islip, outside the limits of
incorporated villages, is hereby divided into use districts, which shall be
classified in rank from highest to lowest as follows:
A. Planned Landmark Preservation District (PLP).
B. Planned Development District (PDD).
C. Ocean Front Dune District (AAAB).
D. Residence BAA District (BAA).
E. Residence AAA District (AAA).
F. Residence AA District (AA).
G. Residence A District (A).
H. Residence B District (B).
I. Residence CAA District (CAA).
J. Residence C District (C).
K. Residence CA District (CA).
L. Residential Redevelopment District (RRD).
M. General Service F District (GSF).
N. General Service Transitional District (GST).
O. General Service C District (GSC).
P. General Service D District (GSD).
Q. General Service E District (GSE).
R. Downtown Development District (DDD).
S. Business District (BD).
T. Business 1 District (B1).
U. Business 2 District (B2).
V. Business 3 District (B3).
W. Industrial Corridor District (ICD).
X. Industrial 1 District (Ind. 1).
§ 68-11 WATER QUALITY § 68-11
66:669
§ 68-12. Zoning Map; district boundaries.
Y. Industrial Business District (IBD).
Z. Recreational Service G (RSG).
AA. Industrial 2 District (Ind. 2)
A. The boundaries of the use districts shall be as shown upon the map and
every section thereof attached to and made a part of this chapter
entitled "Town of Islip, Suffolk County, New York, Amended Zoning
Map."116
B. The boundaries between use districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either along the boundary lines of various properties and lots or the
center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended
or lines parallel thereto. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map
between a street line and a district boundary line, they indicate the
distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated. When
the location of a use district boundary line is not otherwise determined,
it shall be determined by the scale of the map measured from a given
line; where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the
street layouts as shown on the Zoning Map, the designations shown on
the mapped street shall be applied in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purpose of this ordinance for the particular area in question.
Lands lying under water shall be considered as being in the same
district as the abutting upland, for a distance of 100 feet from said
upland, unless specifically classified and designated otherwise. When
property is located in two different zones, it must meet the higher
zoning classification.
C. Interpretation of district boundaries. With respect to the boundaries of
any of the zoning districts as shown on the Official Map, the
Commissioner of Planning or his designee shall be authorized to
interpret the actual geographic extent of any zoning district only in
those instances where: [Added 5-28-2008]
(1) Errors or discrepancies in geographic accuracy occur which are
inherent in legacy mapping and/or survey techniques; or
(2) No supporting documentation clearly expresses an empirical
measurement from a known or discoverable benchmark; or
(3) The spirit and intent of this ordinance is not compromised.
116. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Department of Building and
Engineering.
§ 68-11 ISLIP CODE § 68-12
66:670
ARTICLE III
Application of Ordinance; Nonconforming Uses
§ 68-13. Conformity with ordinance provisions.
Zoning regulations and use districts as herein set forth are approved and
established. The Amended Zoning Map which accompanies this ordinance
is hereby declared to be a part hereof, and all notations, references, etc.,
shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described
herein. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected
or structurally altered except in conformity with this ordinance. No building
or land shall be used for any trade, industry or purpose that is noxious or
offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas fumes, noise, etc.,
or that is detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the
community.
§ 68-14. Special definitions. [Amended 10-13-2010]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE — Any nonconforming use which, at the
time such use was commenced, was maintainable as a matter of right under
the statutes, ordinances and general rules of law then in effect in the Town
of Islip. A legal nonconforming use shall not be considered a permitted use,
as defined in § 68-3.
§ 68-15. Continuation, change, destruction or discontinuance of
nonconforming use. [Amended 1-16-1979]
A. Any legal nonconforming use may be continued, except as set forth in
§§ 68-12, 68-341.IF and 68-401; provided, however, that a legal
nonconforming use shall not be changed unless changed to a
conforming use. A legal nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming
use, may not be thereafter changed to any nonconforming use.
[Amended 9-23-1980]
B. The substantial discontinuance of any nonconforming use for a period
of one year or more terminates such nonconforming use of a structure
or premises, and thereafter said structure or premises shall not be
used, except in conformity with provisions of this ordinance.
[Amended 9-12-2000]
C. No building which has been damaged by fire or other causes to the
extent of more than 50% of physical structure, as determined by the
Commissioner of Planning and Development, or his designee, exclusive
of foundations, shall be repaired, rebuilt or used except in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no junkyard may continue as
a nonconforming use for more than three years after the effective date
of this amendment unless such use is made conforming by a change of
§ 68-13 WATER QUALITY § 68-15
66:671
§ 68-16. (Reserved)118
§ 68-17. Extension of nonconforming use on ground floor, land area
or within a building. [Amended 11-8-1972; 4-2-1985]
zoning and a special permit granted by the Town Board. [Added
1-19-1982]
E. (Reserved)117
F. The subdivision of any parcel(s) on which a legal nonconforming use(s)
exists terminates such legal nonconforming use of a structure or
premises, and, thereafter, said structure or premises shall not be used
except in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance. However, this
subsection shall not apply to the merger of parcels improved with
principal structures if the subdivision shall restore the parcels and
structures to the identical dimensions and densities which existed prior
to the merger. [Added 3-24-1992; amended 11-16-1993]
G. Merger of nonconforming lots. If at any time a nonconforming lot shall
be held in the same ownership as one or more adjoining parcels, the lot
shall lose its status as a nonconforming lot, except to the extent that the
lot created by the merger of the adjoining parcels remains
nonconforming with respect to one or more dimensional regulations of
the district in which it is situated [Added 12-16-1997]
A. A building arranged, designed or devoted to a nonconforming use at the
time of the passage of this ordinance may not be reconstructed or
structurally altered to an extent exceeding 25% of the ground area of
that specific building, unless the use of said building is changed to a
conforming use. The aggregate ground area of any additional
nonconforming structures shall not be considered in this calculation.
[Amended 5-28-2008]
B. A nonconforming use of land may not be extended in the aggregate
more than 25% of the area occupied at the time of the passage of this
ordinance.
C. No legal nonconforming use within a building may be expanded to more
than 25% of the existing floor area occupied by the nonconforming use.
D. No extension of a nonconforming use may be made pursuant to the
foregoing provisions of this section except after the granting of a
special exception by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the
provisions of § 68-415A of the Code of the Town of Islip.
117. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding continuation of boardinghouses, lodging
houses and mixed-use buildings as nonconforming uses, added 1-21-1992, was repealed
5-28-2008.
118. Editor's Note: Former § 68-16, Extension within a building of nonconforming use, was
repealed 4-2-1985. This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 4-21-1985.
§ 68-15 ISLIP CODE § 68-17
66:672
§ 68-18. Nonconforming use of parking area.
A parking area, the use of which does not conform to this ordinance,
shall not be deemed a legal nonconforming parking area unless it has
been used in conjunction with and accessory to a conforming building
or legal nonconforming building. Parking areas which have been installed
at permitted locations without presenting plot plans for approval in
accordance with this ordinance shall not be considered a legal
nonconforming or conforming use.
§ 68-19. Nonconforming use of signs.
Existing sign for which a permit has not been issued within two years
of the effective date of this ordinance, as provided in this article, shall
presumptively be an illegal nonconforming use for the purpose of any
application to or proceeding before any officer or board of the Town of Islip.
E. This section shall not apply to existing structures that maintain a
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance, provided they are
being used for the permitted uses of the district within which they are
located. Any addition or alteration to a structure in this category shall
be subject to the dimensional requirements of the district in which it is
located or shall apply for any necessary area variances from the Zoning
Board of Appeals. [Added 1-14-2003]
F. This section shall not apply to existing structures on substandard lots
that maintain a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance,
provided they are being used for the permitted uses of the district
within which they are located. Any addition or alteration to a structure
in this category shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the
district in which it is located or shall apply for any necessary area
variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Added 1-14-2003]
G. Parcels being used for the permitted uses of the district but existing in a
nonconforming location on a property will be allowed to expand or
modify without variance provided the following conditions are met:
[Added 8-12-2003]
(1) The building maintains a valid certificate of occupancy or
compliance.
(2) The addition or alteration complies with all regulations of the
district in which it is located (i.e. FAR, setbacks, lot occupancy,
height).
(3) The parcel is free from violations and otherwise complies with the
Town Code.
(4) No new or increase of variances occur as a result of the addition.
§ 68-17 WATER QUALITY § 68-20
66:673
§ 68-20. Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use. [Amended
5-2-1972; 4-3-1973; 3-26-1974; 3-21-1978; 2-5-1980]
All applications to establish a nonconforming use shall be heard, after
notice to the surrounding property owners, by the Board of Appeals.
§ 68-20.1. Separately owned lots. [Added 10-13-2010]
A. An applicant must send due notice of said application to the owner or
owners of real property within 200 feet of the subject property. The
notice must be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon
the day of the hearing, said receipt must be submitted to the Board,
along with a copy of a Tax Map showing the premises and all premises
within 200 feet.
B. Upon confirmation by the Board of any legal non-conforming use, a
Building Inspector or other persons charged with the issuance of
certificates of occupancy and/or certificates of compliance shall issue
said document with an endorsement specifying the legal
nonconforming use, and said document shall constitute presumptive
use in any action or proceeding brought under this ordinance.
A. Upon proof satisfactory to the Board of Appeals after due public
hearing, a structure, or additions thereto, which is intended to contain a
permitted use only may be erected on any lot separately owned at the
time of its rezoning to its current zoning district which does not meet
the width and area requirements for said district, provided that the
width and area requirements of the amended Zoning Ordinance were
met prior to such rezoning, and further provided that all other
requirements of the amended Zoning Ordinance associated with that
district are met.
B. Proof of single and separate ownership shall be submitted to the Board
of Appeals in the form of a recognized title company on a form
prescribed by the Board, accompanied by a chain of title of the subject
property and all contiguous property and also a survey prepared by a
licensed surveyor identifying the contiguous lot numbers and/or
properties.
C. Single and separately owned parcels may be merged with adjacent
single and separate parcels to create larger parcels which more closely
conform to the zoning requirements. In accordance with this policy,
single and separate parcels located between adjacent single and
separate parcels may be split and merged with the adjacent single and
separate parcels. In order to encourage the merger of adjacent parcels
to create larger parcels, the owner of a parcel of land which is in single
and separate ownership may also merge an adjacent parcel that is not
in single and separate ownership with the subject parcel, provided that
the parcel not in single and separate ownership was a separate tax
parcel on April 11, 1928.
§ 68-20 ISLIP CODE § 68-20.2
66:674
§ 68-20.2. Resubdivision of real property. [Added 10-13-2010]
Before any lot or building plot is formed from part of a lot or lots shown on
a filed map, the owner thereof shall submit the proposed separation to the
Department of Planning and Development, in duplicate, for determination
as to whether same constitutes a subdivision. If determined to be a
subdivision, the applicant-owner(s) will be required to submit detailed
subdivision improvement plans satisfactory to the Department of Planning
and Development basically in compliance with subdivision regulations. Any
substantial relaxation or waiver of said subdivision regulations will require
the approval of the Planning Board before issuance of any building permits.
§ 68-20.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-20.2
66:675

ARTICLE IV
Administration; Permits and Fees; Standards and Requirements
[Amended 11-6-1969; 10-6-1970; 1-7-1975; 3-21-1978; 9-5-1978;
3-3-1981; 5-7-1985; 8-19-1986; 10-19-1993; 4-8-1997; 12-9-1997;
9-12-2000]
§ 68-21. Title and scope.
A. Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
"Building Code."
B. Matter covered. All matters concerning, affecting or relating to the
construction, alteration or removal of buildings or structures herein
specified as public, residence, business, storage or accessory buildings,
erected or to be erected within the zoned areas of the Town of Islip and
outside the limits of any incorporated village, are presumptively
provided for in this ordinance. Such provisions shall apply with equal
force to Town, county or state buildings as they do to private buildings,
except as may be otherwise specifically provided for.
C. Ordinance remedial. This ordinance is hereby declared to be remedial
and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes
thereof, which are health and welfare, through structural strength and
stability, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property
from fire and hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair,
removal or demolition of buildings or structures.
D. Conformity. No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed,
altered, repaired or removed, nor shall the equipment of a building,
structure or premises be constructed, installed, altered, repaired or
removed, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance or
authorized rule or approval of the Building Inspector made and issued
thereunder.
E. Validity. If any section or part of a section or paragraph of this
ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to
invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or
sections or part of a section or paragraph of this ordinance.
F. Conflicting requirements. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be
deemed to modify any provision of the laws of the State of New York nor
of any ordinance in conflict therewith, but shall be regarded as
supplementing such statutes and ordinances, and whichever imposes
the greater restrictions shall be controlling.
G. Compliance with State Building Code fire limits. Construction of all
buildings and structures shall comply with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code (Uniform Code). Fire limits, as the
term is used in the Uniform Code, shall not include any properties
within the boundaries of the Town of Islip.
§ 68-21 WATER QUALITY § 68-22
66:677
§ 68-22. (Reserved)119
§ 68-23. Permit required; exceptions; application.
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, remove or demolish or to allow,
commence or maintain the alteration, removal or demolition of a
building or structure, or any part thereof, without first filing with the
Building Division an application in writing and obtaining a formal
written permit. [Amended 5-4-2004]
B. It shall be unlawful for any entity or individual to construct, alter,
remove, or demolish or to allow, commence or maintain the alteration,
removal or demolition of a building or structure, or any part thereof, on
behalf of the property owner, without first obtaining a copy of the
formal written permit issued by the Building Division from either the
Building Division or the property owner. This permit is to be displayed
on site at all times work is being performed. [Added 12-15-2009120]
(1) Any person found to have violated § 68-23B shall be guilty of a
violation, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000
or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and
each day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
C. Exceptions. A permit shall not be required for the following:
(1) Repair to buildings or structures, provided that no structural
alteration shall be made and that such repairs shall comply with all
other federal, state, county and Town laws, rules and regulations.
(2) A storage shed, not exceeding 144 square feet, located on the same
plot as a one- or two-family dwelling, provided that such storage
shed shall comply with the structural provisions of the New York
State Building Code and shall comply with all other Town laws,
rules and regulations. This exception shall not apply in any district
on Fire Island or in any lands in the Fire Island National Seashore.
This exception shall apply to only one shed; any additional sheds
shall require permits. [Amended 6-19-2012; 2-28-2017]
(3) A roofless deck located on the same plot as a one- or two-family
dwelling, provided that such deck shall not be more than eighteen
inches above the adjacent grade level, shall not violate the front,
side, or rear yard requirements of the main structure and shall
comply with all other Town laws, rules and regulations. All decks
above 18 inches will require a permit from the Building
Department. This exception shall not apply in any district on Fire
Island or in any lands in the Fire Island National Seashore.
[Amended 4-5-2005]
119. Editor’s Note: Former § 68-22, Building Director; appointment, was repealed 12-17-2019.
120. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B through I as
Subsections C through J, respectively.
§ 68-22 ISLIP CODE § 68-23
66:678
§ 68-24. Permits. [Amended 8-12-2003; 5-28-2008; 12-13-2011;
4-7-2015; 9-24-2019]
(4) A doghouse located on the same lot as a one- or two-family
dwelling, provided that such doghouse shall not violate the front,
side or rear yard requirements of the main structure and shall
comply with all other Town laws, rules and regulations.
D. Form.
(1) An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee may
prescribe. [Amended 12-17-2019]
(2) Such application shall be made by the owner.
E. Plans. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings
of the proposed work, drawn to scale, including floor plans, elevations,
structural details and plot diagrams, as the Commissioner of Planning
or the Commissioner's designee may require. The Commissioner, or the
Commissioner's designee, may establish the appropriate level of plan
preparation and review for each application type in accordance with the
New York State Building Code and § 68-24A of this article. [Amended
4-5-2005; 12-17-2019]
F. Federal Aviation Administration approval. All applications for permits
shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
G. Amendments. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of
amendments to an application or to a plan or other drawing of the work
for which the permit was sought. Such amendments, after approval,
shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the original application.
H. Completion of existing buildings. Nothing in this ordinance shall
require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a
building, the construction of which shall have been actually begun
within 30 days after this ordinance becomes effective and which shall
be completed within one year thereafter.
I. Demolition of existing buildings. A permit must be secured for the
demolition of a building. The work of demolition must be completed
within four months after the permit is issued. All debris shall be cleaned
up and all excavation filled to within one foot of grade.
J. Permit for moving building; bond. A bond may be required by the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee to indemnify
the Town for damage caused by the moving of a building or structure. If
such a bond is requested, no permit to remove a building or structure
shall be granted until the bond is filed with the Town of Islip.
[Amended 12-17-2019]
§ 68-23 WATER QUALITY § 68-24
66:679
A. Action on application. Permit applications may be approved if, after
examination, it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and other laws applicable thereto
and that the proposed construction or work will be safe; the application
will be approved and a permit issued. If the examination reveals
otherwise, the application will be returned as rejected and the findings
noted in a report attached to the application.
B. Approval in part. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the Building Inspector from issuing a permit for the construction of part
of a building or structure before the entire plans and detailed
statements of said building or structure have been submitted or
approved, if adequate plans and detailed statements have been
presented for the same and have been found to comply with this
chapter.
C. Signature and conditions of permit. All work performed under a permit
issued and signed by the Commissioner of Planning, or the
Commissioner's authorized designee, shall conform to the approved
application and plans and approved amendments thereof. [Amended
12-17-2019]
D. Expiration and renewal of permits. A permit shall expire one year after
the date issued. Upon payment of renewal fee as established by the
Commissioner, a permit may be renewed, but not more than three
renewals may be granted. Exception: There shall be no renewals
granted for pool permits or second-story decks.
E. Revocation. [Amended 12-17-2019]
(1) The Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee
may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this
chapter for:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation as to material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was
based;
(b) Return of a check or draft for a permit fee for any reason; or
(c) Failure to commence construction within eight months from
the date the permit was issued.
(d) Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(2) Such revocation shall take place after notice to the applicant and
an opportunity for the applicant to be heard by the Commissioner
of Planning or the Commissioner's designee.
F. Posting of permit.
§ 68-24 ISLIP CODE § 68-24
66:680
(1) A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises, open to public
inspection during the prosecution of the work and until the
completion of the same.
(2) The Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee
may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the
premises at all times until completion of the work. [Amended
12-17-2019]
G. New York State Unified Solar Permit (NYSERDA).
(1) Intent. The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby declares its
participation in the New York State Unified Solar Permit program.
Due to the benefits offered by renewable energy systems, including
residential solar energy systems, and the associated increase in
consumer demand and requests for building permits for same, the
permitting process for such solar energy systems shall be
standardized and streamlined as indicated herein.
(2) Streamlined application process applies to solar energy system
installations of 25kW in size or smaller. For qualified installations:
(a) The permit application fee will be determined by the
Commissioner of Planning and Development.
(b) The Building Division shall provide permit determinations
within 14 days of submittal of a completed application.
(c) Applicants may utilize the Town of Islip's New York State
Unified Solar Permit application, from the Building Division or
the Town's website.
(d) The New York State Unified Solar Permit submittal
requirements. available from the Building Division or the
Town's website, lists the documentation requited for all Unified
Solar Permit applications.
(3) Assistance to first responders. The Town shall maintain a list by
address of all solar energy installations that shall be shared with
relevant first responder organizations. The Town shall also require
applicants to install a sign on or near the utility meter and at any
alternating current (AC) disconnect switch indicating that there is
an operating solar electric cogeneration system on site.
(4) Certification/Inspection. The operation of any solar energy system
shall not commence until a final inspection is made by the Building
Division or received from a third-party inspector and a certification
is issued by the Building Division. The New York State Unified Solar
Permit Field Inspection Checklist, located in the Building Division
or on the Town's website, provides an overview of common points
of inspection.
§ 68-24 WATER QUALITY § 68-24
66:681
§ 68-25. Certificate of occupancy; certificate of compliance.
(a) The Building Division may elect to make such inspections and
certifications by any Town employee trained and authorized to
issue such inspections and certifications. Said employees shall
have obtained suitable credentials from any or a combination
of the following agencies or organizations:
[1] Interstate Renewable Energy Council.
[2] Institute for Sustainable Power Quality.
[3] National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
[4] Any additional training agency which provides a
comparable educational scope at the direction of the
Commissioner of Planning.
(b) The Building Division may also certify a solar energy system, in
part, by virtue of an Underwriters Laboratory certificate or by
authority conferred upon Town employees by the New York
State Department of State Educational Program (Division of
Code Enforcement and Administration) or by professional
engineer (PE) or registered architect (RA) licensed to practice
in New York State.
(c) The Building Division may accept independent certifications
from third-party vendors, including but not limited to The
Interstate Renewable Energy Council, Institute for Sustainable
Power Quality, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, or any
additional agency or organization which provides a
comparable certifying scope at the direction of the
Commissioner of Planning.
A. Change of occupancy - Land. No occupancy or use shall be made of land
that is not consistent with the last-issued certificate of occupancy for
such use of land unless a permit is secured.
B. Change of occupancy - building.
(1) It shall be unlawful to change the occupancy or use of a building
hereafter erected or altered or to allow, commence or maintain the
change of occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected or
altered that is not consistent with the last-issued certificate of
occupancy for such building unless a permit is secured. In case of
an existing building, no change of occupancy that would bring it
under some special provision of this ordinance shall be made unless
the Commissioner, or his designee, upon inspection, finds that such
building conforms substantially to the provisions of this ordinance
with respect to the proposed new occupancy and use, and issues a
certificate of occupancy therefor. [Amended 4-5-2005;
5-21-2013]
§ 68-24 ISLIP CODE § 68-25
66:682
(2) The reestablishment in a building, after a change of occupancy has
been made, of a prior use that would not have been permitted in a
new building of the same type of construction is prohibited. The
change from a specifically prohibited use to another specifically
prohibited use shall not be made.
C. Certificate of compliance.
(1) A certificate of compliance maybe issued for any structure which
was erected prior to July 1, 1938, and which does not meet the
requirements of the current New York State Building Code,
provided that it is in conformance with all applicable zoning
requirements and where, upon inspection, it is determined that the
structure is sound and safe in the determination of the
Commissioner, or his designee. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(2) If a building, addition or alteration was constructed after July 1,
1938, but a certificate of occupancy was never issued, a certificate
of compliance may be issued only where the construction is over
four years old and where, upon inspection, the Commissioner, or
his designee, determines that the structure conforms with the
intent of the New York State Building Code requirements and the
parcel, its use and related structures comply with the requirements
of the Zoning Code and the Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(3) The Commissioner or his/her designee shall have the authority to
issue certificates of compliance for structures and/or uses that may
be purported to have existed since prior to the enactment of any
portion of this chapter which make such structures and/or uses
nonconforming. This authority shall be limited to those instances
where there is conclusive evidence that the structure or use has not
been expanded or altered since prior to the applicable zoning date,
the parcel in question has been held in single and separate
ownership since prior to the establishment of the applicable zoning
provision, no other nonapproved subdivision has occurred, and the
use of the property in question has not been abandoned for a period
in excess of one year. [Amended 4-5-2005; 6-19-2012]
(a) Such conclusive evidence may include a combination of, and
may not be limited to:
[1] Building, land use, or development permits.
[2] Zoning codes or maps.
[3] Utility bills.
[4] Income tax records.
[5] Business licenses.
[6] Listings in telephone, business, or similar directories.
§ 68-25 WATER QUALITY § 68-25
66:683
§ 68-26. Orders and violations.
[7] Advertisements in dated publications.
[8] Insurance policies containing evidence of existence of
applicable structure or use.
[9] Leases, if executed.
[10] Dated aerial photos.
[11] Insurance maps that identify use or development, such as
the Sanborn Maps.
[12] Land use and development inventories prepared by a
government agency.
[13] Photographs containing information that expressly
conveys date taken.
[14] Sketch cards or other documentation used by the Town
Assessor's office for tax assessment purposes.
(b) If, in the sole discretion of the Commissioner, insufficient
evidence exists with respect to any of the aforesaid provisions,
the application shall be rejected and the applicant shall have
the right to make application to the Zoning Board of Appeals as
otherwise provided within the Town Code.
(4) Any and all structures or uses which do not comply with the above
shall have the right to apply to the Board of Appeals in order to
either establish such structure or use as a legal nonconforming use
or to seek a variance in connection with same.
(5) Applications for a certificate of compliance shall be submitted to
the Building Division. Required information and materials shall be
determined by the Commissioner as deemed necessary.
D. Suffolk County Department of Health Services compliance; electrical
wiring.
(1) All sanitary construction must be inspected by and have a
certificate of compliance from the Suffolk County Department of
Health Services filed with the Building Division indicating that such
construction meets the minimum requirements of the Department
of Health.
(2) All electrical wiring must be inspected by and have a certificate of
compliance from the New York Board of Fire Underwriters, or
other approved third party inspector, filed with the Building
Division. [Amended 4-5-2005]
A. Except as may be provided elsewhere in this article, the inspections
required by § 68-27 of this article will be performed by employees or
§ 68-25 ISLIP CODE § 68-26
66:684
agents of the Town of Islip. Such inspectors are authorized to order, in
writing:
(1) That any condition in violation of the Uniform Code or this article
existing in, on or about any building or structure be corrected
within a specified period of time;
(2) That work on a building or structure which is progressing in
violation of the Uniform Code or this article be stopped until the
Town of Islip is satisfied that such violation has been or will be
corrected; and
(3) That a building or structure constructed or maintained in violation
of the Uniform Code or this article shall not be occupied.
B. Orders to correct violations of the Uniform Code or this article shall be
served in person upon a responsible party or his authorized agent or by
registered mail sent to the address of such responsible party. Stop-work
orders and not-to-be occupied orders shall be served in person upon a
responsible party or his authorized agent, or by certified or registered
mail sent to the address of the responsible party or by posting such
order in a conspicuous spot upon the building or structure which is the
subject of such order. If an address for a responsible party has been set
forth in any relevant application for a permit or in any relevant
certificate, that address is the one which shall be used for service of an
order when the order is served by mail. A responsible party who fails to
comply with any order issued by the Department shall be subject to a
penalty as provided by law.
C. When a stop-work order has been issued in connection with a particular
project, no work shall proceed on that project until the stop-work order
has been rescinded or unless the specific work to be undertaken has
been approved in writing by an authorized employee of the Town of
Islip. When a not-to-be occupied order has been issued by the Town,
except for the purposes of inspecting or securing the building or
structure, no building or structure which is the subject of such an order
shall be occupied until such order is rescinded or unless the occupancy
is specifically approved in writing by an authorized employee of the
Town of Islip.
D. Third-party inspections. A person subject to inspection under § 68-27 of
this article may be required by the Town of Islip to have such inspection
performed at his own cost and expense by a competent inspector
acceptable to the Town. Such inspector may be a registered architect,
licensed professional engineer, certified code enforcement officer, or
other person whose experience and training has been demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Town. Such inspector shall certify the results of
his inspection to the Town of Islip. Any person required by the Town to
have an inspection performed at his own cost and expense shall not be
assessed the fees otherwise prescribed in this article.
§ 68-26 WATER QUALITY § 68-26
66:685
§ 68-27. Inspections. [Amended 12-12-2006; 12-17-2019]
E. Notices. Whenever the Building Inspector is satisfied that the execution
of any work for which a permit is issued is contrary to this ordinance
and/or plans and application submitted for the permit, he may serve
notice or order upon the persons responsible, directing the
discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition
that is in violation of the provisions of this code.
F. Stopping work. Whenever in the opinion of the Building Inspector, by
reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or
requirement of this ordinance, the continuance of a building operation
is contrary to public welfare, he may order, either orally or in writing,
all further work to be stopped, and may require suspension of the work
until the condition in violation has been remedied.
G. Penalties.
(1) In accordance with § 68-421, a person who shall violate a provision
of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair,
or has erected, constructed, altered or repaired, a building or
structure in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved thereunder shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both; and each day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation. [Amended 12-15-2009]
(2) The owner of a building, structure or premises where anything in
violation of this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and an
architect, builder, contractor, engineer, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have
assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of
a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
herein provided.
A. Work for which a permit has been issued under this article shall be
inspected at various stages of the project as deemed appropriate by the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee. Work shall
be inspected prior to enclosing or covering any portion thereof and
upon completion of each stage of construction or demolition, including
but not limited to building location, site preparation, excavation,
foundation, framing, superstructure, electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating and air conditioning. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner, applicant, or his agent to inform the Commissioner of Planning
or the Commissioner's designee that the work is ready for inspection
and to schedule such inspection. Failure to appropriately schedule an
inspection may result in the removal of the work, in whole or in part,
pursuant to the direction of the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee, as may be deemed necessary in order to
verify that the work was completed properly.
§ 68-26 ISLIP CODE § 68-28
66:686
§ 68-28. Fees. [Amended 12-13-2011; 9-24-2019]
§ 68-28.1. Review costs and assessment of consultant fees. [Added
5-3-2005]
A. All fees, as established by the Commissioner, shall be collected by
authorized agents as designated by the Commissioner. Fees may be
charged for processing all required permits. [Amended 12-17-2019]
B. In addition to application processing fees, the Commissioner of
Planning or the Commissioner's designee shall collect a public
improvement fee, as established by the Town Board, which shall be
based on the linear feet of street frontage which shall apply to all
building permits for the construction of new buildings on vacant
properties, except where the applicant can show: [Amended
12-17-2019]
(1) That the property is a full lot on a subdivision map approved by the
Planning Board, fully bonded for public improvements and
recorded with the Suffolk County Clerk; or
(2) That the road on which the property fronts has been improved or is
bonded for improvements to meet minimum Town standards in
accordance with Town Law.
C. Recreational contribution. Prior to the issuance of any building permits,
a suitable and adequate contribution must be made for the recreational
needs of Town residents. Fees shall be established and maintained by
the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development.
D. The Commissioner may, in his discretion, waive any building permit
application fee set forth in this section in connection with the
development of affordable housing by a not-for-profit corporation on
land owned by the CDA and conveyed by it to such corporation as part
of the affordable housing program.
E. Sale of copies of ordinance or amendments. A fee shall be collected for
the obtaining of a copy of this chapter with amendments and/or
individual amendments, which fees shall be as determined by the
Commissioner.
A. Legislative findings, intent and purpose.
(1) The Town Board hereby finds and determines that in order to
protect and safeguard the Town of Islip, its residents and their
property, with respect to certain land developments within the
Town, all buildings, highways, drainage facilities, sanitary sewer
facilities, other utilities and parks within said developments should
be designed and constructed in a competent and workmanlike
manner and in conformity with all applicable governmental codes,
rules and regulations and dedicated and conveyed to the Town in a
legally sufficient manner; that in order to assure the foregoing, it is
§ 68-28 WATER QUALITY § 68-28.1
66:687
essential for the Town to have competent competition engineers
retained by the Town to review and approve plans and designs and
make recommendations to the Town Board and Planning Board,
inspect the construction of highways, drainage, sewers, other
facilities and parks to be dedicated to the Town and to recommend
their acceptance by the Town, and to have competent attorneys
retained by the Town to negotiate and draft appropriate
agreements with developers, obtain, review and approve necessary
securities, insurance and other legal documents, review proposed
deeds and easements to assure the Town is obtaining good and
proper title and to generally represent the Town with respect to
legal disputes and issues with respect to developments, and that
the cost of retaining such competent engineers and attorneys
should ultimately be paid by those who seek to profit from such
developments rather than from general Town funds which are
raised by assessments paid by taxpayers of the Town.
(2) This section is enacted under the authority of Subparagraphs
(a)(12) and (d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii) and
Municipal Home Rule Law § 22. To the extent Town Law §§ 274-a,
276 and 277 do not authorize the Town Board or Town Planning
Board to require the reimbursement to the Town of legal and
engineering expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the
review and consideration of application for subdivision and site
plan approval and for the approval, amendment or extension of
planned districts under the Town's Zoning Ordinance, it is the
expressed intent of the Town Board to change and supersede such
statutes. More particularly, such statutes do not authorize the
deferral or withholding of such approvals in the event such
expenses are not paid to the Town. It is the expressed intent of the
Town Board to change and supersede Town Law, §§ 274-a, 276 and
277 to empower the Town to require such payment as a condition to
such approvals.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind who or which requests the Town
to approve a development.
DEVELOPER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind who or which constructs or
proposes to construct one or more developments, highways, drainage
facilities, utilities or parks within or in conjunction with a development
and to convey or dedicate same to the Town.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean and include a subdivision, a site plan,
any planned development district or other similar district.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — All surface water drainage facilities, including,
but not limited to, detention and retention basins, storm sewers and
§ 68-28.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-28.1
66:688
their appurtenances, drainage swales and ditches, and any easements
through or over which said facilities may be constructed or installed in
or in connection with a development.
HIGHWAY — Includes a street, avenue, road, square, place, alley, lane,
boulevard, concourse, parkway, driveway, overpass and underpass and
also includes all items appurtenant thereto, including but not limited to
bridges, culverts, ditches, shoulders and sidewalks in or in connection
with a development.
PARK — An area of land located within a development which is open to
the public and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PLANNED DISTRICT — A planned residential district, planned
residential community district, or planned development district,
including any site plan review pursuant to the Town (or any successor
provision) or environmental review pursuant to the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act.
TOWN — The Town of Islip.
UTILITIES — All water, sanitary sewer, gas, electric, telephone, cable
television facilities and any easements through or over which said
facilities may be constructed or installed in or in connection with a
development.
C. Reimbursement of fees and expenses.
(1) Subdivisions and site plans.
(a) The applicant, for approval of a subdivision or site plan in the
Town, shall reimburse the Town for all reasonable and
necessary engineering expenses incurred by the Town in
connection with the review and consideration of such
subdivision.
(b) A developer who constructs, or proposes to construct, one or
more highways, drainage facilities, utilities or parks: within or
in conjunction with an approved subdivision in the Town shall
reimburse the Town for all reasonable and necessary legal and
engineering expenses incurred by the Town in connection with
the review, design, inspection and acceptance by the Town of
such highways, drainage facilities, utilities and parks and the
dedication of same to the Town.
(2) Planned districts.
(a) An applicant. for the approval, amendment or extension of a
planned district in the Town, shall reimburse the Town for all
reasonable and necessary legal and engineering expenses
incurred by the Town in connection with the review, design and
consideration of said application.
§ 68-28.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-28.1
66:689
(b) A developer who constructs or proposes to construct one or
more buildings, highways, drainage facilities, utilities or parks
within or in conjunction with a planned district in the Town
shall reimburse the Town for all reasonable and necessary
legal and engineering expenses incurred by the Town in
connection with the granting of any building permit, or other
approval, and in connection with the review, design and
inspection and acceptance by the Town of such highways,
drainage facilities, utilities and parks and the dedication of
same to the Town.
D. Exceptions.
(1) The following developments are hereby excepted from the
application of this section:
(a) Any development of land of one acre or less abutting an
existing public highway.
(b) Any minor subdivision of land abutting an existing public
highway.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section,
an applicant or developer shall not be required to reimburse the
Town for any part of a legal or engineering fee incurred by the
Town for services performed in connection with matters, including
but not limited to those resulting from complaints by third parties,
as to which the Planning Board determines the applicant or
developer had no responsibility or was beyond the reasonable
control of the applicant or developer.
E. Deposit of funds and payment of fees.
(1) Simultaneously with the filing of an application for approval of a
development and prior to the commencement of any construction
of buildings, highways, drainage facilities, utilities or parks therein,
the applicant or developer, as the case may be, shall deposit with
the Comptroller a sum of money, as determined in consultation with
the Town Engineer, which sum shall be used to pay the costs
incurred by the Town for engineering and legal services as
described in Subsection C of this section.
(2) Upon receipt of such sums, the Comptroller shall cause such
monies to be placed in a separate non-interest-bearing account in
the name of the Town and shall keep a separate record of all such
monies so deposited and the name of the applicant or developer
and project for which such sums were deposited.
(3) Upon receipt and approval by the Town Engineer, in the case of
engineers, and the Town Attorney, in the case of attorneys, of
itemized vouchers from an engineer and/or attorney for services
rendered on behalf of the Town pertaining to the development, the
§ 68-28.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-28.1
66:690
§ 68-29. Advertising.
No person shall solicit, offer or advertise any building or lot or any portion
thereof for sale or rent for any use which is not permitted by the Code of the
Town of Islip. Violations shall be subject to a penalty and/or fine as deemed
appropriate by the Town Attorney.
§ 68-30. Minimum standard requirements. [Amended 9-11-2001;
12-12-2006; 5-22-2007; 9-11-2007; 4-29-2008; 5-28-2008; 8-4-2015;
12-17-2019]
All new construction shall comply in all respects with minimum standards as
established and maintained by any and all applicable federal, state, county
and local rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the New
Comptroller shall cause such vouchers to be paid out of the monies
so deposited, and shall furnish copies of such vouchers to the
applicant or developer at the same time such vouchers are
submitted to the Town.
(4) The Town Engineer or the Town Attorney shall review and audit all
such vouchers and shall approve payment of only such engineering
and legal fees as are reasonable in amount and necessarily
incurred by the Town in connection with the review, consideration
and approval of developments and the inspection and acceptance of
highways, drainage facilities, utilities and parks within or in
conjunction with such developments. For purpose of the foregoing,
a fee or part thereof is reasonable in amount if it bears a reasonable
relationship to the average charge by engineers or attorneys to the
Town for services performed in connection with the approval or
construction of a similar development, and in this regard the Town
Engineer or the Town Attorney may take into consideration the
size. type and number of buildings to be constructed, the amount of
time to complete the development, the topography of the land on
which such development is located, soil conditions, surface water,
drainage conditions, the nature and extent of highways, drainage
facilities, utilities and parks to be constructed and any special
conditions or considerations as the Town Engineer or Town
Attorney may deem relevant; and a fee or part thereof is
necessarily incurred if it was charged by the engineer or attorney
for a service which was rendered in order to protect or promote the
health, safety or other vital interests of the residents of the Town,
protect public or private property from damage from uncontrolled
surface water run-off and other factors, assure the proper and
timely construction of highways, drainage facilities, utilities and
parks, protect the legal interests of the Town, including receipt to
the Town of good and proper title to dedicated highways and other
facilities and the avoidance of claims and liability, and other such
interests as the Town Engineer or Town Attorney may deem
relevant.
§ 68-28.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:691
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (Uniform Code), the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code (Energy Code), the National
Electric Code (NEC), Suffolk County Department of Health Services
(SCDHS) regulations, and the Islip Town Code.
A. Building and structures: unsafe.
(1) Purpose. Within the Town there exist, from time to time, structures
which have become dangerous, unsound, unsafe or hazardous and
which thereby pose a threat to the health and welfare of Town
residents. The Town Board declares that it is the obligation of
persons responsible for such structures to repair or remove them
after being notified of their condition. In the event that the repair
or removal is not voluntarily accomplished, it is the purpose of this
ordinance to secure such repair or removal and charge the cost
thereof to the owner of the premises.
(2) Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Commissioner
of Planning or the Commissioner's designee. He/she is hereby
authorized to make inspections of all types of structures
throughout the Town, to declare such structures to be unsafe,
hazardous or public nuisances and to make such structures safe in
accordance with the procedures outlined in the chapter. The Town
Attorney, on advice of an engineer, shall be designated an
authorized agent of the Commissioner of Planning.
(3) Declaration of public nuisance. Any structure, as defined in
Chapter 68 of the Code, which in the opinion of the Commissioner
of Planning or the Commissioner's designee has become
dangerous, unsound, unsafe or hazardous as a result of fire,
neglect, disrepair, structural failure, collapse, vandalism or any
other means shall be declared a public nuisance. Such nuisance
shall include any unoccupied structure which is not secured from
entry by having all windows, doors and openings secured in
accordance with the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee's specifications.
(a) The occupants of any such building or structure shall vacate
the premises forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such
building or structure until it is deemed safe and secure by the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee.
(b) Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which
have been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform
inspections, repairs or to demolish and remove such building
or structure.
(4) Public nuisances prohibited. A public nuisance, as declared in this
chapter, is a prohibited condition and shall be removed in
accordance with the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee's specifications.
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:692
(5) Removal of public nuisance, A public nuisance may be removed
without the owner's consent in accordance with the following
procedure:
(a) Notice. A notice shall be served as set forth herein. The notice
shall contain the following:
[1] A description of the premises, consisting of street address
and Tax Map number.
[2] The name and address of the last known owner of the
premises as indicated in the records of the Town Assessor
or the Tax Receiver.
[3] A statement of particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe or dangerous and a public nuisance.
[4] A statement of the time within which work must be
commenced to remove the nuisance.
[5] Notice of the time and place of hearing before the Town
Board for the purpose of determining, in the event that the
repair or removal is not voluntarily completed, whether
the Town shall accomplish such repair work or removal.
(b) Filing of notice. Within 10 days of service on the owner or his
representative, a copy of such notice shall be filed in the office
of the Suffolk County Clerk, together with a statement of the
names of parties involved, the object of the notice and a
description of the property affected. A notice so filed shall be
effective for one year from the date of filing, unless sooner
vacated by court order or by consent of the Town Attorney.
(c) Hearing. The Town Board shall hold a hearing at the time and
place specified in the notice to determine whether the repair or
removal of the public nuisance shall be accomplished by the
Town. At such hearing, the affected owner or his
representative may present evidence in opposition to the
determination of the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee.
(6) Declaration of immediate hazard. A public nuisance may be
declared an immediate hazard by the Commissioner of Planning or
the Commissioner's designee when there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life,
or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes
or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or
operation of defective or dangerous equipment.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:693
(a) The occupants of any such building or structure shall vacate
the premises forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such
building or structure until it is deemed safe and secure by the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee.
(b) Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which
have been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform
inspections, repairs or to demolish and remove such building
or structure.
(7) Removal of immediate hazard. Whenever the Commissioner of
Planning or the Commissioner's designee declares that a premises
contains an immediate hazard, he is hereby authorized to specify
the work required to remove the hazard, to order the property
owner to remove the hazard and to remove the hazard if such
hazard is not removed within a specified time period.
(a) Notice and order. The Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee shall notify the property owner or his
agent of the hazard by telephone, in person or by certified mail
and shall specify the work required and specify the length of
time during which the work must be commenced. He shall also
advise the property owner or his agent of the consequences of
the failure to comply.
(b) Failure to comply. In the event that the owner neglects or
refuses to comply with the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee order, in the specified time, or in the
event that the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee is not able to contact the owner or
his agent, making a diligent effort to do so, the Commissioner
of Planning or the Commissioner's designee is authorized to
proceed with the required work to remove the hazard and to
include all costs incurred by the Town of Islip in the next
regularly scheduled tax bill in accordance with this chapter.
Such work may include, but is not limited to, emergency repair
or demolition and removal of all or part of the building(s) or
structure(s), including foundations, the installation of fencing,
and boarding and securing.
(8) Service of notice. The service of any notice provided for herein may
be made upon the owner, one of the owner's executors, legal
representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a
vested or contingent interest in the unsafe structure. Service shall
be either personally or by registered mail addressed to the last
known address, if any, of the owner or of one of such other named
persons, as such address is shown in the records of the Receiver of
Taxes or in the office of the County Clerk, together with posting a
copy of the notice on the premises.
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:694
(9) Statement of expenses. When the Town has effected the removal of
the public nuisance or hazard pursuant to this chapter, the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee shall
prepare a statement of all costs and expenses incurred by the Town
in connection with the proceedings to remove or secure, including
but not limited to clerical, mailing and administrative costs and the
actual cost of removal of the nuisance or hazard, whether the work
was performed by the Town or by the contractor paid by the Town.
Such statement shall also contain a description of the property
which caused the Town to incur such expenses and the name of the
reputed owner of said property. The statement shall be prima facie
evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that
the ordered work has been completed properly and satisfactorily.
Such statement, when filed, shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement constitutes a charge
against the property described in the statement and that the
amount is due and collectible as provided in this chapter.
(10) Retrieval of expenses.
(a) Filing. Signed copies of the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee sworn statement of expenses shall be
filed with the Assessor of the Town of Islip, and such costs shall
be assessed against the land on which said buildings are or
were located.
(b) Town Assessor. The Town Assessor shall annex the amount of
the statement as a special assessment to the property named in
the statement and shall not remove same until notified by the
Receiver of Taxes that the amount due has been collected in
full.
(c) Receiver of Taxes. The Receiver of Taxes shall include the
amount of the statement on the next regular tax bill for the
property named in the statement.
(d) Civil action. Repayment of costs may also be pursued by a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(11)Waiver of hearing. The property owner may waive the necessity of a
hearing and grant the Town permission, in writing, to remove the
public nuisance. In this event, the expenses incurred by the Town
may be included in the next tax bill in accordance with the
procedure set forth in this ordinance.
(12) Severability. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase
or provision of this Subsection A shall be declared invalid or held
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this
Subsection A as a whole or part or provision thereof other than the
part so declared to be invalid and unconstitutional.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:695
(13) Adoption of provisions. This ordinance, effective June 21, 1937, was
recodified on December 16, 1980.
B. Minimum housing standards.
(1) This provision shall be known as "minimum housing standards."
(2) Legislative intent.
(a) The purpose of this Subsection B is to provide basic and
uniform standards, in terms of performance objectives
implemented by specific requirements, governing the
condition, occupancy and maintenance of occupied premises
and unoccupied premises and establishing reasonable
safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the occupants
and users of said premises, the community and the general
public.
(b) It is the concern of the Town Board that appropriate standards
be enacted regarding the exterior maintenance of properties
within the Town which are covered by this chapter. It is
recognized that the enforcement of such minimum standards is
in the interest of all persons to ensure the stability and to
prevent the deterioration of neighborhoods, as well as to
promote the health and welfare of all Town residents by
protecting the quality of housing.
(3) Applicability. This Subsection B shall apply to all residential
premises as follows:
(a) Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings,
buildings of varied occupancy or accessory structures are
located.
(b) Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings
and multiple dwellings, as defined herein, except as
specifically excluded in § 68-30B(4).
(c) Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
(d) Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
(4) Exceptions. This Subsection B shall not apply to nursing and
convalescent homes, public hospitals, camps, travel trailers, trailer
parks or one-family dwellings located in a BAA District where the
same are rented only from June 1 up to and including September
10.
(5) Most restrictive regulations to prevail. Where a provision of this
Subsection B is found to be in conflict with a provision of a zoning,
building or health ordinance, or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:696
provision or requirement which is the more restrictive or which
establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(6) Existing remedies. Nothing in this Subsection B shall be deemed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the Town of Islip relating to
the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary or otherwise subject to lawful
removal of demolition pursuant to law.
(7) Severability. If a term, part, provision, section, subdivision or
paragraph of this Subsection B shall be held unconstitutional,
invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall
not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions,
sections, subdivisions and paragraphs.
(8) General requirements.
(a) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and
serviceable condition.
(b) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members or cause damage or deterioration to any
part of the building through fixture usage.
(9) Sewage drainage system.
(a) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage
system and such system shall be connected to a Suffolk County
Department of Health Services approval system of sewage
disposal.
(b) Substances which will produce explosive mixtures, destroy the
pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building
drainage system unless it is provided with devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(c) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water-seal trap.
(d) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that
the pipes may be readily cleaned.
(e) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all
pipes in order that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not
cause a loss of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(f) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall
be equipped with air brakes adequate to prevent
contamination of such contents from any possible backup of
sewage through the direct or indirect drainage piping.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:697
(10) Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee
designated official inspector. The Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee of the Town of Islip is authorized to make
or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and
premises in order to safeguard the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the public. The Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee are authorized to enter any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises at any
reasonable time during daylight hours or at such other time as may
be necessary in an emergency for the purpose of performing the
Commissioner's duties under this Subsection B.
(11) Access to dwellings. The owner, operator or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises
shall give access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit and premises for the purpose of such inspections at
any reasonable time during daylight hours or at such times as may
be necessary in an emergency.
(12) Identification of inspectors. Inspectors and authorized personnel of
the Building Division shall be supplied with official identification
when entering any dwelling, dwelling unit. rooming house, rooming
unit or premises.
(13) Emergencies: power to act. Whenever the Commissioner of
Planning or the Commissioner's designee finds a violation of this
Subsection B exists which, in the Commissioner's opinion, requires
immediate action to abate a direct hazard or immediate danger to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the building or of
the public, he may, by telephone notice to the owner, agent,
operator or occupant, or without prior notice, issue an order citing
the violation and directing that such action be taken as is necessary
to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Such order may include
an order to vacate. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Subsection B, such an order shall be effective immediately upon
service and shall be complied with immediately or as otherwise
provided.
(14) Extension of compliance time. The Commissioner of Planning or
the Commissioner's designee may extend the compliance time
specified in any notice or order issued under the provisions of this
Subsection B where there is evidence of intent to comply within the
period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which
prevent immediate compliance.
(15) Abatement of hazards in emergencies. Whenever any violation of
this Subsection B, which, in the opinion of the Commissioner of
Planning or the Commissioner's designee, causes a direct hazard or
immediate danger to the health and safety of the occupants of a
building or the public, has not been corrected in the time specified
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:698
by the order issued, the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee may take such direct action as is
necessary to abate the hazard or danger, including demolition.
Expenses incurred in the execution of such orders shall be
recovered as provided herein.
(16) Recovery of costs and expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to
§ 68-30B(15) of this chapter shall be paid by the owner or occupant
of the premises or by the person who caused such violation to exist,
as follows:
(a) The Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee
shall file among his records an affidavit stating with fairness
and accuracy the items of expenses and the date of the
execution of actions authorized under this chapter. A copy of
such affidavit shall be served upon the owner or occupant of
the premises as provided in this chapter.
(b) Within 10 days thereafter, the owner or occupant upon whom
such affidavit has been served may file with the Commissioner
of Planning or the Commissioner's designee a written request
for a hearing with the Building Inspector and the Town
Attorney to contest any items of expenses set forth in the
affidavit of the Commissioner, of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee. If such a request is not received
within 10 days, the affidavit of the Building Director shall be
final and binding upon the owner or occupant.
(c) At such hearing, the applicant or his representative shall be
given an opportunity to show cause why the items of expenses
listed in the affidavit of the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee are not accurate.
(d) Upon the completion of all work under § 68-30B(15) of this
chapter, the Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's
designee shall file among his records an affidavit fully stating
all items of expenses incurred. A copy of the same shall be
served upon the owner or occupant as provided in this chapter.
(e) The Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee
may institute an action in the Supreme Court to recover such
expenses against any person liable therefor or may cause a
report setting forth all items of expenses incurred under
§ 68-30B(15) of this chapter to be filed with the Town Board of
the Town of Islip.
(f) The Town Board, after a public hearing and notice by mail to
the owner or occupant of the premises. may cause the items of
expenses incurred pursuant to actions authorized by
§ 68-30B(15) of this ordinance to be assessed against the land
upon which the building or structures are located. Said amount
shall be reported to the Assessor of the Town of Islip as an
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:699
assessment to be included in the next succeeding assessment
roll on the Town of Islip to be thereafter prepared.
(17) Administrative liability. No Building Inspector, officer, agent or
employee of the Town of Islip shall render himself personally liable
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this Subsection B. Any suit brought against any officer, agent
or employee of the Town of Islip as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Subsection B
shall be defended by an attorney appointed by the Town Attorney
until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
(18) Designation of unfit structures. Any dwelling or dwelling units,
rooming house or rooming unit or premises having any of the
defects found in Subsection B(18) (a), (b), (c) and (d) below may be
designated by the Commissioner's of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee as unfit for human habitation or use and
may be so placarded.
(a) The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or
other facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the
occupants or the public, as are required by this ordinance.
(b) The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin-infested in such a manner as to create a
serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the
public.
(c) The structure or premises, including foundations, because of
the general conditions, state of the premises or number of
occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise
detrimental to health and safety that it creates a serious
hazard to the occupants or the public.
(d) The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant
to comply with such notices or orders issued pursuant to this
Subsection B, is unfit for human habitation or usage.
(19) Notice of intent to vacate. Whenever the Commissioner of Planning
or the Commissioner's designee determines that a dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit or premises is unfit for human
habitation or use as provided in § 68-30B(18), he/she may include
such finding within the notice of violation provided for in this
chapter. He/she may also include a notice of his intent to vacate and
placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit
or premises if compliance with the provisions of the notice of
violation is not secured within the time specified.
(20) Order to vacate. Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in
§ 68-30B(19) of this chapter, has not been complied with, the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee may
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:700
order the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or rooming house
to be vacated. A copy of such order to vacate shall be served on the
occupant and owner, agent or operator, as provided in this chapter.
(21) Vacation of unfit structures and premises. Any dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house or rooming unit or premises designated as unit
for human habitation or use pursuant to § 68-30B(18) and ordered
to be vacated as provided in § 68-30B(20) shall be vacated within
such reasonable time as the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee may specify in the order. No such
dwelling or dwelling unit shall again be used for human habitation,
or placard removed, until written approval is secured from the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee.
(22) Removal of placard restricted. No person shall deface or remove
the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation, except as provided in §§ 68-30B(21).
(23) Unfit structures made secure. The owner, agent or operator of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit or premises
which has been designated as unfit for human habitation and
vacated shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit safe and secure in whatever manner the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee shall
deem necessary. Any vacant building open at the doors and
windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed a direct hazard or
immediate danger to the health and safety of the general public.
(24) Demolition. Whenever the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee designates a building unfit for human
habitation, the Building Inspector may institute proceeding
pursuant to this chapter to remove and demolish the said structure
or building. The expenses thereof may be recovered pursuant to
§ 68-30B(16) herein.
(25) Responsibility of owners.
(a) Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with
the Subsection B and shall remain responsible therefor
regardless of the fact that this section may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of
any agreements between owners and operators or occupants
as to which party shall assume such responsibility.
(b) Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper
maintenance, condition and operation of service facilities and
for furnishing adequate heat and hotwater supply in multiple
dwellings.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:701
(26) Responsibility of occupants. Occupants of dwelling units shall be
responsible for compliance with this Subsection B in regard to the
following:
(a) Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he
occupies or controls to the maximum permitted by the
ordinance.
(b) Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
(c) Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration
fixtures and appliances, as well as other building equipment
and storage facilities in that part of the premises which he
occupies or controls, in a clean and sanitary condition, and
providing reasonable care in the operation and use thereof.
(d) Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
(e) Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a
clean and sanitary manner.
(27) Revocation of certificate of occupancy; injunction proceedings. Any
certificate of occupancy may be revoked and injunction
proceedings may be maintained by the Town of Islip, in addition to
any other remedy hereunder, in the event of a continuing violation
or a refusal or failure to comply with this chapter. Failure or refusal
to procure a permit required under the Town Code shall be a
violation.
(28) (Reserved)
(29) Fees. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and
Development shall set such fees as he or she deems appropriate.
However, said fees may be modified by the Town Board in its
discretion.
C. Fire prevention.
(1) Interpretation of terms. For the purpose of this chapter, as well as
all other provisions of the Code of the Town of Islip, the term "Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" shall mean any Fire Marshal
employed by the Town of Islip.
(2) Right of entry.
(a) The Chief of the Fire Department, the administrative head of
any code enforcement department or division, Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention or any inspector thereof may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the
purposes of making any inspection or investigation which,
under the provision of this Code, he or they may deem
necessary to be made.
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:702
(b) Public buildings not under jurisdiction of the Town as to
construction shall not be subject to inspection or to the terms
of this chapter.
(3) Inspection of buildings and premises.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to
inspect or cause to be inspected by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or by the Fire Department officers or members all
buildings and premises, except the interiors of one-family
dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable
to cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any violations of the
provisions or intent of this Code, and of any other ordinance
affecting the fire hazard. The Chief of the Fire Department
making such inspections shall report any violations or
conditions alleged to constitute violations to the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(b) The Chief of the Fire Department, the administrative head of
any code enforcement department or division, Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention or an inspector, upon request of the
owner or occupant or upon the complaint of any person or
whenever he or they shall deem it necessary, shall inspect any
buildings and premises within their jurisdiction.
(c) Condominium projects and multiple-occupant dwellings
require inspection of common areas. The Chief of the Fire
Department, the administrative head of any code enforcement
department or division, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or an inspector, upon the request of any owner or
occupant of a condominium unit or upon the complaint of any
person or whenever he or they shall deem it necessary, shall
inspect the common buildings and/or premises of that
condominium development.
(4) Orders to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions.
(a) Whenever any inspectors of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or
hazardous conditions or materials as follows, he or they shall
order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or
remedied in such manner as may be specified by the Chief of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(b) Whenever any of the officers, members or inspectors of the
Fire Department or Bureau of Fire Prevention shall find in any
building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous
conditions or materials as follows, he or they shall order such
dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied
in such manner as may be specified by the Chief of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:703
[1] Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or
explosive or otherwise hazardous materials.
[2] Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or using combustible or
explosive or otherwise hazardous materials.
[3] Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes,
shavings or other highly flammable materials.
[4] Accumulations of dust or waste material in airconditioning
or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen
or other exhaust ducts.
[5] Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways,
doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of
the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire.
[6] Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs,
lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire
alarm apparatus or fire-extinguishing equipment, or
reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other
cause, creates a hazardous condition.
[7] No parking in fire zones. No persons shall park or leave
standing any vehicle in any area designated or marked as a
fire zone, nor shall any area so designated be used for the
storage of any material or used in any way that will
obstruct the same or render the same inaccessible by fire
apparatus.
(5) Service of orders.
(a) The service of orders for the correction of violations of this
Subsection C shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other
person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a
copy of same to such person or by delivering the same to and
leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case
no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of
the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an
order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served
either by delivering to and leaving with said person a copy of
the order or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the
officer making the order, by sending such copy by certified mail
to the owner's last known post-office address.
(b) If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and
occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders
issued in connection with the enforcing of this Subsection C
shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or
orders require the making of additions to or changes in the
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:704
premises themselves such as would immediately become real
estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in
such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not
the occupant.
(c) Any person served with an order properly issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Subsection C shall have 10 days from the
date of service thereof to comply with said order, and failure to
so comply shall be deemed an offense and shall be punishable
by the penalties provided for in this Code. Said time for
compliance may be extended beyond the above-indicated 10
days when, in the opinion of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention extenuating circumstances exist, and said
extension is agreed to in writing by the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
(6) Investigation of fires.
(a) The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall cooperate with the proper
authorities in any investigation of the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the municipality which
is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to
persons or by which property has been destroyed or
substantially damaged.
(b) Every fire shall be reported in writing to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention within two days after the occurrence of the same,
by the officer in whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred.
Such report shall be on a standard form as shall be prescribed
by the Bureau of Fire Prevention and shall contain a statement
of facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such
fire, injury to persons and extent of damage thereof, and such
other information as may be required.
(c) The Town Attorney and the Police Department, upon request of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall assist the inspectors in the
investigation of any fire which in their opinion is of suspicious
origin.
(7) Fire records. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall keep
in the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention a record of all fires
affecting structures and of all the facts concerning the same,
including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage
caused thereby. Such record shall be made from the reports made
by the Fire Department officers and inspectors.
(8) Exceptions. Nothing contained in this Subsection C shall be
construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing
shipped under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the
regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission,
nor as applying to the military forces of the United States.
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:705
(9) Fire drills in educational and institutional occupancies.
(a) Fire drills shall be held at least once a month in educational
occupancies where such occupancies constitute the major
occupancy of a building, and at least once every two months in
institutional occupancies where such occupancies constitute
the major occupancy of a building. During severe weather, fire
drills may be postponed. A record of all fire drills shall be kept,
and persons in charge of such occupancies shall file written
reports at least quarterly with the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
giving the time and date of each drill held.
(b) In educational occupancies, fire drills shall include complete
evacuation of all persons from the building. In institutional
occupancies, fire drills shall be conducted to familiarize
operating personnel with their assigned positions of
emergency duty; complete evacuation of occupants from the
building at the time of the fire drill shall be required only
where it is practicable and does not involve moving or
disturbing persons under medical care.
(c) A record of all fire drills in educational and institutional
occupancies shall be kept, and persons in charge of such
occupancies shall file written reports at least quarterly with
the Bureau of Fire Prevention, giving the time and date of each
drill held.
(10) Permits.
(a) A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or
handle materials, or to conduct processes, which produce
conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment
used in connection with such activities. Such permit does not
take the place of any license required by law. It shall not be
transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises
shall require a new permit.
(b) Before a permit may be issued, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or his assistants shall inspect and approve the
receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used. In
cases where laws or regulations enforceable by departments
other than the Bureau of Fire Prevention are applicable, joint
approval shall be obtained from all departments concerned.
(c) All applications for a permit required by this Subsection C shall
be made to the Bureau of Fire Prevention in such form and
detail as it shall prescribe. Applications for permits shall be
accompanied by such plans as required by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:706
(d) Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated
therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any
officer of the Fire or Police Departments.
(e) One permit only shall be required by establishments dealing in
or using two or more flammable, combustible or explosive
materials to be kept in the establishment at any one time, but
each of the materials shall be listed in the permit.
(f) The Town Board may enter into agreements with the Board of
Fire Commissioners of any fire district wholly or partly within
the Town that the issuance of permits and preliminary
investigations thereto will be performed by said fire districts.
(g) Permits from the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be required in
accordance with § 68-30C(13). Permit fees shall be established
and maintained by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(11) Revocation of permit. The Bureau of Fire Prevention may revoke a
permit or approval issued if any violation of this Subsection C is
found upon inspection or in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(12) Liability for damages. This Subsection C shall not be construed to
hold the Town responsible for any damage to persons or property
by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or
failure to inspect or reinspect or the permit issued as herein
provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein.
(13) Charts.
Materials Requiring a Storage Permit
Material Quantities in Excess of
*Flammable liquids 5 gallons inside or outside if flash point
is less than 100° F.
25 gallons inside if flash point is greater
than 70° F.
50 gallons outside if flash point is
greater than 70° F.
*Flammable
compressed gas
2,000 cubic feet
*Nonflammable
compressed gas
6,000 cubic feet
*Corrosive materials 55 gallons
*Oxidizing materials 500 pounds
*Organic peroxides 10 pounds
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:707
Materials Requiring a Storage Permit
Material Quantities in Excess of
*Toxic materials Any quantity
*Poisonous gases Any quantity
*Ammonium nitrate 1,000 pounds
*Ammonium nitrate
fertilizers
1,000 pounds
*Nitromethane 500 pounds
*Radioactive materials 1 microcurie if not a sealed source 1
millicurie if a sealed source
*Explosive/blasting
agents
Any quantity
*Rubber, cotton, cork,
etc.
2,500 cubic feet
*Cellulose nitrate
plastics
25 pounds
Combustible fibers 100 cubic feet
Lumber 100,000 board feet
Combustible containers 2,500 cubic feet gross volume
Matches 25 cases
Cellulose nitrate
motion-picture film
25 pounds (about 5,000 feet of 35mm
film)
*Placard required.
Operations Requiring a Use Permit
Use Applicability
Place of assembly Any such operation occupied by 50 or
more persons or encompassing 750
square feet or more in area, excluding
occupancies used exclusively as a place of
worship
Tent The erecting, maintaining or use of a tent
covering an area in excess of 500 square
feet
Public fireworks
display
Any such operation
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30
66:708
Operations Requiring a Use Permit
Use Applicability
Welding and cutting
operations
The performing of welding and cutting
operations by any company, corporation,
co-partnership or owner-operator except
where the welding and cutting is
performed in an area approved for the
purpose or the company, corporation, copartnership
or owner- operator has an
approved permit system established for
the control of the fire hazards involved
Spraying and dipping
operations
Any such operation utilizing more than
one gallon on any working day of
flammable or combustible liquids
Bowling lane
resurfacing or pin
refinishing
Any such operation which involves the use
and application of flammable liquid or
materials
Dry-cleaning business Any such operation using flammable or
combustible liquids
Motor vehicle
servicing or repair
Any such operation inside a building, shed
or enclosure
Baking and drying
ovens
Any industrial oven which is heated by oil
or gas fuel or which, during operation,
contains flammable vapors from the
products being baked or dried
Tire recapping or
rebuilding
Any such operation
Fruit ripening process Any such operation
Fumigation or thermal
insecticidal fogging
Any such operation
Magnesium
operations
The melting, casting, heat treating,
machining or grinding of more than 10
pounds of magnesium per working day
Match manufacturing Any such operation
Operation producing
explosive dust
The operating of any grain elevator, flour,
starch or feed mill or plant pulverizing
aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium,
spices, sugar or other material producing
an explosive dust
Flammable liquid
processing
Any manufacturing, processing, blending
or refining of flammable liquids
Open burning Any such operation
Material Quantities in Excess of
§ 68-30 WATER QUALITY § 68-30
66:709
§ 68-30.1. Energy Star requirements. [Added 4-29-2008; amended
10-13-2010; 9-7-2011; 12-11-2012]
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby adopts the Energy Conservation
Construction Code of New York State to govern all construction within the
Town of Islip.
§ 68-30.2. Improvements for senior citizens and disabled. [Added
5-27-2009]
Operations Requiring a Use Permit
Use Applicability
Manufacturing of
pyroxylin articles
Any manufacturing of articles of cellulose
nitrate plastics pyroxylin, including the
use of cellulose nitrate plastics in the
manufacturing or assembling of other
articles
Flammable liquid tank
vehicle delivery
Any business involving the delivery of
flammable liquids from tank vehicles
Fire protection
equipment
Any installation of such equipment
(14) Certificate of fitness and LPG. Any person who performs the
transfer of liquid propane gas (LPG) within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Islip shall first obtain a certificate of fitness from the Town
of Islip Fire Marshal's office.
(a) Each person wishing to obtain a certificate of fitness shall
submit the required application and fee as set by the Division
of Code Enforcement and shall pass a written examination and
practical test.
(b) Any person transferring and/or dispensing LPG shall provide,
upon the request of a Code Enforcement Official, a current
certificate of fitness and, if unable to provide same, may be
punishable by the provisions of this Code.
(c) No person shall knowingly discharge LPG into the atmosphere
without first notifying the Town of Islip Fire Marshal's office
and without using an approved method or device.
A. Legislative intent. The Town Board finds that a growing percentage of
the residents of the Town of Islip require design modifications, and
accessibility improvements, in order to enter and exit their homes
safely. The Town Board has further determined that the incorporation of
certain universal design features during the planning, construction,
extension or alteration of single-family residences will afford all persons
better access to residential buildings, regardless of age, size, or
abilities. In order to construct the necessary design modifications and
§ 68-30 ISLIP CODE § 68-30.2
66:710
accessibility improvements in many of these homes, a building permit
is required. The intent of this section is to facilitate the expeditious
processing of those permits which incorporate three or more universal
design features by the Building Department to the fullest extent
possible, and to allow for relief from certain strictures of the Zoning
Code for such design modifications and accessibility improvements.
Exempting certain improvements to residential structures from the
strict application of the Zoning Code will better assist residents who
wish to "age in place" and improve their quality of life without adversely
affecting neighboring properties.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSIBLE DESIGN — Houses or dwellings that meet specific
requirements for accessibility. These requirements are found in state,
local, and model building codes, and the regulations of the Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988, and the American With Disabilities Act (ADA)
accessibility guidelines. These regulations, guidelines and laws dictate
standard dimensions and features, including, but not limited to, door
widths, clear space or wheelchair mobility, countertop heights for sinks
and kitchens, audible and visual signals, grab bars, and switch and
outlet heights.
ADAPTABLE DESIGN — Allows some features of a building or dwelling
to be changed to address the needs of an individual with a disability
or a person encountering mobility limitations as he/she ages. Essential
design elements, such as wider doorways and halls and barrier-free
entrances, are included as integral features, while provisions are made
for features to be adapted (modified or added), as needed. To meet the
definition of "adaptable," the change must be able to be made quickly
without the use of skilled labor and without changing the inherent
structure of the materials. For example, bathroom walls may be
designed with additional supports or reinforcements between wall
studs for future installation of grab bars.
UNIVERSAL DESIGN — The process of incorporating flexibility and
alternative means of use in the design, construction, and modification
of homes, in order to accommodate use by all people, regardless of age,
ability, sex, and economic status.
C. Requirements. All applications for development, redevelopment,
modification or alteration of single-family residences shall receive
expedited review by the Building Department, to the fullest extent
practicable, if three or more of the following universal design features
are incorporated into the construction:
(1) Zero-step entrance. At least one stepless entrance to the residence,
which may be located at the front, rear or side of the structure, but
does not include any entrance that is located within an attached
garage. There shall be less than a one-half-inch rise at the stepless
entrance. A sidewalk or walkway being utilized as the accessible
§ 68-30.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-30.2
66:711
route to the stepless entrance must have a slope no greater than
1:12.
(2) Doorways and passageways. All doors on the ground floor of the
new construction or addition (including bathrooms, walk-in closets,
pocket and sliding doors, and any door intended for human
passage) shall have a minimum clearance of 34 inches. A thirty-sixinch
door, hung in the standard manner, provides the thirty-fourinch
clear opening required by this section.
(3) Adaptability features: the existence of at least one room on the
ground floor which can easily be converted into a bedroom (except
when such conversion is prohibited) and meets all federal, state,
county, and local building and zoning codes.
(4) Bathroom: reinforcements or "blocking" between wall studs around
the toilet and the bathroom/shower areas to conveniently and
safely allow for future installation of grab bars, commencing at a
height of 32 inches from the floor and extending to a height of at
least 38 inches above the floor. Reinforcements may be constructed
of plywood or wood blocking.
(a) Behind the toilet, a minimum twenty-six-inch-wide reinforced
area is required, which safely accommodates a twenty-fourinch
grab bar and provides proper backing for flange. Where a
toilet is adjoining a side wall, a minimum twenty-six-inch-wide
reinforced area is required, which safely accommodates a
twenty-four-inch grab bar and provides proper backing for
flange. For a side wall adjoining a toilet, a forty-four-inch-wide
reinforced area is required to safely accommodate a forty-twoinch
grab bar with proper backing for flange.
(b) Along a tub wall, reinforcements shall be at least 50 inches
wide which safely accommodates a forty-eight-inch grab bar
and provides proper backing for flange. Side walls shall have a
minimum twenty-six-inch-wide reinforced area, which safely
accommodates a twenty-four-inch grab bar and provides
proper backing for flange.
(c) Inside a shower stall, reinforcements shall be at least 26 inches
wide on each side adjoining a wall, which safely accommodates
a twenty-four-inch grab bar and provides proper backing for
flange.
(5) Convenient facilities. There shall be at least a 1/2 bathroom located
on the ground floor, and the fixtures shall be arranged to provide
sufficient floor space so as to allow an individual using a wheelchair
or other mobility aid to enter and close the door, use the facilities,
reopen the door and exit. A sixty-inch turning radius is required to
meet the requirements of this section. Maneuvering space may
include any knee space or toe space available below bathroom
fixtures, including the clear space under a wall-hung lavatory.
§ 68-30.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-30.2
66:712
§ 68-30.3. Commercial structure energy requirements. [Added
12-15-2009]
D. Universal design incentives.
(1) The Building Department shall promulgate procedures for
departmental review of applications for building permits related to
design modifications and accessibility improvements. Applications
for a single-family detached residence which include three or more
universal design features shall be reviewed within 10 working days.
(2) Any exterior changes related solely to providing accessibility for
disabled persons and seniors to the dwelling, including, but not
limited to, ramps and decks, shall not be included in the calculation
of gross floor area.
(3) The Building Department shall have the authority to approve the
installation of exterior design modifications and accessibility
improvements as a temporary exception from any applicable frontside
and rear-yard setbacks, subject to the following:
(a) Such design modifications and accessibility improvements do
not project more than six feet beyond the otherwise
permissible building area on the front, side, or rear of any
dwelling.
(b) The applicant presents documentation from a licensed
physician declaring that one or more residents domiciled at a
dwelling within the Town of Islip require the construction of
exterior design modifications and accessibility improvements
to provide for access or egress.
(c) In granting such a temporary exception, the Building
Department shall limit the duration of the exception to a time
period of two years. An extension of such duration may be
permitted by presentation of further documentation from a
medical professional addressing the continued need for the
design modification or accessibility improvement.
(d) The construction of said facilities or improvements meets
applicable code requirements for accessibility.
A. Legislative intent. It is the intent of the Town to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of its residents by mandating that the
construction of new commercial structures shall comply with the
requirements contained herein to ensure that such structures use less
energy than if constructed to prevailing building standards. Compliance
with the requirements herein shall be mandated in addition to
compliance with all other applicable requirements.
B. Any new commercial structure of all types, as defined by the Islip Town
Code and New York State Code, shall be built so that it is a minimum
§ 68-30.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-30.3
66:713
§ 68-30.4. Superstorm Sandy reconstruction provision. [Added
5-21-2013]
20% more energy efficient overall than required by the New York State
Energy Conservation Construction Code minimum standards.
C. Verification of compliance with the energy-efficiency requirements
mandated shall be provided through the submission of the New York
State-required Energy Simulation Tool (defined as an approved
software program or calculation-base methodology that projects the
annual energy use of a building (i.e., COMcheck) by an applicant which
is required as part of the Town of Islip Building Division’s construction
plan review and approval process.
D. Any structure not meeting the definition of commercial structure shall
be held to the energy requirements found in § 68-30.1 of this chapter.
E. The requirements described herein shall be effective March 1, 2010.
A. Legislative intent. The Town Board hereby recognizes and
acknowledges that the Town of Islip experienced record coastal damage
due to Superstorm Sandy, on or around October 29, 2012, to such an
extent that significant impacts to public health and welfare resulted.
Such damage resulted in the issuance of a declaration of a state of
emergency by Supervisor Croci, on October 27, 2012, which was
renewed on November 25, 2012. Said declaration followed similar
actions by both the Governor of the State of New York and the President
of the United States under the Stafford Act. The Town Board further
recognizes that the residents, businesses and taxpayers of the Town of
Islip may face financial and other hardships if they are required to apply
to the Zoning Board of Appeals to repair properties damaged by
Superstorm Sandy that are now nonconforming uses under the Islip
Town Code. Further, such hardships would be exacerbated by the
difficulties faced by those applicants who are required, pursuant to
Article XL of this chapter, to elevate their structures to avoid future
floodwaters, to endure the inherent delays in the building permit
process due to the greatly increased volume of storm-related
construction activity, and to pay full fees for the review of said permits.
B. Storm damage reconstruction process. The Commissioner of the
Department of Planning and Development is hereby authorized to waive
the requirement for applicants to apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for damaged properties that are now nonconforming uses under the
Islip Town Code due to Superstorm Sandy, so long as all of the following
criteria are met:
(1) The applicants are rebuilding an identical structure in either the
exact same location as it was located immediately prior to
Superstorm Sandy, or in any other location that comes closer to
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance at the direction of
the Commissioner of Planning, on both public and private property.
§ 68-30.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-30.4
66:714
(2) The gross floor area of said structure does not exceed that of any
previous certified structure.
(3) Any such structure possessed a valid certificate of occupancy and/
or certificate of compliance pursuant to § 68-25 of this chapter
prior to the date of Superstorm Sandy.
(4) Any new or rebuilt structure, which is required to be elevated
pursuant to Article XL of this chapter, complies with the applicable
height provisions within the subject zoning district.
C. Permits expedited. Any division within the Department of Planning and
Development shall expedite all applicable permits and certificate of
occupancy applications that have resulted from Superstorm Sandy, for
both public and private property.
D. Filing fees waived. Any base or filing fee required by any applicable
division within the Department of Planning and Development shall be
waived in connection with the rebuilding of Superstorm Sandy stormdamaged
properties at the direction of the Commissioner of Planning.
E. Term of applicability. This section shall be deemed a temporary
legislative action that shall be effective retroactive from the expiration
of this section through December 31, 2014. [Amended 8-5-2014]
§ 68-30.4 WATER QUALITY § 68-30.4
66:715

ARTICLE IVA
Amendments
[Added 9-11-2001]
§ 68-31. Procedure.121
§ 68-32. Application and notice requirements.
A. The Town Board may from time to time, on its own motion or on
application or on recommendation of the Planning Board, amend,
change, supplement or repeal the regulations, restrictions, district
boundaries and provisions of this chapter, including the Zoning Map,
after public notice and hearing.
B. Such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the Town
Board or by application, may be referred to the Planning Board for
report thereon. The Town Board, by resolution adopted at a stated
meeting, shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed
amendment or change and cause notice to be given in accordance with
provisions of the Town Law.
A. Application. An application requesting a change of zone, modification of
deed covenants and restrictions, or special permit shall be addressed
by the Town Board or Planning Board as specified within the applicable
use district. An application requesting a subdivision or a site plan
modification shall be addressed by the Planning Board in conformance
to the applicable laws and regulations of the State of New York and the
Code of the Town of Islip. Any of the above applications shall contain all
pertinent information deemed necessary by the Commissioner of
Planning and Development. This form shall be signed by each applicant
and property owner and shall be notarized. [Amended 1-14-2003]
B. Application requirements. The Commissioner of Planning and
Development shall have the authority to require whatever information
may be necessary to evaluate such a request. An application shall not
be considered complete, shall not be received, and shall not be
scheduled for any consideration of any Board until all of the application
submission requirements are met to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner of Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's
designee. [Amended 1-14-2003]
C. Notification requirements.
(1) A notice shall be sent, certified mail, return receipt requested, to
every property owner within a distance of 200 feet from the
perimeter of the subject property, at least 10 days prior to the
public hearing, and shall contain the following information:
121. Editor's Note: Former § 68-31, Restrictive covenants, was repealed 9-11-2001. For current
provisions, see § 68-36.
§ 68-31 WATER QUALITY § 68-32
66:717
§ 68-33. Procedure on Town's own motion.
Whenever the Town Board, on its own motion or upon recommendation of
the Planning Board, shall consider any change of use district classification,
the resolution setting a date for a public hearing shall contain a clause
requiring that the owners of all property within the boundaries of the
property proposed to change use district classification and all property
owners immediately adjacent and directly opposite thereto for a distance
of 200 feet from the perimeter of the property proposed to be changed
in use district classification be notified of the proposed change, except as
hereinafter provided. Said notice shall be sent either by certified mail or
registered mail return receipt requested, to such owner at the address
shown on the current Town of Islip assessment roll, and shall be mailed to
(a) The current zoning and the proposed change.
(b) The location of the subject property.
(c) The date, time, and location of the public hearing.
(d) A statement that further information may be obtained by
visiting the Department of Planning and Development, located
at 655 Main Street, Islip, New York, or by calling
(631)224-5450.
(2) At least three posters not less than 11 inches by 22 inches in size
must be conspicuously posted along the entire length of each street
frontage of the subject property at least 10 days prior to the public
hearing date. One poster shall be posted every 200 feet. Such
posters shall contain the following information:
(a) The current zoning and the proposed change.
(b) The date, time, and location of the public hearing.
(3) Affidavit. The applicant shall be required to file an affidavit of
posting with the Planning Department that the above-mentioned
requirements have been completed.
(4) Advertisement. The notice of the Public Hearing before the Town
Board or Planning Board shall be published by the Planning
Department and shall contain the following information:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The proposed application.
(c) The location of the subject property.
(d) A statement that a public hearing on the proposed application
will be held at a specified time, date, and place.
(e) A statement that any interested person will be given the
opportunity to be heard.
§ 68-32 ISLIP CODE § 68-33
66:718
such owner at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. Said notice shall
contain a description sufficient to identify the property which is proposed
to be changed in use district classification, together with information
substantially similar to that required by § 68-32C(1) of this chapter. In the
following enumerated cases, the notice required by this section shall not be
required:
§ 68-34. Special permits from Town Board and Planning Board.
§ 68-35. Area variances in conjunction with change of zones or
special permits.
A. In the event that the area of the proposed change of zone represents
50% or more of the property contained within the bounds of a school
district within the Town of Islip.
B. In the event that the area of the proposed change of zone exceeds 50
acres, street and cross-street geographical location.
C. In all other cases where the Town Board of the Town of Islip shall
determine that the notice required by this section shall be dispensed
with.
A. The Town Board or Planning Board shall be empowered to grant special
permit applications in accordance with all state, county, and local rules
and regulations. The Town Board or Planning Board shall have the
authority to impose reasonable conditions and restrictions in
connection with the proposed special permit use in order to mitigate
any potential impacts and to ensure that the use will not adversely
affect the public's health, safety or general welfare.
B. In reviewing special permit applications, the Town Board or Planning
Board may consider various factors, including but not limited to the
following; traffic impacts; adequacy of parking facilities; environmental
impacts; effect on neighboring properties; compliance with the
comprehensive plan; compatibility with the nature and character of the
surrounding area; architectural impacts to the surrounding area; and
the overall ability of the site to accommodate the proposed special
permit use, and any other consideration involving the public health,
safety, and welfare. [Amended 12-17-2019]
A. Purpose. In order to achieve the goals of proper planning and to provide
for a unified, comprehensive review of zoning proposals in a timely
manner, it is necessary and appropriate to reserve to the Town Board
the authority to consider area variances in connection with change of
zone and special permit applications.
B. The Town Board shall be authorized to consider area variance requests
in connection with Change of Zone and Special Permit applications over
which it has exclusive jurisdiction subject to compliance with all
applicable provisions of Town Law including, but not limited to § 267(b).
§ 68-33 WATER QUALITY § 68-35
66:719
§ 68-36. Restrictive covenants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict the Board of
Appeals from exercising its authority pursuant to all applicable
provisions of Town Law in connection with all other applications before
it.
C. In making such determination, the Board shall consider all relevant
provisions contained within Town Law and the Islip Town Code,
including but not limited to Town Law § 267(b), and shall take into
consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as
weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant.
D. A public hearing shall be required for all change of zone or special
permit applications which incorporate or require a variance. Variance
applications may be heard simultaneously with the main application.
E. Notification and posting of property. Notification of surrounding
property owners and posting of the subject property shall be in
compliance with the standards required by the Commissioner of
Planning and Development and contained within the Islip Town Code.
F. Expiration of variances. Area variances granted by the Town Board
pursuant to this chapter shall expire after one year.
A. An application to the Town Board, Planning Board or Board of Appeals
may result in the imposition of conditions in the form of deed covenants
or stipulations. The owner or tenant shall be obligated to maintain all
improvements so required and to abide by all conditions so imposed.
This shall be a continuing obligation unless modified by the governing
board. The applicant shall also be obligated to comply with any and all
rules and regulations of the Town of Islip, including, but not limited to,
the Town Code and the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations,
as well as all applicable federal, state and county rules and regulations.
The owner or tenant shall be obligated to maintain the subject parcel in
a neat, clean, litter-free condition. The owner or tenant shall be
responsible for adequate refuse collection to ensure compliance with
this condition. The Town or its designee reserves the right to enter onto
the subject property after 15 days' written notice sent certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address of the current owner according
to Town of Islip assessment rolls, to remove litter, debris or maintain or
replace any fencing or plantings if found that the improvements are not
being maintained and shall bill the owner for any expense incurred. All
costs associated with same shall be assessed to the owner's next tax
bill.
B. The failure to comply with any and all conditions shall be deemed a
violation of this article, subject to the penalties provided in § 68-421. In
addition, the Town Board, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals
reserves the right to rescind or revoke, in whole or in part, any and all
§ 68-35 ISLIP CODE § 68-36
66:720
approvals after due public hearing in the event violation of the abovereferenced
provisions occurs. Thereafter, the operation of the use
previously authorized shall be terminated and there shall be no right
to nonconformity. In the event the owner or applicant of an application
before the Town Board, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals fails
to record the required declaration of deed covenants and restrictions
within 180 days of the date of the grant, it will be presumed that
the applicant objects to the conditions imposed and the governing
board reserves the right to rescind any and all approvals and deny the
application. [Amended 12-17-2019]
C. All covenants and restrictions shall be and constitute real covenants
running with the land and shall be binding upon the declarant and any
and all subsequent owners of the said real property or any part thereof,
and upon their heirs, executors, and administrators (or their successors
and assignees) subject, however, to the right of the Town of Islip after a
public hearing to amend, alter, annul or repeal any or all of the
foregoing covenants and/or restrictions at any time with the consent of
the owner or owners for the time being of the premises therein
described, and such right shall be effectual and may be exercised
without the consent of any adjacent owners or other owners or lienors
of any other property.
D. All conditions shall be enforceable through all the powers of the Town
Attorney's Office and Division of Law Enforcement, and the Town
Board, Planning Board and Board of Appeals reserve the right after due
public hearing, to revert the subject parcel to its former zoning
classification or any intermediate zoning classification and/or rescind
the special permit or special exception issued, if violation of the
conditions persists.
E. The improvement of the premises, in accordance with the
determination of the Town Board, Planning Board or Board of Appeals,
must be completed within 36 months after the date of grant. If not so
commenced and completed within this period, then, the governing
board reserves the right to revert the subject property to its former
zoning classification or any intermediate zoning classification, or the
governing body reserves the right to revoke any and all special permits
or special exceptions associated with the subject property after due
public hearing. Thereafter the operation of the use previously
authorized shall be terminated and there shall be no right to
nonconformity. The governing board may shorten this time frame in the
event the application is made to legalize an unauthorized use of the
property. [Amended 12-17-2019]
F. Modification of covenants and restrictions/stipulations. All applications
seeking a modification of a condition in the form of a covenant or
stipulation shall require the review and approval of the Board that
imposed the conditions and shall be subject to a public hearing.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, requests for modification of a condition
in the form of a covenant or a stipulation originally imposed by the
§ 68-36 WATER QUALITY § 68-36
66:721
§ 68-37. Filing fee.
Prior to the filing of an application, a fee shall be paid to the Department
of Planning at the time of the submission. Said fee shall be determined by
the Commissioner of Planning and Development in a schedule of application
fees.
Town Board, but now under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, may
be heard by the Planning Board.
G. All change of zone, special permit, site plan modifications, minor
subdivision, or major subdivision approvals shall expire within two
years of the date of grant by either the Town Board or Planning Board,
unless a building permit (exclusive of demolition permits) has been
secured or the property lawfully used for the purpose granted within 24
months, unless extended by the Commissioner and a fee is paid equal to
50% of the total original application fee, except as may otherwise be
provided herein. The Board issuing the approval may shorten this time
frame in the event the application is made to legalize a previously
unauthorized use of the property. The Board further reserves the right
to revoke said approvals associated with the subject property after due
public hearing if a building permit is not secured within the required
time frame. [Amended 12-17-2019]
H. Filing of covenants and restrictions. Whenever the Town Board,
Planning Board or Board of Appeals, as a condition for the granting of
an application for a change of use district classification or special
permit, requires a restrictive covenant to be imposed upon the subject
property, such restrictive covenant must be properly recorded in the
office of the County Clerk and proof of said recording must be provided
to the Office of the Town Clerk and Planning Board within 180 days of
the date of approval, except that the Board that approved the
application may extend the time for filing the restrictive covenant upon
good cause and upon written application. Failure to file said restrictive
covenant in accordance with the above shall render the granting of the
change ineffective, and null and void. [Amended 12-17-2019]
I. Amendment of restrictive covenants.
(1) The Town Board may from time to time on its own motion or on
application amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal any
covenant imposed on property at the time of a change of use
district classification.
(2) Application and notice requirements shall meet the requirements
set forth in § 68-32C(1).
§ 68-36 ISLIP CODE § 68-38
66:722
§ 68-38. Application for change of zone or special permit after
hearing. [Amended 5-20-2003; 7-25-2017]
No parcel or part thereof may be the subject of an application for a change
of zone or special permit within two years after the Town Board or Planning
Board has held a public hearing or issued a final determination on such
application unless the second application seeks a change to a more
restrictive zoning category than was earlier sought or seeks a less intensive
special permit use, or such petition sought has the unanimous consent of
the governing board. This section shall not apply to an application in which
a motion to approve, deny or amend fails to be carried by a majority of all
the members of a governing board.
§ 68-38 WATER QUALITY § 68-38
66:723

ARTICLE IVB
Validity; Effective Date
[Added 9-11-2001]
§ 68-39. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall
not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision
thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid and unconstitutional.
§ 68-40. When effective; rescission.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after publication and shall
automatically rescind the previous ordinances, together with all subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 68-41. through § 68-44. (Reserved)
§ 68-39 WATER QUALITY § 68-41
66:725

ARTICLE V
Use District Regulations: Residence AAA District
§ 68-45. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-6-1973; 10-2-1984; 4-8-1997]
In a Residence AAA District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one of the following purposes:
§ 68-46. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 10-3-1989; 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
§ 68-46.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after due public hearing. [Added 3-23-1999; amended 4-5-2005]
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Church or similar place of worship, parish house, public school, public
library or municipal building, provided that a minimum buffer area of
25 feet in width in accordance with Town standards is provided and
maintained adjacent to all residential uses or zones and a site plan is
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board or its designee
indicating compliance with all applicable land development standards.
[Amended 3-23-1999]
C. Municipal park, municipal playground or municipal recreation building
or use.
D. Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards or freight stations.
E. Agriculture or nursery uses, including the retail sale of products raised
on the premises, provided that a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in
width in accordance with Town standards is provided and maintained
adjacent to all residential uses or zones and a site plan is submitted to
and approved by the Planning Board or its designee indicating
compliance with all applicable land development standards. [Amended
1-14-2003]
A. Seasonal residential community, provided that a minimum overall lot
size of 225 acres is provided with an overall yield not to exceed one
dwelling unit for every 30,000 square feet of overall lot area in a
Residence AAA District only. A maximum of 15 dwelling units within a
seasonal residential community may be utilized for year-round housing
purposes.
A. Private club mooring wharf for pleasure craft only, provided that there
is no repair work or sale of any products on the premises. [Amended
8-5-2014]
B. Automobile parking field, provided that the field shall be used for
parking automobiles in conjunction with a use allowed in a Residential
§ 68-45 WATER QUALITY § 68-46.1
66:727
§ 68-47. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
AAA District and a site plan is submitted to and approved by the
Planning Board or its designee indicating compliance with all
applicable requirements, including the provisions of a buffer in
accordance with Town standards.
C. Private membership club, fraternity or lodge; provided, however, that
no use shall be permitted when conducted for gain, profit or as a
commercial venture.
D. Cemetery.
E. Private or parochial school, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools colleges and universities. Vocational and other
non-degree-granting schools shall not be considered private schools
and shall not be considered permitted uses.122
A. Public utility where no commercial office, repair or storage facilities are
maintained.
B. Community building.
C. 123Museum. [Added 10-13-2010]
D. (Reserved)124
E. Private boathouse or bathhouse when not an accessory use to a onefamily
dwelling.
F. Historical or memorial monument.
G. Model house for a period of six months, renewable for additional sixmonth
periods, but in no event longer than a total of two years.
H. 125Boat berths, when not an accessory use to a one-family dwelling: one
for every 35 feet of water frontage up to three. [Added 5-6-1980]
I. Child day-care center as an accessory use to a church or similar place of
worship, community building or educational institution, subject to the
following standards: [Added 8-19-1980; amended 4-8-1997]
(1) A minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet shall be required.
(2) The use of cellars or basements shall be permitted, provided that
all applicable New York State and Town of Islip building and fire
codes are met. [Amended 2-28-2017]
122. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Museum, added 6-8-2010, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010. See now § 68-47C.
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Private or parochial school, was repealed 6-22-1999.
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, College building or use, was repealed 6-22-1999.
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H was repealed 7-14-1971.
§ 68-46.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-47
66:728
§ 68-47.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 9-2-1980; amended 10-16-1984;
9-8-1997; 4-5-2005; 12-12-2006; 5-21-2013]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited, including but not limited to
the following:
(3) The structure shall comply in all respects with New York State and
Town of Islip Building and Fire Codes prior to the operation of the
child day-care center.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Town
standards.
(5) Adequate screening, buffering and/or fencing shall be provided for
the proposed parking area and the proposed outdoor play area
pursuant to the direction of the Board of Appeals.
(6) All applicable permits from any involved governmental agencies
shall be obtained prior to the operation of the child day-care center.
(7) A minimum setback of 25 feet from the property line shall be
provided and maintained in connection with the outdoor play area.
(8) The hours of operation of the outdoor play area shall be limited to
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. unless otherwise modified by the Board of
Appeals.
(9) The location of the outdoor play area within the primary or
secondary front yard shall be prohibited unless modified by the
Board of Appeals.126
A. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle registered
as a bus, minibus or commercial vehicle, including a tractor-trailer
combination (or either component thereof).
B. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle bearing
commercial advertising or identification except as provided in
§§ 68-48A(1)(e) and 68-47J.
C. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked, overnight from 9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., any unregistered vehicles, commercial equipment, or
all-terrain vehicle in the right-of-way of any Town roadway.
D. It shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed portable storage units
on occupied residential property, except for a period not to exceed
three months, subject to obtaining a permit from the Building Division.
No more than one renewal of said permit shall be permitted.
126. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection J, regarding parking of a mini school bus, added
10-16-1984, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-29-2016.
§ 68-47 WATER QUALITY § 68-47.1
66:729
§ 68-48. Accessory uses.
E. It shall be unlawful to mechanically test any unregistered vehicles,
commercial equipment or all-terrain vehicles in the right-of-way of any
Town roadway.
A. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 10-3-1978]
(1) The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on
the same lot with the authorized use:
(a) Private garages, provided that the gross floor area of the
garage does not exceed the ground floor area of the main
dwelling and provided that the height does not exceed the
accessory structure requirement. [Amended 1-14-2003]
(b) Home occupation. [Amended 5-7-1985; 4-8-1997]
(c) 127Residential docks. [Added 6-12-2007]
[1] It shall be the policy of the Town of Islip that all docks shall
be designed, constructed and located so as to reduce a
dock's potential adverse impacts to navigation, public
safety, harbor area congestion, access to public trust lands
and water, aesthetics, natural resources, habitats and the
bottoms of harbor areas. Conformance to the following
standards will serve as a basis for granting, denying, or
limiting permits for the construction of docks.
[2] The standards for a residential dock shall be as follows:
[a] In no case shall the dock length exceed beyond a
water depth of four feet below the low water mark as
measured at average tide for this provision only, dock
length shall include the fixed dock, ramp and floating
docks, and any boat berthed at the docks, but in any
event not to exceed 50 feet in length, or exceed 25% of
the width of the harbor area, whichever of these
provisions is less.
[b] Only one residential dock may be constructed per
residential lot, provided that the underwater land not
owned by the County of Suffolk or another private
property owner, such as a neighbor. [Amended
5-10-2011]
[c] A residential dock and any part thereof, or any vessel
tied to a dock, may not be located within or impinge
upon that area located within 10 feet any adjacent
property line.
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(c), providing for customary home occupations,
amended 8-19-1980, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-47.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-48
66:730
[d] A residential dock and associated mooring piles must
be configured so that no more vessel berths are
created than there are number of permitted boats as
per § 68-48A(1)(f);
[e] The width of any single float or floating dock may not
exceed eight feet in width nor 20 feet in length and
shall be secured or installed in such a manner that the
float shall not rest on the bottom of the harbor area at
any time during the tidal cycle.
(d) Signs, as permitted and regulated in Article XXIX.
(e) Parking of commercially registered pickup trucks or vans
having a gross vehicle weight of less than 9,000 pounds,
provided that either type of vehicle does not bear any
commercial advertising or identification; pickup trucks or vans
having a gross vehicle weight of less than 9,000 pounds and
bearing commercial identification may be parked only between
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., provided that any such vehicle is
within an enclosed garage. [Added 9-2-1980]
(f) Boat berths: one for every 35 feet of water frontage up to
three, or as determined by the Planning Board in a subdivision
map at the time of plat approval. [Added 5-6-1980]
(g) Outside boat storage on land. Boats may be stored, subject to
the following regulations:128 [Added 2-24-2009129]
[1] Boat storage on land is restricted to the rear yard, side
yard and driveway;
[2] Any boat(s) stored on land may not encroach upon a public
right-of-way;
[3] Any boat(s) stored pursuant to this section which are
required to be registered with the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles and/or documented by the
United States Coast Guard must have a current
registration and/or documentation.
(h) Personal trailer storage. Trailers maybe stored, subject to the
following regulations: [Added 7-19-2011130]
[1] Personal trailer storage is restricted to the rear yard, side
yard, and driveway;
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(g), providing for family day-care home, added
2-7-1984, was repealed 4-8-1997.
129. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(1)(g) through (j) as Subsection A(1)(h) through (k), respectively.
130. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(1)(h) through (k) as
Subsection A(1)(i) through (l), respectively.
§ 68-48 WATER QUALITY § 68-48
66:731
[2] Any personal trailer(s) stored on land may not encroach
upon a public right-of-way;
[3] Any trailers(s) stored pursuant to this section which are
required to be registered with the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles must have a current
registration and/or documentation.
(i) Decorative ponds. [Added 9-11-2001]
(j) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal
use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a
business. No customary accessory structure, building or use
shall contain indoor showers or other facility used for bathing.
Any shower shall be accessible from the exterior only.
[Amended 9-2-1980; 10-13-2010]
(k) Child day-care center as an accessory use to a church or
similar place of worship, community building or educational
institution. [Added 4-8-1997]
(l) Residential day care. The following regulations shall apply to
residential day cares, as defined in § 68-3 of this chapter:
[Added 4-8-1997; amended 11-19-2019]
[1] Must be licensed and registered by the Long Island
regional headquarters of the New York State Office of
Children and Family Services (NYS OCFS), who are
responsible for registration, licensing and enforcement of
residential day cares in Suffolk County.
[2] A residential day-care provider must meet all New York
State building codes, New York State Health Department
Codes, and all New York State Office of Children and
Family Services requirements for residential day cares.
(m) Permanent auxiliary power generators. [Added 5-21-2013]
(n) Roof mounted or ground mounted solar panels, provided that
they remain within the perimeter of a dwelling or accessory
building if roof mounted, or the setbacks, height, and rear yard
coverage permitted for accessory buildings if ground mounted.
[Added 2-28-2017]
(o) Fixed equipment associated with the operation and
maintenance of a pool, including, but not limited to, pool
heaters and pool filters. [Added 2-28-2017]
(p) Thrift shop as an accessory use to a church or similar place of
worship, provided the following criteria is met: [Added
12-17-2019]
§ 68-48 ISLIP CODE § 68-48
66:732
§ 68-49. Height.
[1] Any structure or portion thereof dedicated to a thrift shop
may not exceed 10% of the total gross floor area of the
principal structure on the property.
[2] The thrift shop must be clearly subordinate to, and may
not operate without, a primary, permitted place of worship
located on the same property.
[3] The use must be clearly operated and sponsored by the
primary place of worship.
[4] The products distributed within the shop must be donated
and the thrift shop may not operate as a typical retail
store, Proceeds from any sales must go to the sponsoring
nonprofit.
[5] All other standard accessory structure setbacks shall
apply.
(2) The Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee is
hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations to
administer and enforce the provisions of § 68-48A. [Amended
12-17-2019]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-46 or by special exception pursuant to § 68-47, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by that Board which authorized the use.
A. In a Residential AAA District, no principal building or structure shall be
erected to a height in excess of 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories. [Amended
1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 14 feet in height or shall be a
maximum of one story, whichever is less. [Amended 1-14-2003]
C. 131Flagpoles shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
D. Exceptions:
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, providing for portions of buildings in excess of 35
feet, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-48 WATER QUALITY § 68-49
66:733
§ 68-50. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio. [Amended
11-1-1988; 1-14-2003]
§ 68-51. Area density.
§ 68-52. Living area.
(1) The provision hereof shall not apply to the height of architectural
elements of a church or similar place of worship, including but not
limited to a steeple or a dome, or a monument, chimney, water tank
or elevator. [Amended 4-8-1997; 10-25-2011]
(2) In the event such structures as excepted by § 68-49D(1) are within
1 1/2 miles of an established airport, then approval by the Federal
Aviation Agency shall be secured and any and all conditions met.132
E. All new dwelling entrance platforms, stoops or terraces shall not
exceed three feet in height. The Commissioner of Planning and
Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary this
requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height. Only that height that is necessary to
safely enter the dwelling from average grade may be permitted upon
the determination of the Commissioner. [Added 4-5-2005]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25.
B. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 10% of the total lot area
nor more than 25% of the rear yard area.
C. The area of paved or gravel surfaces shall not occupy more than 30% of
the rear yard area. [Amended 10-25-2011; 12-17-2019]
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
40,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 40,000 square feet.
A. For a single-family dwelling hereafter erected, the minimum required
ground floor area, exclusive of attached garages, carports, open
porches and breezeways, shall be:
(1) For a one-story dwelling, 900 square feet.
(2) For a two-story dwelling where the second story contains the same
living area as the first story, the minimum ground floor area shall
be 650 square feet, and both stories must be finished in accordance
with the provisions of the New York State Building Code.
132. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(3), regarding the maximum height permitted for a
principal structure requiring an increased first floor elevation, added 12-2-2008, and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-5-2013.
§ 68-49 ISLIP CODE § 68-52
66:734
§ 68-53. Width of lot.
§ 68-54. Front yard.
(3) For all other types of dwellings, the minimum living area of the
ground floor shall be 750 square feet; provided, however, that at
least 150 square feet of living area above the ground floor must be
finished in accordance with the provisions of the New York State
Building Code.
B. For the purpose of this ordinance, "ground floor area" shall mean the
area within the exterior walls of the dwelling at grade level, and further
provided that the distance from floor to ceiling shall not be more than
50% below grade.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence AAA District shall be 150 feet.
(2) The minimum width of lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence AAA District shall be 150 feet.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot is 150 feet in width as measured parallel to and 50 feet
back from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this ordinance.
A. Main buildings. All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum required front yard of 50 feet; provided,
however, that 25% of the block frontage on either side of the street is
improved with buildings having a greater depth of front yard than is
required by the ordinance, these new buildings shall have a front yard
whose depth shall be equal to the average depth of front yard of such
existing buildings. In no case shall the front yard be required to be
greater than 70 feet.
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 50 feet.
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 50 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot.
D. Accessory structures. [Amended 1-14-2003; 8-5-2014]
§ 68-52 WATER QUALITY § 68-54
66:735
§ 68-55. Side yards.
§ 68-56. Rear yard.
(1) In addition to any other applicable requirements, accessory
structures may be placed no closer behind the front line of the main
dwelling, as defined in § 68-3, Definitions, than the following
distances: [Amended 5-21-2013]
(a) Structures no more than six feet high: four feet.
(b) Structures over six feet high: 20 feet.
(2) Accessory structures on corner lots shall also have a minimum
front yard setback from the side street of 55 feet, or the arterial
highway setback, whichever is greater.
(3) No accessory structure in the front yard shall be used to house
poultry, as that term is defined in § 12-32 of the Islip Town Code.
[Added 7-19-2011]
A. Dwellings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
60 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 25 feet.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the side yards for
other permitted buildings shall be 60 feet with a minimum width of
either of such yards of 30 feet.
C. Accessory buildings. [Amended 9-12-2000; 7-19-2011]
(1) No accessory building of 144 square feet or less shall be closer to
any side yard than two feet. Accessory buildings greater than 144
square feet and less than 500 square feet shall not be closer to any
side yard than four feet. Accessory buildings 500 square feet and
larger shall not be closer to any side yard than 10 feet. [Amended
2-28-2017]
(2) No accessory buildings used to house poultry, as that term is
defined in § 12-32 of the Islip Town Code, shall be closer to any side
yard than 10 feet, irrespective of the structure's square footage.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a
minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 40 feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) No accessory building of 144 square feet or less shall be closer to
any rear yard than two feet. Accessory buildings greater than 144
square feet and less than 500 square feet shall not be nearer to a
rear line than four feet. Accessory buildings 500 square feet and
§ 68-54 ISLIP CODE § 68-56
66:736
§ 68-56.1. (Reserved)134
§ 68-57. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
larger shall not be closer to any rear yard than 10 feet. [Amended
9-12-2000; 2-28-2017]
(2) Accessory buildings used to house poultry, as that term is defined in
§ 12-32 of the Islip Town Code, shall not be closer to any rear yard
than 10 feet, irrespective of the structure's square footage. [Added
7-19-2011133]
(3) Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than eight feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a depth, at any point,
greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest point of
the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line to the
outside face of the porch. [Added 9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003;
8-5-2014]
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than eight feet from
the minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in
height as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption
shall not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and
nonconforming uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck have a
depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from
the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(2) as Subsection
B(3).
134. Editor's Note: Former § 68-56.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-56 WATER QUALITY § 68-57
66:737
§ 68-58. (Reserved)135
§ 68-59. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-59.01. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997]
property line to the outside face of the deck. [Added 9-11-2001;
amended 1-14-2003; 8-5-2014]
F. Cellar entranceways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. [Added 9-11-2001]
G. Subsurface emergency escape and rescue openings and window wells,
provided that no portion of same is more than six inches above grade.
These shall be permitted up to three feet into any conforming setback.
[Added 12-12-2006]
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The clearing of any land of trees and brush shall be governed by the
provisions of the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, and a permit shall be obtained prior to land clearing as
such permit is required by said regulations. In the event that a building
permit or site plan application is filed with the Town of Islip, then land
clearing shall be prohibited until such building permit or site plan
approval has been issued. For applications involving both a site plan
and building permit review, no land clearing may occur until the
issuance of the requested final building permit, at the determination of
the Commissioner of Planning and Development. [Amended
1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
C. The regrading, placement of fill, installation of walls, dumping of
material, excavating, mining, or other similar disturbance of land shall
be governed by the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
Any of the above actions may be subject to a site plan review at the
determination of the Town Engineer. Said determination shall be
obtained prior to commencement of the action. The site plan review
135. Editor's Note: Former § 68-58, Separately owned lots, as amended, was repealed
10-13-2010. See now § 68-20.1.
§ 68-57 ISLIP CODE § 68-59.01
66:738
§ 68-59.02. through § 68-59.04. (Reserved)
§ 68-59.05. Patios and decks. [Added 3-24-1992]
(See § 68-407.)
shall ensure that the action does not significantly alter the subject
parcel so as to infringe on the health, safety and welfare of all citizens,
does not negatively impact surrounding land uses and properties, and
provides adequate on-site drainage to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer. [Added 1-14-2003; amended 8-12-2003]
D. The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall also
be regulated under the provisions of Article XXXI of this chapter.
[Added 1-14-2003]
§ 68-59.01 WATER QUALITY § 68-59.05
66:739

ARTICLE VA
Use District Regulations: Ocean Front Dune District AAAB
[Added 8-1-1972; amended 4-18-1978; 3-3-1981; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-59.1. Intent.
§ 68-59.2. Boundaries and composition of Dune District.
The Dune District shall consist of all lots that are within or on the Dune
District boundary lines shown as such on the Amended Zoning Map of
the Town of Islip. The southerly boundary line shall be the mean hightide
line, and the northern boundary line shall be 100 feet landward of
the crest of the primary dune. Where breaches exist in the dune form, a
line has been established that represents the general trend in the dune
crest and delineates a zone of dynamic dune formation. This Dune District
has also been based upon the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood
Hazard Boundary Map H-01-34, Zone V-10 (areas of special flood hazard,
with velocity, that are inundated by tidal floods) and the Dune District
boundary as shown for the Lighthouse Management Unit in the General
Management Plan for the Fire Island National Seashore. All lands zoned
within this District shall be deemed zoned and mapped in the Residence
AAAB District, and all of the provisions of said District, as contained in
Article XI, §§ 68-135 through 68-149.3, are fully applicable to all lands
zoned and mapped within the District. The provisions of this article shall be
applied and are intended to be an Overlay District, superimposed upon and
in addition to the requirements of the BAA District, Article XI.
§ 68-59.3. Permitted uses.
A. It is the Town Board's intent to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of residents and visitors of Islip on both the mainland and the
barrier beach known as "Fire Island" by the protection of the barrier
beach through this chapter from development which does not take into
consideration the natural function of a barrier beach and its ecological
systems.
B. The Town Board hereby states its concern about life and property due
to the overdevelopment of Fire Island both on the mainland and the
aforesaid barrier beach. The Town Board is in full agreement with the
United States Department of the Interior's general intent for
preservation of Fire Island as a unique resource for present and future
generations, consistent with the General Management Plan for the Fire
Island National Seashore.
A. In a Residence AAAB District, no building, structure or premises shall
be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be so erected or altered except for one or more of the following
purposes:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
§ 68-59.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-59.3
66:741
§ 68-59.4. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
The following uses shall be permitted upon issuance of a special permit by
the Town Board after a public hearing:
§ 68-59.5. Accessory uses.
§ 68-59.6. Height.
(2) Municipal park, municipal playground or municipal recreation
building or use.
B. Additional structures and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that all requirements of this article are met.
A. Private membership club, fraternity or lodge; provided, however, that
no use shall be permitted when conducted for gain, profit or as a
commercial venture.
B. Public utility.
C. Community building, church or other similar place of worship.
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot as and when clearly incidental to the principal use: [Amended
12-17-2019]
(1) Signs, as permitted and regulated in Article XXXVIII.
(2) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
excluding garages and guesthouses and including but not limited to
sheds for storage, decks and ramps and aboveground swimming
pools, subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of
this article and of the Code of the Town of Islip. No accessory use
shall be equipped with cooking facilities. An accessory use does not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(3) Refuse enclosures not to exceed four feet by six feet and bicycle
racks/platforms shall be permitted as accessory structures and
shall not be subject to set back requirements or building permits.
B. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot with the
principal building, and no accessory building shall be constructed on a
lot until the construction of the main building has actually been
commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-137, no accessory use shall be permitted unless the same shall
have been specifically authorized by the Town Board.
§ 68-59.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-59.6
66:742
§ 68-59.7. (Reserved)137
§ 68-59.8. Area density.
§ 68-59.9. Living area.
A. In a Residence AAAB District, no building or structure shall be erected
to a height in excess of 28 feet as measured from the elevation at the
center of an established walkway or from the average grade of the lot,
whichever is less, to the ridge or peak of the roof or structure. In no
case shall a building or structure exceed two stories in height.
B. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet in height.
C. Exceptions subject to Town Board approval. The following, after
receiving Town Board approval, shall be exceptions:
(1) A church or other place of worship.
(2) (Reserved)136
(3) A stack, chimney or standpipe.
(4) A water tank.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
6,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 20,000 square feet.
C. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of passage of this article or on
any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and which conforms to the area density
requirements of the amended zoning ordinance prior to any such
amendment and which conforms to all other minimum requirements of
this chapter.
A. For a single-family dwelling hereafter erected, the minimum required
ground floor area, exclusive of accessory uses, such as open porches,
breezeways, sheds, decks, ramps and other such uses, shall be 600
square feet.
B. (Reserved)138
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), which provided for a flagpole, was repealed
9-11-2001. See Subsection D.
137. Editor’s Note: Former § 68-59.7, Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio, as
amended, was repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 68-59.6 WATER QUALITY § 68-59.9
66:743
§ 68-59.10. Width of lot.
§ 68-59.11. Front yard.
C. The maximum total floor area for a single-family dwelling hereafter
erected, inclusive of all accessory uses, shall not exceed an FAR of 0.30.
D. (Reserved)139
E. For the purpose of this article, "deck" shall be defined as a single- or
multilevel flat, floored, roofless structure more than four feet in width
which is designed as an accessory use to a dwelling. No part of a deck
shall be closer than five feet to any side yard property line or 15 feet
from any front yard or rear yard property line.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence AAAB District shall be 60 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of a lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence AAAB District shall be 100 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, as long
as the following requirements are met:
(1) Said lot is 60 feet in width as measured parallel to and 25 feet back
from the front property line.
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line.
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all the requirements of this article.
C. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of passage of this article or on
any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot requirements
of the amended zoning ordinance prior to any such amendment and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this article.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a required front yard of 25 feet.
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 15 feet.
138. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, which defined "ground floor area" as used in this
article, was repealed 10-25-2011.
139. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, which defined "total floor area" as used in this article,
was repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 68-59.9 ISLIP CODE § 68-59.11
66:744
§ 68-59.12. Side yards.
§ 68-59.13. Rear yard.
§ 68-59.13.1. (Reserved)141
§ 68-59.14. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot.
D. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building in a Residence AAAB District shall have a
minimum front yard setback of 60 feet.
(2) An accessory building on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum
of 75% of the total depth of the lot and shall in no case be nearer
than 10 feet to the side or rear property line.
A. Dwellings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
25 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 10 feet.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 30
feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
C. Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be closer to any side
yard than 10 feet.140
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings,shall not be nearer to a rear line than 10 feet.
(2) Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 12 1/2% of the rear
yard area.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
141. Editor's Note: Former § 68-59.13.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-59.11 WATER QUALITY § 68-59.14
66:745
§ 68-59.15. Separately owned lots.
(See §§ 68-59.8C, 68-59.10C and 68-59.12D of this article.)
§ 68-59.16. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-59.17. Swimming pools.
§ 68-59.18. (Reserved)142
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
A. No in-ground swimming pools, in-ground wading pools, in-ground water
use structures of this or a similar type shall be erected. As stated in the
Town of Islip Comprehensive Plan, Fire Island should continue to serve
two major functions:
(1) Serve as a natural and protective barrier for the Great South Bay
and Mainland.
(2) Serve as a resource for increased recreational activity within the
natural setting.
B. The Town Board finds that the above uses therefore represent an
overintensification of property use on Fire Island in light of the high
development density of the area, an intrusion on the peace and
tranquilty of living styles on Fire Island and an unnecessary accessory
use to a residential dwelling in light of the swimming and bathing
opportunities readily available to all residents of the beach.
C. Aboveground swimming pools shall be permitted as of right as an
accessory use, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The parcel of land on which the swimming pool is to be erected and
maintained shall have and continue to have a lot area of not less
than 12,000 square feet.
(2) All other requirements of this article and Article XXVIII are met.
D. Aboveground swimming pools shall be permitted as an accessory use on
a parcel of land having less than 12,000 square feet only after
application is made to and granted by the Islip Town Zoning Board of
Appeals. [Added 5-28-2008]
142. Editor's Note: Former ~ 68-59.18, Temporary special exception to erect and maintain
aboveground swimming pools, was repealed 5-28-2008.
§ 68-59.14 ISLIP CODE § 68-59.19
66:746
§ 68-59.19. Special procedures.
§ 68-59.20. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
1-14-2003]
The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of § 68-59.01
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
A. Before any permit concerning a building, structure or premises or part
thereof, its use or occupation of its alteration or erection is issued, the
applicant must comply with the procedure set forth in the
Environmental Quality Review Ordinance, Chapter 13B.
B. The National Park Service shall hereafter be granted the right to be a
party to any Town hearings on permit applications concerning Fire
Island.
§ 68-59.19 WATER QUALITY § 68-59.20
66:747

ARTICLE VI
Use District Regulations: Residence AA District
§ 68-60. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
In a Residence AA District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one of the purposes which are permitted in a
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-61. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
§ 68-61.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 7-13-1999]
The uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-62. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals, and no
other.
§ 68-62.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 12-12-2006;
5-21-2013; 2-28-2017]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited, including but not limited to
the following:
A. The uses permitted by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing, and no other.143
A. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle registered
as a bus, minibus or commercial vehicle, including a tractor-trailer
combination (or either component thereof).
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, as amended 7-2-1974 and 5-3-1977, dealing with
maintenance of a temporary office for a doctor, Subsection C, as added 7-8-1973 and
amended 7-2-1974, dealing with notification of property owners and changes in zoning
regulations, and Subsection D, as added 7-2-1974, dealing with renewal of a temporary
certificate of occupancy, all of which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
5-4-1982.
§ 68-60 WATER QUALITY § 68-62.1
66:749
§ 68-63. Accessory uses.
No accessory use and structure shall be permitted in a Residence AA
District except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-64. Height.
The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District.
§ 68-65. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio. [Amended
1-14-2003]
The percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio regulations shall be
the same as those in the Residence AAA District.
§ 68-66. Area density.
§ 68-67. Living area.
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those in the
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-68. Width of lot.
B. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle bearing
commercial advertising or identification except as provided in §§
68-48A(1)(e) and 68-47J.
C. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked, overnight from 9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., any unregistered vehicles, commercial equipment, or
all-terrain vehicle in the right-of-way of any Town roadway.
D. It shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed portable storage units
on occupied residential property, except for a period not to exceed
three months, subject to obtaining a permit from the Building Division.
No more than one renewal of said permit shall be permitted.
E. It shall be unlawful to mechanically test any unregistered vehicles,
commercial equipment or all-terrain vehicles in the right-of-way of any
Town roadway.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
20,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 40,000 square feet.144
A. Minimum requirements.
144. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-62.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-68
66:750
§ 68-69. Front yard.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence AA District shall be 100 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence AA District shall be 150 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot is 100 feet in width as measured parallel to and 40 feet
back from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this
ordinance.145
A. Main buildings. All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum required front yard of 40 feet. Provided,
however, that if 25% of the block frontage on either side of the street is
improved with buildings having a greater depth of front yard than is
required by the ordinance, these new buildings shall have a front yard
whose depth shall be equal to the average depth of front yard of such
existing buildings. In no case shall the front yard be required to be
greater than 60 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see
Article XXXII).
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 30 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article
XXXII).
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 40 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII). [Amended 2-28-2017]
D. Accessory structures. [Amended 1-14-2003]
(1) Accessory structures shall observe the same setback behind the
front line of the main dwelling as those in the Residence AAA
District. [Amended 5-21-2013; 8-5-2014]
(2) Accessory structures on corner lots shall also have a minimum
front yard setback from the side street of 35 feet, or the arterial
highway setback, whichever is greater. [Amended 2-28-2017]
145. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-68 WATER QUALITY § 68-70
66:751
§ 68-70. Side yards.
§ 68-71. Rear yard.
§ 68-71.1. (Reserved)147
§ 68-72. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
A. Dwellings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
36 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 18 feet.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 50
feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 25 feet.
C. Side yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-55.146 [Amended 9-12-2000;
2-28-2017]
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings. [Amended 9-12-2000; 2-28-2017]
(1) Rear yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as
those in the Residence AAA District, § 68-56.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
146. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 68-71.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-70 ISLIP CODE § 68-72
66:752
§ 68-73. (Reserved)148
§ 68-74. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-74.1. Patios and decks. [Added 3-24-1992]
(See § 68-407.)
§ 68-74.2. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997; amended 1-14-2003]
The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of § 68-59.01
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a depth, at any point,
greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest point
of the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line to the
outside face of the porch. [Added 9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003;
8-5-2014]
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck have a depth, at any
point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest
point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line
to the outside face of the deck. [Added 9-11-2001; amended
1-14-2003; 8-5-2014]
F. Cellar entranceways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. [Added 9-11-2001]
G. Subsurface emergency escape and rescue openings and window wells,
provided that no portion of same is more than six inches above grade.
These shall be permitted up to three feet into any conforming setback.
[Added 6-12-2007]
148. Editor's Note: Former § 68-73, Separately owned lots, was repealed 10-13-2010. See now
§ 68-20.1.
§ 68-72 WATER QUALITY § 68-74.2
66:753

ARTICLE VII
Use District Regulations: Residence A District
§ 68-75. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
In a Residence A District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one of the purposes which are permitted in a
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-76. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
§ 68-76.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 7-13-1999]
The uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-77. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
The uses permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Appeals after a
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals,
and no other.
§ 68-78. Accessory uses.
No accessory use and structure shall be permitted in a Residence A District
except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-78.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 12-12-2006;
5-21-2013; 2-28-2017]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited, including, but not limited
to, the following:
A. The uses permitted by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing, and no other.149
149. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, as amended 7-2-1974 and 5-3-1977, dealing with
maintenance of a temporary office for a doctor, Subsection C, as added 7-2-1974, dealing
with notification of property owners and changes in zoning regulations, and Subsection D,
as added 7-2-1974, dealing with renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy, all of
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 5-4-1982.
§ 68-75 WATER QUALITY § 68-78.1
66:755
§ 68-79. Height.
The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District.
§ 68-80. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio. [Amended
1-14-2003]
The percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio regulations shall be
the same as those in the Residence AAA District.
§ 68-81. Area density.
§ 68-82. Living area.
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those in the
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-83. Width of lot.
A. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle registered
as a bus, minibus or commercial vehicle, including a tractor-trailer
combination (or either component thereof).
B. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle bearing
commercial advertising or identification except as provided in
§§ 68-48A(1)(e) and 68-47J.
C. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked, overnight from 9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., any unregistered vehicles, commercial equipment, or
all-terrain vehicle in the right-of-way of any Town roadway.
D. It shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed portable storage units
on occupied residential property, except for a period not to exceed
three months, subject to obtaining a permit from the Building Division.
No more than one renewal of said permit shall be permitted.
E. It shall be unlawful to mechanically test any unregistered vehicles,
commercial equipment or all-terrain vehicles in the right-of-way of any
Town roadway.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
11,250 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 40,000 square feet.150 [Amended
4-8-1997]
A. Minimum requirements.
150. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-78.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-83
66:756
§ 68-84. Front yard.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence A District shall be 75 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence A District shall be 100 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot is 75 feet in width as measured parallel to and 40 feet back
from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this
ordinance.151
A. Main buildings.
(1) All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter erected shall
have a required front yard of 40 feet. Provided, however, that if
25% of the block frontage on either side of the street is improved
with buildings having a greater depth of front yard than is required
by the ordinance, these new buildings shall have a front yard whose
depth shall be equal to the average depth of front yard of such
existing buildings. In no case shall the front yard be required to be
greater than 50 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater
(see Article XXXII).
(2) Exception. In a Residence A District where the width of lot is 100
feet at thirty-foot setback line or more throughout, the front yard
setback may be a minimum of 30 feet.
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 22 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article
XXXII). [Amended 2-28-2017]
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 40 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
D. Accessory structures. [Amended 1-14-2003]
151. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-83 WATER QUALITY § 68-84
66:757
§ 68-85. Side yards.
§ 68-86. Rear yard.
§ 68-86.1. (Reserved)153
§ 68-87. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
(1) Accessory structures shall observe the same setback behind the
front line of the main dwelling as those in the Residence AAA
District. [Amended 5-21-2013; 8-5-2014]
(2) Accessory buildings on corner lots shall also have a minimum front
yard setback from the side street of 27 feet, or the arterial highway
setback, whichever is greater. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. Dwellings. All main building's hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
28 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 14 feet.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 40
feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 20 feet.
C. Side yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-55.152 [Amended 9-12-2000;
2-28-2017]
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings. Rear yard regulations for accessory buildings shall
be the same as those in the Residence AAA District, § 68-56. [Amended
9-12-2000; 2-28-2017]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
152. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
153. Editor's Note: Former § 68-86.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-84 ISLIP CODE § 68-87
66:758
§ 68-88. (Reserved)154
§ 68-89. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-89.1. Patios and decks. [Added 3-24-1992]
(See § 68-407.)
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a depth, at any point,
greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest point of
the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line to the
outside face of the porch. [Added 9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003;
8-5-2014]
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck have a depth, at any
point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest
point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line
to the outside face of the deck. [Added 9-11-2001; amended
1-14-2003; 8-5-2014]
F. Cellar entrance ways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. [Added 9-11-2001]
G. Subsurface emergency escape and rescue openings and window wells,
provided that no portion of same is more than six inches above grade.
These shall be permitted up to three feet into any conforming setback.
[Added 6-12-2007]
154. Editor's Note: Former § 68-88, Separately owned lots, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-87 WATER QUALITY § 68-89.2
66:759
§ 68-89.2. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997; amended 1-14-2003]
The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of § 68-59.01
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
§ 68-89.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-89.2
66:760
ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)155
§ 68-90. through § 68-104. (Reserved)
155. Editor's Note: Former Article VIII, Use District Regulations: Residence AB District, was
repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-90 WATER QUALITY § 68-90
66:761

ARTICLE IX
Use District Regulations: Residence B District
§ 68-105. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
In a Residence B District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one of the purposes which are permitted in a
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-106. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
Shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District when
authorized by a special permit from the Town Board after a public hearing,
and no other.
§ 68-106.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 7-13-1999]
The uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-107. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
Shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District when
authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals, and no other.
§ 68-108. Accessory uses.
No accessory use and structure shall be permitted in a Residence B District
except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-108.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 12-12-2006;
5-21-2013; 2-28-2017]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited, including, but not limited
to, the following:
A. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle registered
as a bus, minibus or commercial vehicle, including a tractor-trailer
combination (or either component thereof).
B. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any vehicle bearing
commercial advertising or identification except as provided in
§§ 68-48A(1)(e) and 68-47J.
§ 68-105 WATER QUALITY § 68-108.1
66:763
§ 68-109. Height. [Amended 10-6-1987]
§ 68-110. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio.
[Amended 10-6-1987; 1-14-2003]
The percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio regulations shall be
the same as those in the Residence AAA District.
§ 68-111. Area density.
C. It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked, overnight from 9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., any unregistered vehicles, commercial equipment, or
all-terrain vehicle in the right-of-way of any Town roadway.
D. It shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed portable storage units
on occupied residential property, except for a period not to exceed
three months, subject to obtaining a permit from the Building Division.
No more than one renewal of said permit shall be permitted.
E. It shall be unlawful to mechanically test any unregistered vehicles,
commercial equipment or all-terrain vehicles in the right-of-way of any
Town roadway.
A. In Residence B District, no building or structure shall be erected to a
height in excess of 28 feet or two stories.
B. Flagpoles shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
C. The required accessory structure height shall be the same as that in the
Residence AAA District. [Added 1-14-2003]
D. All new dwelling entrance platforms, stoops or terraces shall not
exceed three feet in height. The Commissioner of Planning and
Development, or the Commissioner's designee may vary this
requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height. Only that height that is necessary to
safely enter the dwelling from average grade may be permitted upon
the determination of the Commissioner. [Added 4-5-2005]156
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
7,500 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 40,000 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1997]
C. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and conforms to the area density requirements
156. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Exceptions, added 12-2-2008, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-5-2013.
§ 68-108.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-111
66:764
§ 68-112. Living area.
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those in the
Residence AAA District.
§ 68-113. Width of lot.
§ 68-114. Front yard.
of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence B District shall be 75 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence B District shall be 100 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot is 75 feet in width as measured parallel to and 25 feet back
from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this chapter.
C. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot requirements
of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this chapter.
A. Main buildings. All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a required front yard of 25 feet. Provided, however,
that if 25% of the block frontage on either side of the street is improved
with buildings having a greater depth of front yard than is required by
the ordinance, these new buildings shall have a front yard whose depth
shall be equal to the average depth of front yard of such existing
buildings. In no case shall the front yard be required to be greater than
50 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article XXXII.)
[Amended 4-8-1997]
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 15 feet for a single-family dwelling and 25 feet for other permitted
§ 68-111 WATER QUALITY § 68-114
66:765
§ 68-115. Side yards.
§ 68-116. Rear yard.
buildings, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article
XXXII.)
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot, unless arterial highway
setback is greater. (See Article XXXII.)
D. Accessory structures. [Amended 1-14-2003]
(1) Accessory structures shall observe the same setback behind the
front line of the main dwelling as those in the Residence AAA
District. [Amended 5-21-2013; 8-5-2014]
(2) Accessory structures on corner lots shall also have a minimum
front yard setback from the side street of 20 feet, or the arterial
highway setback, whichever is greater. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. Dwellings. [Amended 10-6-1987; 9-6-1988; 1-14-2003]
(1) All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard along
each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width of
the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum
of 28 feet with a minimum width of 14 feet.
(2) Exception in a Residence B District: Existing dwellings that provide
a minimum ten-foot side yard requirement may alter or expand the
main dwelling, without variance, provided the following criteria are
met:
(a) The alteration or expansion, including upper level additions,
provides a fourteen-foot side yard setback.
(b) The construction meets the criteria provided in §§ 68-17G of
this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003157]
(c) The subject parcel complies in all other respects to the Town
Code.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 30
feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
C. Side yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-55.158 [Amended 9-12-2000;
2-28-2017]
157. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(2)(c), regarding
compliance with the Town Code, which subsection immediately followed this subsection.
158. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-114 ISLIP CODE § 68-116
66:766
§ 68-116.1. (Reserved)159
§ 68-117. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings. Rear yard regulations for accessory buildings shall
be the same as those in the Residence AAA District, § 68-56. [Amended
9-12-2000; 2-28-2017]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a
depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from
the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street
property line to the outside face of the porch. [Added 9-11-2001;
amended 1-14-2003]
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck
have a depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be
measured from the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling
from the street property line to the outside face of the deck. [Added
9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003]
F. Cellar entrance ways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
159. Editor's Note: Former § 68-116.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-116 WATER QUALITY § 68-117
66:767
§ 68-118. Separately owned lots.
(See §§ 68-IIIC, 68-113C and 68-115D of this article.)
§ 68-119. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-119.1. Patios and decks. [Added 3-24-1992]
(See § 68-407.)
§ 68-119.2. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997]
The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of § 68-59.01
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. [Added 9-11-2001]
G. Subsurface emergency escape and rescue openings and window wells,
provided that no portion of same is more than six inches above grade.
These all be permitted up to three feet into any conforming setback.
[Added 6-12-2007]
§ 68-117 ISLIP CODE § 68-119.2
66:768
ARTICLE X
Use District Regulations: Residence C District
[Amended 9-5-1972]
§ 68-119.3. Legislative intent. [Added 4-8-1997]
These provisions are enacted to provide for proper housing for the Town's
senior citizens. The Town Board recognizes an existing and growing need
for the provision of housing, especially designed for senior citizens, based
upon economic conditions, demographic trends and the existing housing
stock. A "senior citizen" shall be defined as any person 55 years of age or
older. The senior citizen's immediate family is limited to the senior citizen's
spouse, children and grandchildren 19 years of age or older. Adults under
55 years of age may be admitted as permanent residents if it is established
to the satisfaction of the Town Board that the presence of such person
is essential for the physical care or economic support of eligible older
persons. Exceptions: Rental units constructed prior to the revision of the
age requirement from 60 to 55 years of age shall be required to submit a
site plan to the Planning Board for a determination that adequate parking
exists to accommodate the lower age requirement. Occupancy of all housing
units within a Residence C District shall be restricted to senior citizens as
provided herein.
§ 68-119.4. General site criteria. [Added 4-8-1997]
§ 68-120. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-1-1973; 7-14-1993; 4-8-1997]
In a Residence C District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be so erected or altered
except for the following purposes:
A. The site shall be located within a convenient distance to a downtown
center or in the alternative existing retail services.
B. The site shall maintain convenient access to public transportation
services.
C. The site shall be of sufficient size and shape so as to provide for the
required buffer, landscaping and setback requirements.
D. The site shall be of sufficient size so as to provide for adequate parking
in accordance with Town standards while still maintaining a residential
appearance to the site.
E. The site shall be of sufficient size so as to provide for ample open space
and/or recreation areas consistent with the needs of the residents and
the goals of the Town of Islip.
A. Senior citizen apartments.
B. Senior citizen attached or detached single-family dwellings.
§ 68-119.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-121
66:769
§ 68-121. Uses permitted by special permit.
Permitted uses shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized by a special permit from the Town Board after
public hearing, and no other.
§ 68-121.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 7-13-1999]
The uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-122. Uses permitted as special exception.
Permitted uses shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals,
and no other.
§ 68-123. Accessory uses.
No accessory use or structure shall be permitted in a Residence C District
except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District and those
specially related to principal uses or structures permitted under this article.
§ 68-123.01. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-123.1. Basement occupancy.
No basement or cellar shall be occupied as living or sleeping quarters,
except that management and/or custodial employee's living quarters may
be provided in the basement area.
§ 68-124. Height. [Amended 12-17-2019]
An apartment house or garden apartment shall not exceed 35 feet in height
or two stories for living purposes; provided, however, that in a specific
application and after a public hearing, the Town Board may permit
additional height and grant additional stories for apartment houses or
garden apartments. In such instances, that portion of the apartment house
or garden apartment which is granted in excess of 35 feet shall be set back
a minimum of one additional foot for each additional foot of height with
relation to front yards, rear yards and side yards. In no instance shall any
building exceed four stories.
§ 68-125. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-121 ISLIP CODE § 68-125
66:770
§ 68-126. Lot area. [Amended 5-1-1973; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-126.1. Maximum permitted density (dwelling units per acre).
[Added 4-8-1997]
Density shall be determined based upon consistency with the general site
design criteria as determined by the Planning Board during the site plan
review process.
§ 68-126.2. Affordable housing. [Added 4-8-1997; amended
2-28-2017]
§ 68-126.3. Height. [Added 4-8-1997]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.40 for senior citizen apartments.
B. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.30 for senior citizen single-family attached dwellings.
C. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for senior citizen detached single-family dwellings.
D. Accessory buildings shall not exceed an FAR of 0.10.
A. The minimum required plot area for senior citizen apartments or
attached single-family dwellings shall be 40,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for each senior citizen detached
single-family dwelling shall be 10,000 square feet.
A. A maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for senior
citizen apartments.
B. A maximum of 10 dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for senior
citizen attached single-family dwellings.
C. A maximum of four dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for senior
citizen detached single-family dwellings. Lot area shall not include
public facilities such as roads, including interior roads, drainage areas
or open-space areas as determined by the Planning Board.
A. A minimum of 10% of all apartments/ownership units shall be set aside
as affordable housing.
A. An attached or detached single-family dwelling shall not exceed 35 feet
in height or two stories.
B. (Reserved)160
160. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding apartment houses or garden apartments,
was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-125 WATER QUALITY § 68-126.3
66:771
§ 68-127. Living area.
The minimum living area requirements, exclusive of attached garages,
carports, open porches, open balconies, breezeways or patios, shall be
500 square feet for apartment units and 750 square feet for single-family
attached dwellings.
§ 68-128. Width of lot.
§ 68-129. Front yards. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-130. Side yards and rear yards. [Amended 4-8-1997]
C. An accessory building shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
A. Minimum requirements. [Amended 4-8-1997]
(1) The minimum width of lot for a senior citizen single-family attached
dwelling in a Residence C District shall be 25 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for senior citizen apartments in a
Residence C District shall be 200 feet throughout.
(3) The minimum width of lot for senior citizen single-family detached
dwellings in a Residence C District shall be 75 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout as long
as:
(1) Said lot has no less than the required width as measured parallel to
and 30 feet back from the front property line.
(2) Said lot otherwise complies with all the requirements of this
chapter.
A. The minimum required front yard setback for senior citizen apartments
shall be 50 feet from all streets for all parcels two acres and less in size,
unless arterial setback is greater.
B. The minimum required front yard setback for senior citizen apartments
shall be 75 feet from all streets for all parcels greater than two acres in
size, unless arterial highway setback is greater.
C. The minimum required front yard setback for senior citizen attached or
detached single-family dwellings shall be 50 feet from all streets, unless
arterial highway setback is greater.
D. The minimum required front yard setback for security booths and
gatehouses shall be 25 feet. The minimum required front yard setback
for all other accessory buildings shall be 75 feet from all streets, unless
arterial highway setback is greater.
§ 68-126.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-130
66:772
§ 68-131. (Reserved)161
§ 68-132. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-133. Exterior site improvements, land clearing and parking.
[Amended 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
§ 68-134. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be provided for all senior citizen
apartment houses or garden apartments from all adjoining properties.
B. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be provided for all senior citizen
attached or detached single-family dwellings from all adjoining
properties.
C. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be provided for all accessory
buildings.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
A. The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
B. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width, in accordance with Town
standards, shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
161. Editor's Note: Former § 68-131, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-130 WATER QUALITY § 68-134
66:773

ARTICLE XI
Use District Regulations: Residence BAA District
§ 68-135. Intent. [Added 4-18-1978162]
§ 68-136. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-18-1978163; 4-8-1997]
A. It is the Town Board's intent to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of residents and visitors of Islip on both the mainland and the
barrier beach known as "Fire Island" by the protection of the barrier
beach through this ordinance from development which does not take
into consideration the natural function of a barrier beach and its
ecological systems.
B. The Town Board hereby states its concern about life and property due
to the overdevelopment of Fire Island both on the mainland and the
aforesaid barrier beach. The Town Board is in full agreement with the
United States Department of the Interior's general intent for
preservation of Fire Island as a unique resource for present and future
generations, consistent with the General Management Plan for the Fire
Island National Seashore.
C. The Town Board hereby designates the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Appeals to review the permitted uses enumerated in § 68-137
and § 68-137.1 pursuant to the intent of this ordinance. [Added
4-5-2005]
A. In a Residence BAA District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be so erected or altered except for one of the following purposes:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal park, municipal playground or municipal building or use.
(3) Public school. [Added 3-23-1999]
B. Additional structures and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that all requirements of this ordinance, including the
minimum required width of lot, minimum required lot area, minimum
required setbacks and maximum permitted floor area ratio (FAR) are
met for each such additional use.
162. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 68-135, Permitted uses, was
renumbered as § 68-136.
163. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 68-136, Uses permitted by special
permit from Town Board after public hearing, was renumbered as § 68-137.
§ 68-135 WATER QUALITY § 68-137
66:775
§ 68-137. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Amended 4-18-1978164; 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
The following uses shall be permitted upon issuance of a special permit by
the Planning Board after a public hearing:
§ 68-137.1. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Added 4-8-1997]
A. Private club mooring wharf for pleasure craft only, provided that there
is no repair work or sale of any products other than petroleum products
on the premises.
B. Private membership club, fraternity or lodge; provided, however, that
no use shall be permitted when conducted for gain, profit or as a
commercial venture.
C. Public utility.
D. Community building, church or other similar place of worship.
E. Private, parochial school or college or municipal use, including but not
limited to a firehouse.
F. Private boathouse or bathhouse when not an accessory use to a onefamily
dwelling.
G. Historical or memorial monument.
H. Stores or offices in which goods or commodities or services are sold at
retail with or without any outdoor sales, displays or storage when solely
in support of community activities.
A. Child day-care center as an accessory use to a church or similar place of
worship, community building or educational institution subject to the
following standards:
(1) A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet shall be required.
(2) The use of cellars or basements shall be prohibited.
(3) The structure shall comply in all respects with New York State and
Town of Islip Building and Fire Codes prior to the operation of the
child day-care center.
(4) All applicable permits from any involved governmental agencies
shall be obtained prior to the operation of the child day-care center.
(5) A minimum setback of 25 feet from the property line shall be
provided and maintained in connection with the outdoor play area.
164. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 68-137, Uses permitted as special
exception by Board of Appeals after public hearing, was deleted.
§ 68-137 ISLIP CODE § 68-137.1
66:776
§ 68-138. Accessory uses. [Amended 4-18-1978]
(6) The hours of operation of the outdoor play area shall be limited to
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. unless otherwise modified by the Board of
Appeals.
(7) The location of the outdoor play area within the primary or
secondary front yard shall be prohibited unless modified by the
Board of Appeals.
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot with and when clearly incidental to the principal use:
[Amended 9-4-1984]
(1) Office of a physician, lawyer, architect, teacher, chiropractor,
engineer, dentist or musician residing on the premises and when
such use is incidental to such residence; provided, however, that
such use shall be within the main building and occupying not more
than 1/3 of the first floor area. The storage of radioactive materials
for therapeutic usage with human beings shall be permitted by
hospitals and duly licensed physicians, when approved by the New
York State Department of Health.
(2) Signs, as permitted and regulated in Article XXXVIII.
(3) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
excluding garages and guesthouses, and including but not limited
to sheds for storage, decks and ramps and aboveground swimming
pools, subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of
this article and of the Code of the Town of Islip. No accessory use
shall be equipped with cooking facilities. An accessory use does not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(4) Hot tub or spa provided that the size of such hot tub or spa does not
exceed seven feet by seven feet, or 49 square feet, in area or a
height of four feet. [Added 5-28-2008]
(5) Residential dock, subject to the same requirements found in
§ 68-48A(1)(c). [Added 2-28-2017]
(6) Refuse enclosures not to exceed four feet by six feet and bicycle
racks/platforms shall be permitted as accessory structures and
shall not be subject to setback requirements or building permits.
[Added 12-17-2019]
B. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot with the
principal building, and no accessory building shall be constructed on a
lot until the construction of the main building has actually been
commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is completed and used.
§ 68-137.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-138
66:777
§ 68-138.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-139. Height. [Amended 4-18-1978]
§ 68-140. (Reserved)167
§ 68-141. Area density.
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-137, no accessory use shall be permitted unless the same shall
have been specifically authorized by the Planning Board. [Amended
4-5-2005]
A. In a Residence BAA District, no building or structure shall be erected to
a height in excess of 28 feet as measured from the elevation at the
center of an established walkway or from the average grade of the lot,
whichever is less, to the ridge or peak of the roof or structure. In no
case shall a building or structure exceed two stories in height.
[Amended 12-19-1978]
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 14 feet in height or shall be a
maximum of one story, whichever is less. [Amended 1-14-2003]
C. Exceptions subject to Town Board approval. The following, after
receiving Town Board approval, shall be exceptions:
(1) A church or other place of worship.
(2) (Reserved)165
(3) A stack, chimney or standpipe.
(4) A water tank.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]166
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
6,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for other permitted buildings not
accessory buildings shall be 20,000 square feet.168
165. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), which provided for a flagpole, was repealed
9-11-2001. See now Subsection D.
166. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Additional exceptions, added 6-8-2010, and which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-5-2013.
167. Editor's Note: Former § 68-140, Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio, was
repealed 6-8-2010.
168. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which immediately followed, regarding separate
ownership, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-138 ISLIP CODE § 68-142
66:778
§ 68-142. Living area. [Amended 4-18-1978; 12-19-1978; 5-7-1985;
11-1-1988; 3-24-1992; 9-11-2001; 6-8-2010]
§ 68-143. Width of lot.
A. For a single-family dwelling hereafter erected, the minimum required
ground floor area, exclusive of accessory uses, such as open porches,
breezeways, sheds, decks, ramps and other such uses, shall be 600
square feet.
B. (Reserved)
C. The maximum gross floor area for a single-family dwelling hereafter
erected, inclusive of all accessory structures unless specifically
excluded in this chapter, shall not exceed an FAR of 0.30. [Amended
8-5-2014]
D. (Reserved)
E. For the purpose of this chapter, "deck" shall be defined as a single- or
multi-level flat, open-floored, roofless structure more than four feet in
width which is designed as an accessory use to a dwelling. All decks on
Fire Island shall conform to the roofless deck and patio requirements in
§ 68-407 and are subject to the definition of "gross floor area" in § 68-3.
[Amended 8-5-2014]
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of a lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence BAA District shall be 60 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of a lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence BAA District shall be 100 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, as long
as the following requirements are met:
(1) Said lot is 60 feet in width as measured parallel to and 25 feet back
from the front property line.
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line.
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of passage of this ordinance or
on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot requirements
§ 68-142 WATER QUALITY § 68-143
66:779
§ 68-144. Front yard.
§ 68-145. Side yards.
§ 68-146. Rear yard.
of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this chapter.
A. Main buildings. All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a required front yard of 25 feet.
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 15 feet.
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot.
D. Accessory buildings; sanitary systems.
(1) An accessory building in a Residence BAA District shall have a
minimum front yard setback of 60 feet.
(2) An accessory building on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum
of 20 feet from the side street property line. [Amended
2-28-2017]
(3) Sanitary systems above grade by more than 12 inches shall be set
back a minimum of 15 feet from any street frontage. [Added
4-8-1997]
A. Dwellings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
25 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 10 feet.
B. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 30
feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
C. Accessory buildings; sanitary systems.
(1) No accessory buildings or hot tubs shall be closer to any side yard
than 10 feet. [Amended 10-13-2010]
(2) No sanitary systems above grade by more than 12 inches shall be
closer to any side yard than 10 feet.169 [Added 4-8-1997]
169. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-143 ISLIP CODE § 68-146
66:780
§ 68-146.1. (Reserved)170
§ 68-147. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings; sanitary systems.
(1) Accessory buildings or hot tubs shall not be nearer to a rear line
than 10 feet. [Amended 10-13-2010]
(2) Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 12 1/2% of the rear
yard area. [Amended 4-18-1978]
(3) Sanitary systems above grade by more than 12 inches shall not be
closer to any real property line than 10 feet. [Added 4-8-1997]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a
depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from
the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street
property line to the outside face of the porch. [Added 1-14-2003]
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck
have a depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be
170. Editor's Note: Former § 68-146.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-146 WATER QUALITY § 68-147
66:781
§ 68-148. (Reserved)171
§ 68-149. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-149.1. Swimming pools. [Added 4-18-1978; amended 9-4-1984]
measured from the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling
from the street property line to the outside face of the deck. [Added
1-14-2003]
A. No in-ground swimming pools, in-ground wading pools, in-ground water
use structures of this or a similar type shall be erected. As stated in the
Town of Islip Comprehensive Plan, Fire Island should continue to serve
two major functions:
(1) Serve as a natural and protective barrier for the Great South Bay
and Mainland.
(2) Serve as a resource for increased recreational activity within the
natural setting.
B. The Town Board finds that the above uses therefor represent an
overintensification of property use on Fire Island in light of the high
development density of the area, an intrusion on the peace and
tranquility of living styles on Fire Island and an unnecessary accessory
use to a residential dwelling in light of the swimming and bathing
opportunities readily available to all residents of the beach.
C. Aboveground swimming pools shall be permitted as of right as an
accessory use, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The parcel of land on which the swimming pool is to be erected and
maintained shall have and continue to have a lot area of not less
than 12,000 square feet.
(2) (Reserved)172
(3) All other requirements of this article and Article XXVIII are met.
D. A lot need not have the required lot area so long as the current property
owner was previously granted a temporary special exception by the
Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the elimination of the former Islip
Town Code § 68-149.2 on December 12, 2006. In such cases, the Zoning
Board of Appeals is empowered to renew the prior temporary special
exception subject to compliance with the following requirements:
[Added 12-12-2006; amended 4-22-2014]
171. Editor's Note: Former § 68-148, Separately owned lots, was repealed 10-13-2010. See now
§ 68-20.1.
172. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), which prohibited any portion of a swimming pool
from being erected within the Ocean Front Dune District AAAB, was repealed 9-11-2001.
§ 68-147 ISLIP CODE § 68-149.1
66:782
§ 68-149.2. (Reserved)173
(1) A temporary special exception to erect and maintain an
aboveground swimming pool was granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals to the current property owner prior to the elimination of
the former Islip Town Code § 68-149.2 on December 12, 2006; and
(2) It is demonstrated, by sufficient documentary proof and at a public
hearing, that the property owner or his/her spouse or child is
impacted by a neurological or muscular disease which requires
treatment by aquatic therapy. Such proof must contain, at the
minimum, a statement by a medical doctor licensed to practice in
the State of New York which sets forth the current neurological or
muscular condition of the person having the physical hardship as
well as the basis necessitating the use of the swimming pool for
therapeutic purposes.
E. The following regulations and criteria must be followed by the Board
when renewing the temporary special exception to maintain an
aboveground pool not having the required plot area: [Added
4-22-2014]
(1) The temporary special exception may be granted for a maximum
period of three years and can only be renewed after compliance
with § 68-149.1D is demonstrated at a public hearing.
(2) The temporary special exception may be granted only to the owner
of the property.
(3) The temporary special exception is not transferrable and shall
terminate automatically upon the transfer of the property; the
death of the individual having the medical hardship; or upon any
violation of this section.
(4) There must be a statement of nontransferability included on every
certificate of occupancy or other document acknowledging
approval of the temporary special exception contemplated herein
which states:
ZBA APPLICATION # [ - ] TEMPORARY SPECIAL EXCEPTION TO
MAINTAIN ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOL. EXPIRES THREE
(3) YEARS FROM THE DATE OF ZONING BOARD APPROVAL.
NONTRANSFERRABLE.
(5) The statement of nontransferability must also be incorporated in an
instrument in recordable form and must be recorded against the
property in the Suffolk County Clerk's office at the expense of the
applicant. Proof of the recording must be filed at the offices of the
Zoning Board of Appeals before any approval shall take effect.
173. Editor's Note: Former § 68-149.2, Temporary special exception to erect and maintain
aboveground swimming pools, added 9-4-1984, as amended, was repealed 12-12-2006.
§ 68-149.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-149.3
66:783
§ 68-149.3. Special procedure. [Added 4-18-1978]
§ 68-149.4. Special regulations dealing with Fire Island. [Added
4-8-1997]
§ 68-149.5. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
1-14-2003]
The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of § 68-59.01
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
A. Before any permit concerning a building, structure or premises or part
thereof, its use or occupation or its alteration or erection is issued, the
applicant must comply with the procedure set forth in the
Environmental Quality Review Ordinance, Chapter 13B.
B. The National Park Service shall hereafter be granted the right to be a
party to any Town hearings on permit applications concerning Fire
Island.
A. All development on Fire Island shall conform in all respects with all
federal, state and county rules and regulations unless so modified by
said agencies.
§ 68-149.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-149.5
66:784
ARTICLE XII
Use District Regulations: Residence CAA District
§ 68-150. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
In a Residence CAA District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be
so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-151. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
The uses permitted by special permit from the Town Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by a special permit from the Town Board after public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-152. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
The uses permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Appeals after a
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals,
and no other.
§ 68-153. Accessory uses.
No accessory use and structure shall be permitted in a Residence CAA
District except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-153.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-154. Height.
The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District.
§ 68-155. Percentage of lot occupancy.
A. One-family dwelling.
B. Two-family dwelling.
C. A single three-or four-family dwelling when adjacent to a property
zoned Residence C. Residence CA, Business District, Business 1,
Business 2 or General Service T District and having no other uses other
than accessory uses on the subject parcel. The subject parcel shall meet
the requirements of §§ 68-500 and 68-501. The building must have a
lobby from which all rooms are accessible (via hallways, elevators). No
entry doors to each unit are permitted. [Added 12-17-2019]
§ 68-150 WATER QUALITY § 68-155
66:785
§ 68-156. Area density. [Amended 11-1-1988; 10-13-2010;
12-17-2019]
§ 68-157. Living area.
The minimum living area requirements for a single-family dwelling shall be
the same as those in the Residence AAA District. A two-family dwelling must
have twice the minimum living area of a single-family dwelling.
§ 68-158. Width of lot.
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
0.25. [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. The rear yard consists of 15% open space exclusive of buffer and
parking areas.174 [Added 12-17-2019]
C. (Reserved)175
D. (Reserved)176
E. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 15% of the total lot area
nor more than 25% of the rear yard area.
A. The minimum required plot area for a permitted use in § 68-150 shall be
15,000 square feet.
B. (Reserved)
C. The minimum required plot area for all other uses shall be 20,000
square feet.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family dwelling in a
Residence CAA District shall be 75 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for a two-family dwelling shall be 100
feet throughout.
(3) The minimum width of lot for other permitted buildings in a
Residence CAA District shall be 100 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
174. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding single-family dwellings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
175. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding two-family dwellings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
176. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding other permitted buildings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
§ 68-155 ISLIP CODE § 68-158
66:786
§ 68-159. Front yard.
§ 68-160. Side yards.
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 25 feet
back from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of ordinance.177
A. Main Buildings. All buildings except accessory buildings hereafter
erected shall have a required front yard of 25 feet. Provided, however,
that if 25% of the block frontage on either side of the street is improved
with buildings having a greater depth of front yard than is required by
the ordinance, these new buildings shall have a front yard whose depth
shall be equal to the average depth of front yard of such existing
buildings. In no case shall the front yard be required to be greater than
25 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 15 feet for a one-family dwelling and 25 feet for other permitted
buildings, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article
XXXII).
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
on both street frontages on a through lot, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
D. Accessory buildings. [Amended 2-28-2017]
(1) Accessory structures shall observe the same setback behind the
front line of the main dwelling as those in the Residence AAA
District.
(2) Accessory buildings on corner lots shall also have a minimum front
yard setback from the side street of 30 feet.
A. Dwellings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard
along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width
of the two side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
35 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
[Amended 11-1-1988]
B. Two-family dwellings. The sum of the width of the two side yards for a
two-family dwelling shall be a minimum of 35 feet with a minimum
width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-158 WATER QUALITY § 68-160
66:787
§ 68-161. Rear yard.
§ 68-161.1. (Reserved)179
§ 68-162. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
C. Other permitted buildings. The sum of the width of the two side yards
for any other permitted building not an accessory building shall be 35
feet with a minimum width of either such side yards of 15 feet.
D. Side yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-55.178 [Amended 6-19-2012;
2-28-2017]
A. Dwellings and other permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter
erected shall have a minimum rear yard whose depth is not less than 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings. Rear yard regulations for accessory buildings shall
be the same as those in the Residence AAA District § 68-56. [Amended
6-19-2012; 2-28-2017]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted. [Amended 1-14-2003; 4-5-2005]
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a
depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be measured from
the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street
property line to the outside face of the porch. [Added 9-11-2001;
amended 1-14-2003]
178. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding separate ownership, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-13-2010.
179. Editor's Note: Former § 68-161.1, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-160 ISLIP CODE § 68-162
66:788
§ 68-163. (Reserved)180
§ 68-164. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
§ 68-165. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Amended
4-8-1997; 1-14-2003; 12-17-2019]
§ 68-165.1. Patios and decks. [Added 3-24-1992]
(See § 68-407.)
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than five feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to secondary front yards, nonconforming front yard setbacks
and nonconforming uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck
have a depth, at any point, greater than 10 feet. Depth shall be
measured from the furthest point of the front line of the main dwelling
from the street property line to the outside face of the deck. [Added
9-11-2001; amended 1-14-2003]
F. Cellar entranceways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Residential AAA District requirements of
§ 68-59.01 and Article XXXI of this chapter.
B. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained alongside a parking lot
when it is adjacent to any residential zone or use, except as modified by
the Planning Board in accordance with the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
C. No light poles taller than 12 feet shall be permitted when the subject
parcel is adjacent to a Residential AAA, AA, A or B Zoning District nor
shall said poles be closer than 25 feet to any such residential zoning
boundary.
180. Editor's Note: Former § 68-163, Separately owned lots, was repealed 10-13-2010. See now
§ 68-20.1.
§ 68-162 WATER QUALITY § 68-165.1
66:789

ARTICLE XIII
Use District Regulations: Residence CA District
§ 68-166. General site criteria.181 [Added 4-8-1997]
§ 68-166.1. Permitted uses.
In a Residence CA District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-167. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
The uses permitted by special permit from the Town Board after public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by a special permit from the Town Board after public
hearing, and no other.
A. The site shall be located within a convenient distance to a downtown
center or in the alternative existing retail services.
B. The site shall maintain convenient access to public transportation
services.
C. The site shall be of sufficient size and shape so as to provide for the
required buffer, landscaping and setback requirements.
D. The site shall be of sufficient size so as to provide for adequate parking
in accordance with Town standards while still maintaining a residential
appearance to the site.
E. The site shall be of sufficient size so as to provide for ample open space
and/or recreation areas consistent with the needs of the residents and
the goals of the Town of Islip.
A. Apartment house and garden apartment. [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. Attached single-family dwellings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 12-21-1993;
5-21-2013]
C. 182 Detached single-family dwellings. [Added 5-21-2013]
181. Editor's Note: This section was renumbered from § 68-165.2 to § 68-166 and incorporated
in Art. XIII 10-13-2010. Former § 68-166 was renumbered as § 68-166.1 in order to
accommodate the incorporation of § 68-166.
182. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which permitted apartment houses and garden
apartments, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-166 WATER QUALITY § 68-167.1
66:791
§ 68-167.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 7-13-1999]
The uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District
when authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing, and no other.
§ 68-168. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
The uses permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Appeals after
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals,
and no other.
§ 68-169. Accessory uses.
No accessory use and structure shall be permitted in a Residence CA
District except those which are permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-169.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-170. Height. [Amended 12-21-1993; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-171. Floor area ratio (FAR).
A. An attached or detached single-family dwelling shall not exceed 35 feet
in height or two stories.
B. Apartments shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two stories for living
purposes; provided, however, that in a specific application and after a
public hearing, the Town Board may permit additional height and grant
additional stories for apartment houses or garden apartments;
provided, further, that the portion of the apartment building which is
erected in excess of 35 feet shall be set back a minimum of one
additional foot for each additional foot of height with relation to front
yards, rear yards and side yards. In no instance shall any building
exceed four stories. [Amended 12-17-2019]
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
D. An accessory building shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
A. The total building area for all permitted uses, including all buildings,
shall not exceed an FAR of 0.20, except when density bonuses are
granted in accordance with §§ 173.1, 173.2 and 173.3 of this article in
which case a maximum FAR of 0.3 may be permitted by the Town Board
after public hearing. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-8-1997; 5-21-2013]
§ 68-167.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-171
66:792
§ 68-172. Lot area. [Amended 6-3-1969; 6-15-1976; 9-1-1981;
11-1-1988; 12-21-1993; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-173. Maximum permitted density (dwelling units per acre).187
[Added 4-8-1997]
Density shall be determined based upon consistency with the general
design criteria as determined by the Planning Board during the site plan
review process.
B. (Reserved)183
C. (Reserved)184
D. (Reserved)185
E. (Reserved)186
F. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 15% of the total lot
area.
A. The minimum required plot area for an apartment house or garden
apartment-or attached single-family dwelling shall be 80,000 square
feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for each detached single-family
dwelling shall be 10,000 square feet.
C. A minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet shall be required when the
following criteria is met: [Added 12-17-2019]
(1) The subject parcel is within 1,250 feet of a Long Island Railroad
Station or a parcel eligible for the Downtown Development District
zoning district.
(2) The rear yard consists of 15% open space exclusive of buffer and
parking areas.
(3) No parking in the front yard.
(4) The building must have a lobby from which all rooms are accessible
(via hallways, elevators). No entry doors to each unit are permitted.
183. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding attached or detached single-family
dwellings, as amended, was repealed 4-8-1997.
184. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding two-family dwellings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
185. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding other permitted buildings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
186. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding apartment houses or garden apartments,
was repealed 11-1-1988.
187. Editor's Note: Former § 168-173, Living area, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-171 WATER QUALITY § 68-173
66:793
§ 68-173.1. Density bonuses, generally. [Added 5-21-2013188]
§ 68-173.2. Affordable housing. [Added 4-8-1997; amended
5-21-2013; 12-17-2019]
A. A maximum of nine dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for
apartment houses or garden apartments, except as otherwise provided
in §§ 173.1, 173.2 and 173.3 of this article. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. A maximum of six dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for
attached single-family dwellings, except as otherwise provided in
§§ 173.1, 173.2 and 173.3 of this article. [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. A maximum of four dwelling units per acre shall be permitted for
detached single-family dwellings. Lot area shall not include public
facilities such as roads, including interior roads, drainage areas or open
space areas as determined by the Planning Board.
A. In accordance with the provisions of Town Law § 261-b, the Town Board
is empowered to provide for a system of zoning incentives, or bonuses,
as deemed necessary and appropriate to advance the Town's specific
physical, cultural and social policies in accordance with the Town's
comprehensive plan and in coordination with other community
planning mechanisms or land use techniques.
B. The Town Board has determined that affordable housing, as well as
energy and sustainable design, are suitable community benefits which
warrant promotion through the density bonuses hereinafter described.
If the Town Board determines that affordable housing/energy and
sustainable design are not immediately feasible or otherwise not
practical, the Town Board may accept a payment to the Town in lieu
thereof. Any such payment shall be deposited in a trust fund to be used
by the Town Board exclusively for specific community benefits
authorized by the Town Board.
C. In order to utilize the density bonuses described herein, an applicant
shall make application for approval from the Town Board through the
Department of Planning and Development in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Article IVA of this chapter.
D. At no time shall overall densities exceed 12 units per acre for apartment
houses and garden apartments.
E. At no time shall overall densities exceed 10 units per acre for attached
single-family dwellings.
A. Minimum requirements. A minimum of 10% of all dwelling units
permitted pursuant to this article shall be designated as affordable
housing on site in accordance with Town standards.
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 173.1 as
§ 173.2.
§ 68-173 ISLIP CODE § 68-173.2
66:794
§ 68-173.3. Energy and sustainable design. [Added 5-21-2013]
B. Affordable housing density bonus. Provided that a minimum of 20% of
all units permitted pursuant to § 68-166.1A and B are maintained as
affordable units on site, additional density may be permitted by the
Town Board after public hearing pursuant to the following provisions:
(1) The maximum permitted density for apartment houses or garden
apartments may be increased, provided that each additional unit
above nine units per acre is designated as affordable housing in
accordance with Town standards, or that a minimum of 20% of the
total number of units are designated as affordable, whichever is
more restrictive.
(2) The maximum permitted density for attached single-family
dwellings may be increased, provided that each additional unit
above six units per acre is designated as affordable housing in
accordance with Town standards, or that a minimum of 20% of the
total number of units are designated as affordable, whichever is
more restrictive.
(a) To qualify for the affordable housing density bonus on attached
single-family dwellings, the sales prices of affordable units
shall be established such that the units are affordable for
households whose earnings do not exceed the median family
income for the Nassau-Suffolk Metropolitan Area as
established by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD MFI), as adjusted for family size.
(b) If the sales prices of the affordable units are set lower than as
described in § 68-173.2B(2)(a), fewer affordable units may be
required to meet the density bonus requirements. The
percentage reduction in the number of affordable units
required shall be equal to the percent change in affordability
from the HUD MFI, (i.e., units designated as affordable to
households earning 80% of HUD MFI shall be permitted a
reduction of 20% in the number of affordable units required to
qualify for the affordable housing density bonus).
(c) The Town Board in its discretion may permit a range of
affordability levels for a particular project, provided that the
average level of affordability complies with these
requirements.
A. Energy and sustainable design density bonus. Additional density may
be permitted by the Town Board after public hearing pursuant to the
following provisions:
(1) The permitted density for apartment houses, garden apartments
and/or attached single-family dwellings may be increased, provided
that solar, wind, geothermal, or other alternative renewable energy
§ 68-173.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-173.3
66:795
source deemed acceptable by the Town Board will provide a
percentage of the total energy needs of the development, as
measured using Comcheck or other applicable energy modeling
system sanctioned by the New York State Energy Code, in
accordance with the table below:
Total Energy Needs of Site
Provided by Alternative
Renewable Energy Source
(percentage)
Additional Permitted Density
Above Base Permitted
Density
(units per acre)
At least 30% Up to 1
At least 50% Up to 2
At least 70% Up to 3
(2) The permitted density for apartment houses, garden apartments
and/or attached single-family dwellings may be increased, provided
that the development complies with Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) standards or the National Green
Building Standard (NGBS) for certification, in accordance with the
table below. The bonus unit(s) shall not be constructed until proof
of certification has been verified by the Commissioner of Planning
and Development.
Type and Level of Certification
Additional Permitted
Density Above Base
Permitted Density
(units per acre)
Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED)
standards for Certification or
National Green Building Standard
(NGBS) standards for Bronze
Certification
Up to 1
Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED)
standards for Silver Certification or
National Green Building Standard
(NGBS) standards for Silver
Certification
Up to 2
Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED)
standards for Gold Certification or
National Green Building Standard
(NGBS) for Gold Certification
Up to 3
§ 68-173.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-173.4
66:796
§ 68-173.4. Clustered housing and recreational uses. [Added
12-17-2019]
§ 68-174. Width of lot. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-175. Front yard. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-8-1997]
A. In the Residence CA District the following recreational uses shall be
allowed as an additional use to the uses permitted under § 68-166.1:
golf courses, commercial equestrian stables and riding academies, and
community gardens.
B. Maximum permitted density shall be determined based on the total lot
area of the subject parcel and may include density bonuses pursuant to
§ 68-173.1. The residential development rights of the portion of the
subject parcel devoted to the recreational use shall be transferred to
the portion of the subject parcel devoted to the permitted use. The
portion of the subject parcel devoted to the recreational use shall not be
developed or used for residential purposes or for any purpose other
than the recreational use. A restrictive covenant shall be recorded by
the property owner prior to any site plan approval evidencing such
transfer of residential development rights.
C. To enable and encourage flexibility of design so as to allow recreational
uses as a component of development undertaken pursuant to this
section and provide visual open space, the Planning Board shall
establish the requirements for lot width and setbacks. A restrictive
covenant shall be recorded by the property owner prior to any site plan
approval setting forth the Planning Board's determination regarding
such requirements.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for an attached single-family dwelling
shall be 50 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for a detached single-family residence
shall be 75 feet throughout.
(3) The minimum width of lot for an apartment house or garden
apartment shall be 200 feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width as measured parallel
to and 30 feet back from the front property line, so long as:
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 50 feet
back from the front property line;
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line; and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this chapter.
§ 68-173.4 WATER QUALITY § 68-175
66:797
§ 68-176. Side yards and rear yards. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-177. (Reserved)189
§ 68-178. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-179. Exterior site improvements, land clearing and parking.
[Amended 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
A. The minimum required front yard setback for an apartment house or
garden apartment shall be 50 feet from all streets for all parcels two
acres and less in size, unless arterial setback is greater.
B. The minimum required front yard setback for an apartment house or
garden apartment shall be 75 feet from all streets for all parcels greater
than two acres in size, unless arterial highway setback is greater.
C. The minimum required front yard setback for an attached or detached
single-family dwelling shall be 50 feet from all streets, unless arterial
highway setback is greater.
D. The minimum required front yard setback for security booths and
gatehouses shall be 25 feet. The minimum required front yard setback
for all other accessory buildings shall be 75 feet from all streets, unless
arterial highway setback is greater.
A. A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be provided for all apartment
houses or garden apartments or attached single-family dwellings from
all adjoining properties, except when density bonuses are granted in
accordance with §§ 173.1, 173.2 and 173.3 of this article, in which case
a minimum setback of 25 feet may be permitted by the Town Board
after public hearing. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be provided for all detached singlefamily
dwellings from all adjoining properties.
C. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be provided for all accessory
buildings.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
189. Editor's Note: Former § 68-177, Building separation, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 68-175 ISLIP CODE § 68-179
66:798
§ 68-180. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
B. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width, in accordance with Town
standards, shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
§ 68-179 WATER QUALITY § 68-180
66:799

ARTICLE XIIIA
Use District Regulations: Downtown Development District190
[Added 6-15-1976; amended 4-22-1986; 1-4-1994; 5-28-2008;
9-9-2008]
§ 68-180.1. Legislative intent.
The Downtown Development District (DDD) established in this article is
designed to strengthen the social and economic stability of the Town's
hamlet centers by improving the working, shopping and living environment.
This general goal includes, among others, the following specific purposes:
§ 68-180.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCADE — An arched or covered pedestrian passageway which is open to a
street or plaza except for columns or supports as necessary. An arcade may
be extended into any required front yard and shall be open to the public
during business hours.
A. To promote more efficient use and development of these centers and
thus to conserve and enhance the value of buildings and land.
B. To coordinate development with plans for the provision of public
facilities and services required to accommodate such expansion.
C. To provide a broader range of housing choices.
D. To reduce automobile transportation demand by locating housing near
major commercial and employment centers and mass transit facilities.
E. To facilitate pedestrian circulation and access to transportation,
shopping, recreation, natural features and other amenities.
F. To achieve a more enriching balance between nature and development
by restoring and encouraging the use, where possible, of natural
features; preserving views and creating visual corridors; and providing
convenient access to vistas, open spaces and recreation areas.
G. To provide an incentive for development in a manner consistent with
the foregoing objectives which are integral parts of the Town of Islip
Comprehensive Plan.
H. To promote adaptive reuse of older structures and redevelopment of
blighted sites.
190. Editor's Note: Former Article XIIIA, District Regulations: Residence GA District, added
10-14-1969, was repealed 12-19-1972.
§ 68-180.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.2
66:801
BOATEL — A building or group of buildings which contains living or
sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy and is
immediately accessible by boat.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT FUND — A separate account, kept by the
Town, for the purposes of funding off-site and downtown improvements
such as planning and design of projects; aesthetic improvements such
as landscaping, signs and street furniture; and land acquisition and
improvement. Contributions by developers to this fund may be made in
lieu of optional amenities when, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Board, said contribution serves the provision of this article.
MEW — A pedestrian way which is accessible to the public from a street,
plaza, arcade or other mew and which has retail or service uses fronting
along the boundary walls on either side. Such "mew" may be covered or
uncovered.
OPEN SPACE — That part of a zoning lot, including courts and yards, which:
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTOR — A continuous walkway between any two of
the following elements in the pedestrian/vehicular circulation system:
PLAZA — An open space paved and/or partially landscaped and accessible
to the public at all times.
§ 68-180.3. Applicability.
Is open and unobstructed from its lower level to the sky, except as
provided below.
A.
Is accessible to and usable by all persons occupying or using the zoning
lot.
B.
May be roof area dedicated to public or common use at the discretion
of the Town Board.
C.
A. Parking lot.
B. Street/sidewalk.
C. Building.
D. Plaza.
E. Mew.
A. The Town Board may amend the zoning of a parcel or parcels of land to
a Downtown Development District (DDD) only within those areas
described as follows:
(1) Downtown Bay Shore. The Official Map shall contain a boundary
line representing the extent of the Downtown Bay Shore District.
Said line shall be contiguous with surveyed property lines or shall
otherwise exist as described in § 68-12. Said boundary line shall
completely encompass any such Suffolk County tax parcel listed
§ 68-180.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.3
66:802
below, except as otherwise specified, and the outer extent of these
listed parcels, as joined across rights-of-way, shall comprise the
extent of the Downtown Bay Shore District: [Amended
10-16-2018]
0500-36600-0100-032000 0500-39300-0200-142000
0500-36600-0100-033000 0500-39300-0200-142001
0500-36600-0200-022000 0500-39300-0300-021001
0500-36600-0200-023000 0500-39300-0300-023000
0500-36600-0200-024000 0500-39300-0300-024000
0500-36600-0200-025000 0500-39300-0300-025000
0500-36600-0200-026000 0500-39300-0300-026001
0500-36600-0200-027000 0500-39300-0300-026002
0500-36600-0200-110000 0500-39300-0300-027000
0500-36600-0400-005000 0500-39300-0300-028000
0500-36600-0400-006000 0500-39300-0300-029001
0500-36600-0400-007000 0500-39300-0300-030003
0500-36600-0400-008000 0500-39300-0300-031000
0500-36600-0400-010000 0500-39300-0300-032000
0500-36600-0400-011000 0500-39300-0300-034001
0500-36600-0400-012000 0500-39300-0300-035000
0500-36600-0400-013000 0500-39300-0300-036000
0500-36600-0400-014000 0500-39300-0300-037000
0500-36600-0400-015000 0500-39300-0300-038000
0500-36600-0400-016000 0500-39300-0300-039000
0500-36600-0400-035000 0500-39300-0300-040000
0500-36600-0400-036000 0500-39300-0300-041000
0500-36600-0400-037000 0500-39300-0300-042000
0500-36600-0400-038000 0500-39300-0300-043000
0500-36600-0400-039000 0500-39300-0300-044001
0500-36700-0100-061000 0500-39300-0300-044002
0500-36700-0100-062000 0500-39300-0300-045000
0500-36700-0100-063000 0500-39300-0300-046000
0500-36700-0100-064000 0500-39300-0300-057000
0500-36700-0100-066001 0500-39300-0300-058000
0500-36700-0100-066002 0500-39300-0300-059000
0500-39300-0300-060000
Part of: 0500-39300-0300-061000
§ 68-180.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.3
66:803
0500-36700-0100-130000 0500-39300-0300-072001
0500-39300-0300-073000
0500-36700-0100-134000 0500-39300-0300-087000
0500-36700-0100-135000 0500-39300-0300-088000
0500-36700-0100-136000 0500-39300-0300-089000
0500-36700-0100-137000 0500-39300-0300-090000
0500-36700-0100-138000 0500-39300-0300-100000
0500-36700-0100-139000 0500-39300-0300-101000
0500-36700-0100-140000 0500-39300-0300-102000
0500-36700-0100-141000 0500-39300-0300-103000
0500-36700-0100-142000 0500-39300-0300-113000
0500-36700-0300-023000 0500-39300-0300-114000
0500-36700-0300-024000 0500-39300-0300-115000
0500-36700-0300-025000 0500-39300-0300-116000
0500-36700-0300-026000 0500-39300-0300-117000
0500-36700-0300-027000 0500-39300-0300-118000
0500-36700-0300-028000 0500-39300-0300-120002
0500-36700-0300-029000 0500-39300-0300-133001
0500-36700-0300-030001 0500-39300-0300-135000
0500-36700-0300-031001 0500-39300-0300-135001
0500-36700-0300-032000 0500-39300-0300-135002
0500-36700-0300-033000 0500-39300-0300-136000
0500-36700-0300-034001 0500-39300-0300-137002
0500-36700-0300-035000 0500-39300-0300-137003
0500-36700-0300-036000 0500-39300-0300-137531
0500-36700-0300-037000 0500-39300-0300-139001
0500-36700-0300-038000 0500-39300-0300-139002
0500-36700-0300-039001 0500-39300-0300-139003
0500-36700-0300-040000 0500-39300-0300-140000
0500-36700-0300-041000 0500-39300-0300-140001
0500-36700-0300-042000 0500-39300-0300-140002
0500-36700-0300-043000 0500-39300-0300-142001
0500-36700-0300-044000 0500-39300-0400-001000
0500-36700-0300-045000 0500-39300-0400-002000
0500-36700-0300-046000 0500-39300-0400-002001
0500-36700-0300-047000 0500-39300-0400-003000
0500-36700-0300-048000 0500-39300-0400-004002
§ 68-180.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.3
66:804
0500-36700-0300-049000 0500-39300-0400-005000
0500-36700-0300-050000 0500-39300-0400-007000
0500-36700-0300-051000 0500-39300-0400-008001
0500-36700-0300-052000 0500-39300-0400-008002
0500-36700-0300-053000 0500-39300-0400-009002
0500-36700-0300-054000 0500-39300-0400-010002
0500-36700-0300-055000 0500-39300-0400-011000
0500-36700-0300-056000 0500-39300-0400-012000
0500-36700-0300-057000 0500-39300-0400-013000
0500-36700-0300-058000 0500-39300-0400-014000
0500-36700-0300-059000 0500-39300-0400-015000
0500-36700-0300-060000 0500-39300-0400-017001
0500-36700-0300-061000 0500-39300-0400-017002
0500-36700-0300-062000 0500-39300-0400-018000
0500-36700-0300-063000 0500-39300-0400-023000
0500-36700-0300-064000 0500-39300-0400-024001
0500-36700-0300-066000 0500-39300-0400-024002
0500-36700-0300-067000 0500-39300-0400-024003
0500-36700-0300-068000 0500-39300-0400-025002
0500-36700-0300-069000 0500-39300-0400-025003
0500-36700-0300-073000 0500-39300-0400-026008
0500-36700-0300-074000 0500-39300-0400-026009
0500-36700-0300-075000 0500-39300-0400-026010
0500-39300-0400-041001
Part of: 0500-39300-0400-041002
0500-36700-0300-076000 0500-39300-0400-049000
0500-39300-0400-050000
0500-36700-0300-083000 0500-39300-0400-051000
0500-36700-0300-084000 0500-39300-0400-052000
0500-36700-0300-085000 0500-39300-0400-053000
0500-36700-0300-086000 0500-39300-0400-054000
0500-36700-0300-088000 0500-39300-0400-055001
0500-36700-0300-089000 0500-39300-0400-055002
0500-36800-0200-043000 0500-39300-0400-056000
0500-39300-0400-057000
0500-39300-0400-058000
0500-36800-0200-050003 0500-39300-0400-059000
§ 68-180.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.3
66:805
0500-36800-0200-050005 0500-39300-0400-060002
0500-39300-0400-061000
0500-39300-0400-068000
0500-39200-0100-003000 0500-39300-0400-069002
0500-39200-0100-004000 0500-39300-0400-072000
0500-39200-0100-020000 0500-39300-0400-073000
0500-39200-0100-021000 0500-39300-0500-001000
0500-39200-0100-022001 0500-39300-0500-002000
0500-39300-0500-003000
Part of: 0500-39300-0500-004000
0500-39200-0100-023000 0500-39300-0500-005000
0500-39300-0500-006000
0500-39200-0100-024000 0500-39300-0500-007000
0500-39200-0100-025000 0500-39300-0500-008000
0500-39200-0100-026000 0500-39300-0500-009000
0500-39200-0100-027000 0500-39300-0500-010000
0500-39200-0100-028000 0500-39300-0500-011000
0500-39200-0100-029000 0500-39300-0500-012000
0500-39200-0100-029001 0500-39300-0500-013000
0500-39200-0100-030001 0500-39300-0500-014000
0500-39200-0100-031000 0500-39300-0500-015000
0500-39200-0100-032000 0500-39300-0500-016000
0500-39200-0100-033000 0500-39300-0500-017000
0500-39200-0100-034000 0500-39300-0500-018000
0500-39200-0100-036000 0500-39300-0500-019000
0500-39200-0100-037000 0500-39300-0500-020000
0500-39200-0100-038000 0500-39300-0500-021000
0500-39200-0100-039000 0500-39300-0500-022000
0500-39200-0100-040000 0500-39300-0500-023000
0500-39200-0100-041000 0500-39300-0500-024000
0500-39200-0100-042000 0500-39300-0500-025000
0500-39200-0100-043000 0500-39300-0500-026000
0500-39200-0100-044000 0500-39300-0500-027000
0500-39200-0100-045000 0500-39300-0500-028000
0500-39200-0300-062000 0500-39300-0500-029000
0500-39200-0300-063000 0500-39300-0500-030000
0500-39200-0300-064000 0500-39300-0500-031000
§ 68-180.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.3
66:806
0500-39200-0300-065000 0500-39300-0500-032000
0500-39200-0300-066000 0500-39300-0500-033000
0500-39200-0300-067000 0500-39300-0500-034000
0500-39200-0300-068000 0500-39300-0500-035000
0500-39200-0300-069000 0500-39300-0500-036000
0500-39200-0300-070000 0500-39300-0500-037000
0500-39200-0300-071000 0500-39300-0500-038000
0500-39200-0300-072000 0500-39300-0500-039000
0500-39200-0300-080000 0500-39300-0500-040000
0500-39200-0300-086000 0500-39300-0500-041000
0500-39200-0300-090001 0500-39300-0500-042000
0500-39200-0300-091000 0500-39300-0500-043000
0500-39200-0300-092000 0500-39300-0500-044000
0500-39200-0300-093000 0500-39300-0500-045000
0500-39200-0300-094000 0500-39300-0500-046000
0500-39200-0300-096001 0500-39300-0500-047000
0500-39200-0400-001000 0500-39300-0500-048000
0500-39200-0400-002000 0500-39300-0500-049000
0500-39200-0400-003000 0500-39300-0500-050000
0500-39200-0400-004000 0500-39300-0500-051000
0500-39200-0400-005000 0500-39300-0500-052000
0500-39200-0400-006000 0500-39300-0500-053000
0500-39200-0400-007000 0500-39300-0500-054000
0500-39200-0400-008000 0500-39300-0500-055000
0500-39200-0400-009000 0500-39300-0500-056000
0500-39200-0400-010000 0500-39300-0500-057000
0500-39200-0400-011000 0500-39300-0500-058000
0500-39200-0400-012000 0500-39300-0500-059000
0500-39200-0400-013000 0500-39300-0500-060000
0500-39200-0400-014000 0500-39300-0500-061000
0500-39200-0400-015000 0500-39300-0500-062000
0500-39200-0400-016000 0500-39300-0500-063000
0500-39200-0400-017000 0500-39300-0500-064000
0500-39200-0400-018000 0500-39300-0500-065000
0500-39200-0400-019000 0500-39300-0500-066000
0500-39200-0400-020000 0500-39300-0500-067000
0500-39200-0400-021000 0500-39300-0500-068000
§ 68-180.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.3
66:807
0500-39200-0400-022000 0500-39300-0500-069000
0500-39200-0400-023000 0500-39300-0500-070000
0500-39200-0400-024000 0500-39300-0500-071000
0500-39200-0400-025000 0500-39300-0500-072000
0500-39200-0400-026000 0500-39300-0500-073000
0500-39200-0400-027000 0500-39300-0500-074000
0500-39200-0400-028000 0500-39400-0100-003000
0500-39200-0400-029000 0500-39400-0100-004001
0500-39200-0400-030000 0500-39400-0100-008004
0500-39200-0400-031000 0500-39400-0100-017000
0500-39200-0400-032000
0500-39200-0400-033000 Part of:
0500-39200-0400-034000 0500-39400-0100-018000
0500-39200-0400-035000
0500-39200-0400-036000 0500-39400-0100-021002
0500-39200-0400-037000
0500-39200-0400-038000 Part of:
0500-39200-0400-039000 0500-39400-0100-068009
0500-39200-0400-040000
0500-39200-0400-044000 0500-39400-0100-069000
0500-39200-0400-045000 0500-39400-0100-097000
0500-39300-0100-008000 0500-39400-0100-098000
0500-39300-0100-009000 0500-39403-0100-001001
0500-39300-0100-010000 0500-39403-0100-001002
0500-39300-0100-011000 0500-39403-0100-002000
0500-39300-0100-015001 0500-39403-0100-003000
0500-39300-0100-016000 0500-39403-0200-001000
0500-39300-0100-017000 0500-39403-0200-002000
0500-39300-0100-018000 0500-39403-0200-003000
0500-39300-0100-019000 0500-39403-0200-004000
0500-39300-0100-021000 0500-41900-0100-001000
0500-39300-0100-023001 0500-41900-0100-005000
0500-39300-0100-023003 0500-41900-0100-006000
0500-39300-0100-024000 0500-41900-0100-010000
0500-39300-0100-025000 0500-41900-0100-011000
0500-39300-0100-026000 0500-41900-0100-015000
0500-39300-0100-027000 0500-41900-0100-018000
§ 68-180.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.3
66:808
0500-39300-0100-028000 0500-41900-0100-019000
0500-39300-0100-029000 0500-41900-0100-020000
0500-39300-0100-030001 0500-41900-0100-021000
0500-39300-0100-031001 0500-41900-0100-022000
0500-39300-0200-034000 0500-41900-0100-028000
0500-39300-0200-056000 0500-41900-0100-030000
0500-39300-0200-057000 0500-41900-0100-031000
0500-39300-0200-058000 0500-41900-0100-032004
0500-39300-0200-059000 0500-41900-0100-033000
0500-39300-0200-060000 0500-41900-0100-034000
0500-39300-0200-061000 0500-41900-0100-035000
0500-39300-0200-062000 0500-41900-0100-036000
0500-39300-0200-063000 0500-41900-0100-039001
0500-39300-0200-064000 0500-41900-0100-041002
0500-39300-0200-065000 0500-41900-0100-041003
0500-39300-0200-066000 0500-41900-0100-042000
0500-39300-0200-067000 0500-41900-0100-043000
0500-39300-0200-068000 0500-41900-0100-044001
0500-39300-0200-069000 0500-41900-0100-044003
0500-39300-0200-070000 0500-41900-0100-044008
0500-39300-0200-071000 0500-41900-0100-045000
0500-39300-0200-072000 0500-41900-0100-046002
0500-39300-0200-073000 0500-41900-0100-047000
0500-39300-0200-075000 0500-41900-0100-048000
0500-39300-0200-077000 0500-41900-0100-049000
0500-39300-0200-078000 0500-41900-0100-050000
0500-39300-0200-079000 0500-41900-0100-051000
0500-39300-0200-080000 0500-41900-0300-002001
0500-39300-0200-081000 0500-41900-0300-006001
0500-39300-0200-083002 0500-41900-0300-006002
0500-39300-0200-083003 0500-41900-0300-007000
0500-39300-0200-090000 0500-41900-0300-008000
0500-39300-0200-091000 0500-41900-0300-009000
0500-39300-0200-091001 0500-41900-0300-010000
0500-39300-0200-092000 0500-41900-0300-059000
0500-39300-0200-093000 0500-41900-0300-060000
0500-39300-0200-097000 0500-41900-0300-061000
§ 68-180.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.3
66:809
0500-39300-0200-098000 0500-41900-0300-062000
0500-39300-0200-099001 0500-41900-0300-064000
0500-39300-0200-099002 0500-41900-0300-065000
0500-39300-0200-100000 0500-41900-0300-066000
0500-39300-0200-101000 0500-41900-0300-067000
0500-39300-0200-102000 0500-41900-0300-068000
0500-39300-0200-103000 0500-41900-0300-069000
0500-39300-0200-104000 0500-41900-0300-070000
0500-39300-0200-105000 0500-41900-0300-071000
0500-39300-0200-106000 0500-41900-0300-072000
0500-39300-0200-107000 0500-41900-0300-073000
0500-39300-0200-108001 0500-41900-0300-074001
0500-39300-0200-109000 0500-41900-0300-074002
0500-39300-0200-110000 0500-41900-0300-075000
0500-39300-0200-111000 0500-41900-0300-076000
0500-39300-0200-113000 0500-41900-0300-077000
0500-39300-0200-114000 0500-41900-0300-078000
0500-39300-0200-115000 0500-41900-0300-079000
0500-39300-0200-116000 0500-41900-0300-080000
0500-39300-0200-118001 0500-41900-0300-081000
0500-39300-0200-122000 0500-41900-0300-082000
0500-39300-0200-123000 0500-41900-0300-084002
0500-39300-0200-124003 0500-41900-0300-085001
0500-39300-0200-125001 0500-41900-0300-085003
0500-39300-0200-125003 0500-41900-0300-085004
0500-39300-0200-126000 0500-41900-0300-086000
0500-39300-0200-127000 0500-41900-0300-088000
0500-39300-0200-128000
0500-39300-0200-129001 Part of:
0500-39300-0200-129002 0500-41900-0400-029000
0500-39300-0200-130000
0500-39300-0200-131000 0500-41900-0400-030000
0500-39300-0200-132000 0500-41900-0400-031000
0500-39300-0200-133000 0500-41900-0400-032000
0500-39300-0200-134000 0500-41900-0400-033000
0500-39300-0200-135000 0500-41900-0400-034000
0500-39300-0200-136000 0500-41900-0400-035000
§ 68-180.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.3
66:810
0500-39300-0200-138000 0500-41900-0400-036000
0500-39300-0200-138001 0500-41900-0400-037000
0500-39300-0200-140000 0500-41900-0400-038000
0500-39300-0200-141000 0500-41900-0400-039000
(2) Specific portions of downtown Bay Shore lying within the extent of
the above-described area shall not be included within the
Downtown Bay Shore District. The Official Map shall contain a
boundary line showing the extent of such excluded area. Said line
shall show the exclusion of any such Suffolk County tax parcel
listed below:
0500-36700-0300-070000 0500-39300-0300-081002
0500-36700-0300-071000 0500-39300-0300-082000
0500-36700-0300-072000 0500-39300-0300-083000
0500-36700-0300-087000 0500-39300-0300-084000
0500-39300-0300-047000 0500-39300-0300-091000
0500-39300-0300-048000 0500-39300-0300-092000
0500-39300-0300-049000 0500-39300-0300-093000
0500-39300-0300-050001 0500-39300-0300-094000
0500-39300-0300-051001 0500-39300-0300-095000
0500-39300-0300-052001 0500-39300-0300-096000
0500-39300-0300-053000 0500-39300-0300-097000
0500-39300-0300-063000 0500-39300-0300-098000
0500-39300-0300-064000 0500-39300-0300-099000
0500-39300-0300-065000 0500-39300-0300-104000
0500-39300-0300-066000 0500-39300-0300-105000
0500-39300-0300-067000 0500-39300-0300-106000
0500-39300-0300-068000 0500-39300-0300-107000
0500-39300-0300-069000 0500-39300-0300-108000
0500-39300-0300-070000 0500-39300-0300-109000
0500-39300-0300-071000 0500-39300-0300-110000
0500-39300-0300-072002 0500-39300-0300-111000
0500-39300-0300-074000 0500-39300-0300-122000
0500-39300-0300-075000 0500-39300-0300-123000
0500-39300-0300-076000 0500-39300-0300-124000
0500-39300-0300-077000 0500-39300-0300-125000
0500-39300-0300-078000 0500-39300-0300-126000
0500-39300-0300-079000 0500-39300-0300-127000
§ 68-180.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.3
66:811
§ 68-180.4. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-4-1994; 2-28-2017;
10-16-2018]
0500-39300-0300-080000 0500-39300-0300-128000
0500-39300-0300-081001 0500-39300-0300-129006
B. All development within a Downtown Development District, including
but not limited to housing, circulation improvements, commercial
developments, recreation and open space and development timing,
shall be consistent with the policies and objectives of the Town of Islip
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Application for a change of zone to "DDD" shall be conditional upon the
existence of or proposal for public facilities adequate to support the
proposed development, including but not limited to adequate sanitary
waste disposal, roads and pedestrian access to mass transit facilities, as
normally provided in a downtown area.
D. Applicability of the development standards contained herein will be
contingent on the provision at the time of development of on-site
amenities as noted in § 68-180.6 et. seq.
A. No use shall be permitted in this district unless a minimum of three
public amenities or mitigations described in § 68-180.6 are provided. In
a Downtown Development District, no building, structure or premises
shall be so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Apartment house, garden apartment, attached single-family
dwelling, or multistory condominium or cooperative.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Retail establishments, except gasoline service stations, vehicle
repair, new or used motor vehicle dealerships, trailer or motorcycle
sales or service.
(4) Service establishment, including professional, personal and repair
services other than those for automotive, marina or heavy
equipment.
(5) Processing or manufacturing of goods purely incidental to retail
business(es) conducted on the premises and similar to or of no
more objectionable nature than the following: bakery,
confectionery or ice cream store, florist, interior decorator,
photographer, printer, furrier or tailor or optician.
(6) Mixed-use buildings.
(7) Office(s).
§ 68-180.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.4
66:812
§ 68-180.4.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board
after public hearing. [Added 10-16-2018]
§ 68-180.5. Accessory uses.
§ 68-180.5.1. Affordable housing requirement.
All residential development within the Downtown Development District
shall provide that a minimum of 20% of the total dwellings in the approved
plan be deemed affordable. The schedule of affordable housing provision
shall be approved by the Town of Islip Department of Planning and
Development in consultation with the Community Development Agency
prior to the issuance of any building permit. Cash contributions to any
approved affordable housing fund, in lieu of actual construction of
affordable housing, may satisfy this requirement at the direction of the
Town Attorney.
§ 68-180.6. Development bonus provisions. [Amended 10-16-2018]
(8) Uses permitted as per §§ 68-256, 68-257, 68-257.1, and 68-257.2.
These uses shall be permitted as of right.
A. Hospital.
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot with the authorized use:
(1) Private parking garage.
(2) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(3) Facial signs, as regulated in Article XXIX.
(4) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
B. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot as the principal
building.
A. Intent. This provision, allowing for the awarding of development
bonuses to those applicants who provide certain specified public
amenities (see § 68-180.6B), is designed to improve the working,
shopping and living environment of the Town's hamlet centers by:
(1) Encouraging the retention and development of attractive and
useful open space.
(2) Improving pedestrian circulation.
(3) Encouraging a mix of land uses and housing types which take
advantage of nearby mass transportation facilities.
§ 68-180.4 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.6
66:813
(4) Improving traffic circulation and parking.
(5) Arranging and designing buildings to provide light and air to
streets and other properties and to preserve and enhance scenic
views.
(6) Encouraging the development of attractive, pedestrian-oriented
retail areas.
(7) Encouraging the provision and use of both passive and active
recreation areas.
(8) Preserving and/or increasing the quantity and quality of
landscaping.
(9) Encouraging creative and superior architectural design.
B. Examples of amenities, subject to the approval of the Town Board,
which could meet the above mitigations include but are not limited to:
(1) Additional off-street parking made available for public use.
(2) Additional setback at grade, allowing for sidewalk widening or
plaza with landscaping and/or unique paving design.
(3) Public street crosswalks.
(4) Sidewalk canopy.
(5) Additional open space, enhancement of existing open space, and
ecological restoration.
(6) Unique landscaping.
(7) Private or public recreational opportunities.
(8) Pedestrian connector.
(9) Off-site improvements to parks, open space, transit facilities, and
streetscape within the Downtown Development District.
(10)Off-street passenger loading (for hotels, apartment, condominium,
or housing cooperative buildings, etc.).
(11) Arcade (street or internal).
(12) Interior freight loading.
(13) Provision for special uses, e.g., theaters.
(14) Subsurface, concourse or bridge connections to other buildings.
(15) Design chosen by architectural competition.
(16) Cash contribution toward the Downtown Development Fund in lieu
of the above.
§ 68-180.6 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.6
66:814
C. Development standards. [Amended 12-17-2019]
Building Type
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Lot
Size
(sq. ft.) Max. FAR1
Maximum
Density
Yard Requirements
Attached single -
family townhome
35 feet or 3
stories
21,500 (per
unit lot)
0.60 17 units per
acre
*
Garden apart
ment
35 feet or 3
stories
40,000 0.60 17 units per
acre
*
Apartment house2 65 feet or 5
stories
20,000 2.0 — *
Office-commercial
65 feet or 5
stories
10,000 2.0 — *
Mixed-use building6 65 feet or 5
stories
10,000 2.5 Minimum
average
gross floor area
per apartment
500
square feet
*
Hospital 110 feet3 or 6
stories
600,000 0.64 — See Note 5
Notes:
* As may be required by the Planning Board, based on the site plan review process.
1 FAR = Floor Area Ratio.
2 Also multistory condominium/cooperative having a common entrance area. Apartment houses shall be
prohibited on Main Street (New York State Route 27A).
3 Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, excluding parking garages.
Parking garages shall have a maximum of 65 feet or five stories.
4 FAR may be increased to a maximum of 1.5, subject to the construction of a parking garage. Parking
garages shall not be included in the calculation of FAR.
5 For a hospital, the minimum yard requirements for the main building shall be as follows: primary front
yard of 100 feet, second front yard of 65 feet, through lot front yard of 65 feet, side yards of 100 feet each,
and rear yard of 100 feet. Accessory buildings, excluding parking garages, shall be required to maintain
the following setbacks: primary front of 85 feet, second front yard of 35 feet, through lot front yard of
65 feet, side yards of 65 feet each, rear yard of 65 feet. Parking garages accessory to a hospital shall
have a minimum setback of 25 feet from any street property line, except for those portions of the garage
fronting on a street where the opposite side of the street is zoned as Downtown Development District,
the setback shall then be a minimum of five feet.
§ 68-180.6 WATER QUALITY § 68-180.6
66:815
§ 68-180.7. Permitted encroachments. [Added 10-16-2018]
The following encroachments within the yard requirements are hereby
permitted:
§ 68-180.8. (Reserved)
§ 68-180.9. Architectural requirements.
Notes:
6 A minimum of 50% of the gross floor area of the first floor shall be comprised of commercial space for a
mixed use building.
A. Open canopy or overhang for hospital patient dropoff or pickup areas;
covered walkways.
A. The Planning Department reserves the right to require additional
architectural elements, including but not limited to front porches and
decorative windows. The design and materials of all elements of the
building shall be subject to Planning Division approval.
B. Existing structures cannot be removed or modified without the
approval of the Planning Division or issuance of an approved site plan
and/or building permits.
C. Surface parking underneath buildings shall be screened from public
view pursuant to the direction of the Planning Department. [Added
12-17-2019]
§ 68-180.6 ISLIP CODE § 68-180.9
66:816
ARTICLE XIV
Use District Regulations: General Service C District
§ 68-181. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-25-1992; 4-8-1997]
In a General Service C District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be
so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-182. through § 68-183. (Reserved)191
§ 68-184. Accessory uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include activity
commonly conducted as a business.
§ 68-184.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 3-23-1999]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-185. Height. [Amended 4-8-1997; 9-11-2001; 9-19-2017]
A. Nursing home or skilled nursing facility.
B. Hospital.
C. (Reserved)
D. Adult day-care facility.
E. Child day-care center.
F. Adult home or assisted-living facility.
G. Life-care community or continuum-care facility.
A. No building or structure shall be erected or altered to a height in excess
of 35 feet or two stories.
B. A hospital, skilled nursing facility, assisted-living facility, or continuumcare
facility may be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet or two
stories with the approval of the Town Board after due public hearing,
and provided that the portion of the building which is erected in excess
of 35 feet shall be set back one additional foot for each additional foot of
height with relation to front yards, rear yards and side yards.
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
191. Editor's Note: Former § 68-182, Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing, as amended 9-18-1973 and 8-27-1974, was repealed 11-1-1988. Former
§ 68-183, Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals after public hearing,
amended 11-1-1988, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-181 WATER QUALITY § 68-185
66:817
§ 68-186. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 11-1-1988]
The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR of
0.40.
§ 68-187. Area density. [Amended 4-8-1997]
The minimum required lot area for a hospital shall be 120,000 square feet.
The minimum required lot area for other permitted uses shall be 30,000
square feet.
§ 68-188. Width of lot.
§ 68-189. Front yard.
D. No accessory building shall be erected or altered to a height in excess
of 18 feet.
A. The minimum required width of lot for all permitted uses shall be 150
feet throughout. [Amended 4-8-1997]
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 40 feet
back from the front property line, and
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line, and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum front yard setback for a hospital shall be 100 feet, unless
arterial highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII). The minimum
front yard setback for other permitted uses shall be 40 feet, unless
arterial highway setback is greater. [Amended 4-8-1997]
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot in a
General Service C District shall also have a front yard facing the side
street. This front yard shall be a minimum of 30 feet, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 40 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see
Article XXXII).
D. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building in a General Service C District shall have a
minimum front yard setback of 80 feet.
§ 68-185 ISLIP CODE § 68-189
66:818
§ 68-190. Side yards.
§ 68-191. Rear yard.
§ 68-192. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-193. Exterior site improvements, land clearing and parking.
[Amended 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
(2) Accessory buildings on corner lots shall have a minimum front yard
setback from the side street of 50 feet.
A. Permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected in a General
Service C District shall have a side yard along each lot line other than a
street or rear line. The sum of the width of the two side yards shall be
50 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 25 feet. The
required space of a side yard shall remain open and unobstructed
except for permitted encroachments or other features of a strictly
landscape or ornamental character or nature.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings in a General Service C District shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. All main buildings in a General Service C District shall have a minimum
rear yard of 35 feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and projecting not
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
§ 68-189 WATER QUALITY § 68-193
66:819
§ 68-194. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. The exterior site improvements and land clearing of property shall be
regulated under the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
and Article XXXI of this chapter.
B. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width, in accordance with Town
standards, shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
§ 68-193 ISLIP CODE § 68-194
66:820
ARTICLE XV
Use District Regulations: General Service D District
§ 68-195. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-18-1979; 8-19-1980;
11-1-1988; 4-8-1997]
In a General Service D District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be
so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-196. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-196.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board.
[Added 12-17-2019]
A. Offices.
B. (Reserved)192
C. Funeral parlor/home.
D. Child day-care center.
E. Mini-storage warehouse, provided that the lot on which the use is
located has frontage along Sunrise Highway or the Long Island
Expressway. [Added 5-15-2018]
F. Adult day-care facility.
G. Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the building.
[Added 1-14-2003]
H. Churches or other similar places of worship, parish houses, libraries or
municipal buildings or uses, provided that a twenty-five-foot buffer is
provided and maintained adjacent to any residential use or zone in
accordance with Town standards and a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating compliance
with all applicable land development standards. [Added 8-5-2014]
I. Broadcasting. [Added 8-5-2014]
A. (Reserved)
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
192. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Hospital, was repealed 5-15-2018.
§ 68-195 WATER QUALITY § 68-196.1
66:821
§ 68-197. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-198. Accessory uses. [Amended 4-8-1997]
Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business.
§ 68-198.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-199. Height.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
B. Uses.
(1) Outdoor storage of registered passenger vehicles, recreational
vehicles or marine vessels, including rental moving trucks as an
accessory use to a mini storage warehouse, provided that all
vehicles are set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any street
and 200 feet from any residential use or zone and provided that
such vehicles are properly screened from view with fencing and/or
landscaping pursuant to the direction of the Planning Board. Said
storage shall consist of no more than 20% of the overall area of the
site and height of vehicles shall not exceed 20 feet. Outdoor storage
shall not count towards minimum parking requirements. A
supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations when said outdoor storage is
adjacent to a residential use or zone.
A. Historical or memorial monument.
B. (Reserved)193
C. (Reserved)194
A. The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District except as herein provided.
B. A medical center, professional building, mortuary or undertaking parlor
shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two stories; provided, however, that
in a specific application and after a public hearing, the Town Board may
193. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Private or parochial school, was repealed 6-22-1999.
194. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, College building or use, was repealed 6-22-1999.
§ 68-196.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-199
66:822
§ 68-200. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 11-1-1988;
5-15-2018]
The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR of
0.40, except as provided herein.
§ 68-201. Area density. [Amended 11-1-1988; 5-15-2018]
The minimum required lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, except as
provided herein.
§ 68-202. Width of lot
permit additional height and grant additional stories, and further
provided that the portion of the building which is erected in excess of
35 feet shall be set back a minimum of one additional foot for each
additional foot of height with relation to front yards, rear yard and side
yards.
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
D. Any mini-storage building shall have a minimum of two stories. [Added
5-15-2018]
A. A mini-storage warehouse and its associated accessory structures shall
not occupy more than 40% of the lot on which they are situated. The
floor area ratio may be increased to a maximum of 0.65, subject to
complying with the following criteria:
(1) The submission of a surety bond to cover the costs of demolition of
all or part of the mini-storage warehouse to allow for its future
conversion to other permitted uses in a fashion compliant with the
permissible FAR in the General Service D district and the
requirements of the subdivision and land development regulations.
The Planning Board shall have the authority to waive or modify this
requirement.
(2) A thirty-foot strip of landscaping shall be provided along street
frontages, except for driveways and curb cuts.
(3) The incorporation of renewable energy that provides for a
minimum of 50% of the building's energy demand.
(4) Use of "superior architecture," as defined in § 68-3, Word usage
and definitions, on the facade for building elevations that are
visible from streets.
(5) Use of architecture similar to the superior architecture on the
facade for building elevations that are not visible from streets.
A. The minimum required plot area for a mini-storage warehouse shall be
60,000 square feet.
§ 68-199 WATER QUALITY § 68-202
66:823
§ 68-203. Front yard.
§ 68-204. Side yards.
A. The minimum width of lot shall be 100 feet throughout. [Amended
11-1-1988]
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 25 feet
back from the front property line;
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line; and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this chapter.
A. The minimum front yard setback for all buildings shall be 25 feet from
all streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article
XXXII.) [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a General
Service D District abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district,
the minimum front yard setback for the building on the plot in the
General Service D District shall be the minimum requirement for the
front yard setback in the residence district, unless arterial highway
setback is greater. (See Article XXXII.)
C. Corner lots. All main buildings erected on a corner lot in a General
Service D District shall have a front yard facing the side street. This
front yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet unless arterial highway
setback is greater. (See Article XXXII.)
D. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See
Article XXXII.)
A. Permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected in a General
Service D District shall have a side yard along each lot line other than a
street or rear line. The sum of the width of the two side yards shall be
30 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet. The
required space of a side yard shall remain open and unobstructed
except for permitted encroachments or other features of a strictly
landscape or ornamental character or nature.
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a General
Services D District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts
other than GSD, then the minimum required side yard for all main
buildings in a GSD District shall be equal to the more restrictive side
yard so abutted.
§ 68-202 ISLIP CODE § 68-204
66:824
§ 68-205. Rear yard.
§ 68-206. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-207. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
§ 68-208. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings in a General Service D District shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. All main buildings in a General Service D District shall have a minimum
rear yard of 35 feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and projecting not
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards
shall be maintained adjacent to any residential zone or use.
§ 68-204 WATER QUALITY § 68-208
66:825

ARTICLE XVI
Use District Regulations: General Service E District
§ 68-209. Permitted uses.195 [Added 11-1-1988; amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-210. (Reserved)196
§ 68-210.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 4-8-1997]
§ 68-210.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
A. Hotel (motel).
B. (Reserved)
C. Boardinghouse or lodging house.
A. Private parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principle
use.
B. Minor restaurant as an accessory use to a hotel, except as otherwise
provided herein. [Amended 9-12-2000]
C. Restaurant as an accessory use to a hotel. [Added 9-12-2000]
D. Bar, tavern, or nightclub as an accessory use to a hotel. [Added
10-25-2011]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant as an accessory use to a hotel.
195. Editor's Note: Former § 68-209, Permitted uses, was repealed 12-7-1971.
196. Editor’s Note: Former § 68-210, Uses permitted by special permit from Town after public
hearing, added 4-8-1997, was comprised of Subsections A and B. Former Subsection A,
Restaurant as an accessory use to a hotel, was repealed 9-12-2000. Former Subsection B,
Bar, tavern or nightclub as an accessory use to a hotel, was repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 68-209 WATER QUALITY § 68-211
66:827
§ 68-211. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
The uses permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Appeals after a
public hearing shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA
District when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals,
and no other.
§ 68-212. Accessory use. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-212.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-213. Height.
§ 68-214. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 11-1-1988]
The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR of
0.40.
§ 68-215. Area density. [Amended 11-1-1988]
The minimum required lot area for a hotel, motel, boardinghouse or lodging
house shall be 40,000 square feet and not less than 1,250 square feet of lot
area for each sleeping room.
§ 68-216. Width of lot.
A. Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business.
B. Child day-care center as an accessory use to a permitted principal use.
A. The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District except as herein provided.
B. The maximum height permitted is 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories. Additional
height may be permitted by the Town Board when considering a change
of zone application for this use district. [Amended 11-1-1988]
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The minimum width of lot for a hotel, motel, boatel, lodging house or
boardinghouse shall be 150 feet throughout. [Amended 9-4-1973]
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 40 feet
back from the front property line.
§ 68-211 ISLIP CODE § 68-216
66:828
§ 68-217. Front yard.
§ 68-218. Side yards.
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line.
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum front yard setback for a hotel, motel, lodging house or
boardinghouse shall be 25 feet, unless arterial highway setback is
greater (see Article XXXII). [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot in a
General Service E District shall also have a front yard facing the side
street. This front yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
C. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a General
Service E District abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district,
the minimum front yard setback for the building on the plot in the
General Service E District shall be the minimum requirement for the
front yard setback in the residence district.
D. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setbacks are greater (see
Article XXXII).
E. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building in a General Service E District shall have a
minimum front yard setback of 50 feet.
(2) Accessory buildings on corner lots shall also have a minimum front
yard setback from the side street of 50 feet.
A. Permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected in a General
Service E District shall have a side yard along each lot line other than a
street or rear line. The sum of the width of the two side yards shall be
30 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards of 15 feet.
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a General
Service E District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts other
than General Service E District, then the minimum required side yards
for all main buildings in the General Service E District shall be equal to
the more restrictive side yard so abutted.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings in a General Service E District shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet.
§ 68-216 WATER QUALITY § 68-218
66:829
§ 68-219. Rear yard.
§ 68-220. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-221. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
§ 68-222. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. All main buildings in a General Service E District shall have a minimum
rear yard of 35 feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and projecting not
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
§ 68-218 ISLIP CODE § 68-222
66:830
ARTICLE XVII
Use District Regulations: General Service F District
[Amended 12-21-1971]
§ 68-223. Permitted uses.
In a General Service F District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be
so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-224. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
Shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District when
authorized by a special permit from the Town Board after a public hearing,
and no other.
§ 68-225. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
Shall be the same as those permitted in a Residence AAA District when
authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals, and no other.
§ 68-226. Accessory uses.
No accessory use or structure shall be permitted in a General Service F
District except those permitted in a Residence AAA District.
§ 68-226.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-227. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home without inside toilets and
bath and is prohibited in a mobile home park as defined in this ordinance.
LICENSEE — Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this ordinance.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure having been
constructed with wheels (whether or not such wheels have been removed)
and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings and so
designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, being not less than 10 feet by 50 feet in dimensions.
A. Mobile home parks shall be permitted in this district and in no other
district.
B. Modular home park. [Added 1-3-1984]
§ 68-223 WATER QUALITY § 68-227
66:831
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile
homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MODULAR HOME — A prefabricated dwelling unit which is permanently
affixed to a continuous foundation with no wheels or axles anywhere on the
structure.[Added 1-3-1984]
MODULAR HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more
modular homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are
located.[Added 1-3-1984]
PARK — A mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
SHALL — The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 68-228. License.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home
park within the limits of the Town of Islip unless such person shall first
obtain a license therefor, except that the construction, maintenance or
operation of a mobile home park in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance may be continued.
§ 68-229. License fees.
§ 68-230. Application for license. [Amended 6-8-2010]
A. The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be $3 per
mobile home.
B. The fee for transfer of a license shall be $1 per mobile home.
A. Application for initial license, Application for an initial mobile home
park license shall be filed with the Building Division. The application
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the
following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
§ 68-232 of this ordinance.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home
park.
§ 68-227 ISLIP CODE § 68-230
66:832
§ 68-231. Location.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Building
Division to enable them to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements. The application and all
accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. If
the application and proposed plans and specifications are found to
be in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance and all other
applicable ordinances and statutes, the Chief Building Inspector
shall approve the application and issue a building permit, and, upon
completion of the park according to the plans, shall issue the
license.
(6) A minimum fee of $50, plus $5 for each mobile home in excess of 20
homes, as shown on the proposed plans and specifications.
B. Application for renewal license. Upon application, in writing, by a
licensee for renewal of a license, and upon payment of the annual
license fee, a certificate renewing such license for another year shall be
issued by the Building Division.
C. Application for transfer of license. Upon application, in writing, for
transfer of a license and payment of the transfer fee, the Building
Division shall issue a transfer.
A. Mobile homes. [Added 2-28-1978]
(1) Any mobile home park or individual mobile home which is located
within Zones AL-30 on the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps must have:
(a) The elevation of the lots elevated to or above the base flood
level.
(b) Adequate access and drainage provided.
(c) If pilings are used for elevation, the lot must be large enough to
permit steps and such pilings must be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart and reinforcement must be provided
for pilings more than six feet above the ground.
(2) These standards are in accordance with the Department of Housing
and Urban Development Regulation, Chapter X, Subchapter B, Part
1910.3(c)(5)(iii). Said regulation and any amendments thereto are
incorporated by reference into this section.
B. Where any boundary of a park directly abuts property which is
improved with a permanent residential building located within 25 feet
of such boundary, or directly abuts unimproved property which may
under existing laws and regulations be used for permanent residential
construction, a fence or other form of screening or buffer shall be
§ 68-230 WATER QUALITY § 68-231
66:833
§ 68-232. Mobile home park plan.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
provided along such boundary as the Engineering Division may require.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
C. All mobile homes to be placed within Zone A on the Town of Islip Flood
Hazard Boundary Map shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground
anchors. Special requirements shall be that over-the-top ties be
provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two
additional ties per side at intermediate locations, mobile homes less
than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; frame ties be
provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at
intermediate points, mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side; all components of the anchoring system be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and any additions to the
mobile home be similarly anchored. [Added 7-11-1978]
A. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
insure rapid drainage and free from stagnant pools of water, and shall
be a minimum of 10 acres.
B. Each park shall provide mobile home spaces and each such space shall
have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except that the
Planning Board is authorized to permit a cluster arrangement of said
mobile homes to enable and encourage flexibility of design and
development of the land in such a manner as to promote most
appropriate use of land and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities
of open land: provided, however, that the number of mobile homes shall
in no case exceed the number which could be permitted under the
terms of this ordinance; and be it further provided, however, that
mobile home parks which, at the time of the adoption of this ordinance,
existed lawfully with mobile home spaces that do not comply with any of
the foregoing minimum area and width or minimum average area and
average width requirements may continue to operate and shall be
excused from such compliance.
C. Mobile homes shall be so located on each space so that there shall be at
least a twenty-foot clearance between mobile homes. No mobile home
shall be located closer than 10 feet to any building or roadway within
the park. No mobile home shall be located closer than 25 feet to any
property line of the park abutting upon a public street or highway,
except for such other distance as may be established by ordinance as a
front yard or setback requirement with respect to conventional
buildings in the district in which the mobile home park is located.
D. All roadways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced and
lighted at night.
§ 68-231 ISLIP CODE § 68-232
66:834
§ 68-233. Water supply.
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall
be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces within the
park.
§ 68-234. Service buildings.
§ 68-235. Sewage and refuse disposal.
Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories and slop
sinks in service and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into
a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a
private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction
and in such manner as will present no health hazard and which is approved
by the Suffolk County Department of Environmental Control and the Suffolk
County Department of Health.
§ 68-236. Garbage receptacles.
Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall
be located on the mobile home space. The cans shall be kept in a sanitary
E. An electrical outlet supplying at least 100-115/220-250 volts, 100
amperes, shall be provided for each mobile home space.
F. Each mobile home space shall be provided with two off-street parking
spaces, and no on-street parking shall be permitted. Accessory camper
vehicles, travel vehicles, boats or other vehicles and cars shall not be
stored or parked on individual mobile home spaces or in any street or
roadway, public or private, but shall be stored or parked in a screened
central storage area within the boundaries of the park.
A. Service buildings, if provided, housing sanitation facilities, shall be
permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and
statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems.
B. The service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well-ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of such moisture-proof material, which may be painted
woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. during the period from
October 1 to May 1. The floors of the service buildings shall be of waterimpervious
material.
C. All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in
a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will
menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a
nuisance.
§ 68-232 WATER QUALITY § 68-236
66:835
condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed
of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall
not overflow.
§ 68-237. Fire protection.
Every park shall provide and be equipped with fire extinguishing equipment
in good working order, such as hydrants, fire extinguishers, warning and
alarm signals, to the satisfaction of the Fire Prevention Officer of the Town
of Islip.
§ 68-238. Roadways within mobile home parks.
All roadways in every park must be maintained in a passable and dustfree
condition at all times and shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. Said
roadways shall be kept unobstructed at all times.
§ 68-239. Rentals.
Rental of mobile homes shall not be permitted within a park.
§ 68-240. Revocation of license. [Amended 6-8-2010]
The Chief Building Inspector, or his designee, may revoke any license to
maintain and operate a park when the licensee has been found guilty by a
court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this ordinance.
After such conviction, the license shall be reissued if the circumstances
leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained
and operated in full compliance with the law.
§ 68-241. Posting of license.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of, or on
the premises of, the mobile home park at all times.
§ 68-241.1. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
§ 68-241.2. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be an offense which
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $250 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or both for a second or
subsequent offense.
§ 68-241.3. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997]
§ 68-236 ISLIP CODE § 68-241.3
66:836
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
use or zone.
§ 68-241.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-241.3
66:837

ARTICLE XVIII
Use District Regulations: Recreation Service G District
§ 68-242. Permitted uses.
§ 68-243. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-8-1997; 9-12-2000;
4-5-2005]
(Reserved)
A. The following uses shall be permitted in this district, provided that
adequate sanitary, parking and drainage facilities are installed:
[Amended 8-30-1977]
(1) Golf course with attendant facilities, including a clubhouse,
whether or not conducted for gain or profit.
(2) Tennis courts.
(3) Swimming pool.
(4) Cabanas, lockers or bathhouses, wading pool.
(5) Drive-in movie theaters. [Added 11-1-1988]
(6) Performing arts centers. [Added 11-1-1988]
(7) Bowling alleys. [Added 11-1-1988]
(8) Gymnasiums and health clubs. [Added 11-1-1988]
(9) Skating rinks, indoor or outdoor. [Added 11-1-1988]
(10) Miniature golf, driving ranges and batting ranges. [Added
11-1-1988]
(11)Racquetball, squash, handball and similar court and field games.
[Added 11-1-1988]
(12) Commercial stables and riding academies. [Added 11-1-1988]
(13) Billiard hall. [Added 4-8-1997]
(14) Health club. [Added 4-8-1997]
(15) Child day-care center. [Added 4-8-1997]
B. (Reserved)197
197. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding accessory uses, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-242 WATER QUALITY § 68-243.1
66:839
§ 68-243.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 9-12-2000]
The following uses are permitted by special permit from the Planning Board
after public hearing.
§ 68-243.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
A. Minor restaurant when operated in conjunction with a permitted use,
except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Restaurant when operated in conjunction with a permitted use.
C. Private club mooring wharf for pleasure craft only, provided that there
is no repair work or sale of any products other than petroleum products
on the premises. [Added 4-5-2005]
D. Automobile parking field, provided that the field shall be used for
parking automobiles in conjunction with a use allowed in a Recreation
Service G District and a site plan is submitted to and approved by the
Planning Board or its designee indicating compliance with all
applicable requirements, including the provisions of a buffer in
accordance with Town standards. [Added 4-5-2005]
E. Private membership club, fraternity or lodge; provided, however, that
no use shall be permitted when conducted for gain, profit or as a
commercial venture. [Added 4-5-2005]
F. Indoor recreational uses not specified in § 68-242. [Added
12-17-2019]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant when operated in conjunction with a permitted
use.
§ 68-243.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-244
66:840
§ 68-244. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Amended 4-8-1997]
The following uses are permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Appeals after public hearing:
§ 68-245. Accessory uses.
No accessory use or structure shall be permitted in a Recreation Service G
District except the following:
§ 68-245.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-246. Height.
A. Community building.
B. (Reserved)198
C. (Reserved)199
D. Private boathouse or bathhouse when not an accessory use to a onefamily
dwelling.
E. Historical or memorial monument.
F. Boat berths, when not an accessory use to a one-family dwelling: one
for every 35 feet of water frontage up to three.
A. (Reserved)200
B. Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business. [Amended 4-8-1997]
A. The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District except as herein provided.
B. Permitted buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two stories;
provided, however, that in a specific application and after a public
hearing, the Town Board may permit additional height and grant
additional stories, and further provided that the portion of the building
which is erected in excess of 35 feet shall be set back a minimum of one
additional foot for each additional foot of height with relation to front
yards, rear yard and side yards.
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
198. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Private or parochial school, was repealed 6-22-1999.
199. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, College building or use, was repealed 6-22-1999.
200. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding restaurants and bars, was repealed
11-1-1988.
§ 68-244 WATER QUALITY § 68-247
66:841
§ 68-247. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 11-1-1988]
§ 68-248. Area density.
The minimum required lot area for the uses permitted herein shall be
20,000 square feet.
§ 68-249. Width of lot.
§ 68-250. Front yard.
§ 68-251. Side yards.
A. The total building area, including all buildings shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.40.
B. A restaurant or bar shall not exceed an FAR of 0.05.
A. The minimum width of lot for the uses permitted herein shall be 100
feet throughout.
B. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot has the required width as measured parallel to and 25 feet
back from the front property line;
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel, and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line; and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum front yard setback for a building or structure permitted
herein shall be 25 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback
is greater (see Article XXXII).
B. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a Recreation
Service G District abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district,
the minimum front yard setback for the building on the plot in a
Recreation Service G District shall be the minimum requirement for the
front yard setback in the residence district.
C. Corner lots. All main buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a
front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall have at least a
twenty-five-foot setback, unless the arterial highway setback is greater
(see Article XXXII).
D. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see
Article XXXII).
§ 68-247 ISLIP CODE § 68-251
66:842
§ 68-252. Rear yard.
§ 68-253. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-254. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
A. Permitted buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected in a
Recreation Service G District shall have a side yard along each lot line
other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width of the two side
yards shall be 30 feet with a minimum width of either of such side yards
of 15 feet. The required space of a side yard shall remain open and
unobstructed except for permitted encroachments or other features of
a strictly landscape or ornamental character or nature.
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a Recreation
Service G District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts other
than RSG, then the minimum required side yard for all main buildings in
an RSG District shall be equal to the more restrictive side yard so
abutted.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings in a Recreation Service G District shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. All main buildings in a Recreation Service G District shall have a
minimum rear yard of 35 feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
(2) Exception. Structures designed for and used in connection with
mechanical sewerage treatment plants shall not be closer to any
property line than 50 feet.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and projecting not
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
§ 68-251 WATER QUALITY § 68-254
66:843
§ 68-255. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards
shall be maintained adjacent to any residential zone or use.
§ 68-254 ISLIP CODE § 68-255
66:844
ARTICLE XIX
Use District Regulations: Business District (BD)
§ 68-256. Permitted uses.
In a Business District (BD), no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. (Reserved)201
B. (Reserved)202
C. (Reserved)203
D. Store, office or bank.
E. (Reserved)204
F. Broadcasting studio.
G. Community building.
H. Personal service establishments, including but not limited to
barbershops, beauty parlors or shoe repair shops.
I. Laundromat.
J. Retail dry-cleaning establishment using New York Board of Fire
Underwriters' Class I liquids.
K. Place of business of the following and businesses of a similar and no
more objectionable nature, provided that any manufacture or
processing of goods on the premises is clearly incidental to retail
business conducted on the premises. The parking requirements and
necessary site improvements for these uses are to be determined by the
Planning Board. [Amended 4-5-2005; 2-28-2017]
Baker Florist Photographer
Confectioner Furrier Printer
Decorator Milliner Tailor
Dressmaker Optician Needle Trades
Artist Artisan Hand-craftsmen
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which designated single-family detached dwellings as
permitted uses, was repealed 6-8-2010. See now § 68-257.1E.
202. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which designated two-family detached dwellings as
permitted uses, was repealed 6-8-2010. See now § 68-257.1L.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding university or college buildings, added
4-21-1998, was repealed 3-23-1999.
204. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which designated restaurants, luncheonettes, etc., as
permitted uses, was repealed 9-7-1976 and subsequently repealed and removed from the
Code 6-8-2010.
§ 68-256 WATER QUALITY § 68-256
66:845
§ 68-257. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
Microbrewer
L. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
M. Historical or memorial monument.
N. Church or other similar place or worship, or parish house, provided that
a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards is
maintained adjacent to any residential use or zone and a site plan is
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board, or its designee,
indicating compliance with all applicable land development standards.
[Amended 4-8-1997]
O. Automobile parking field, provided that a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board or its designee in accordance with all
Town standards. [Amended 4-8-1997]
P. Additional structures and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that all requirements of this ordinance are met.
Q. Funeral parlor/home. [Added 1-7-1986; amended 4-8-1997;
8-5-2014]
R. (Reserved)205
S. (Reserved)206
T. Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the building.
[Added 4-8-1997]
U. (Reserved)207
V. Public, private or parochial school, including child day-care centers,
preschool programs, elementary and secondary schools, vocational
schools and other non-degree-granting schools, including self-defense,
dance, swimming, gymnastics and similar instruction/programs, except
those associated with manufacturing or truck driving. [Added
3-23-1999; amended 8-5-2014]
W. Museum. [Added 6-8-2010]
A. 208 University or college dormitory or similar residential use. [Added
4-21-1998]
205. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection R, Child day-care center, added 1-7-1986, as amended,
was repealed 8-5-2014.
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection S, Dental clinic, added 1-7-1986, was repealed 4-8-1997.
207. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection U, Public school, added 3-23-1999, was repealed
8-5-2014.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Motor vehicle salesrooms, was repealed 3-5-1985.
§ 68-256 ISLIP CODE § 68-257
66:846
§ 68-257.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after a public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997;
3-23-1999; 9-12-2000]
B. (Reserved)209
C. (Reserved)210
D. Community theater. [Amended 4-8-1997]
E. (Reserved)211
F. (Reserved)212
G. (Reserved)213
H. (Reserved)214
I. (Reserved)215
A. Minor restaurant, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Outside display, except as otherwise provided herein.
C. Billiard hall.
D. Health club, except as otherwise provided herein.
E. (Reserved)216
F. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
G. Mixed-use building, provided the commercial use occupies a minimum
of 30% of the gross floor area of the building. [Amended 2-28-2017]
H. Private parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principle
use.
209. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Automobile repair shops, was repealed 3-5-1985.
210. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Automobile storage garage, was repealed 9-12-2000.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Mixed-use building, added 4-8-1997, was repealed
9-12-2000.
212. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding private parking garages, added 4-8-1997,
was repealed 9-12-2000.
213. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Boardinghouses or lodging houses, added 12-7-1971,
was repealed 1-21-1992.
214. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Restaurant, added 9-7-1976, as amended, was
repealed 9-12-2000.
215. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, regarding bars, taverns and nightclubs, was repealed
10-25-2011. Former Subsection J, regarding medical centers and offices, added 1-7-1986,
as amended, former Subsection K, regarding nursing and rest homes, added 1-7-1986, and
former Subsection L, regarding convenience markets, added 9-16-1986, all of which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 4-8-1997.
216. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding single-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-257 WATER QUALITY § 68-257.1
66:847
§ 68-257.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
I. Restaurant. [Amended 9-11-2001]
J. Any single-user freestanding retail use in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area. [Added 4-5-2005]
K. The location of a bank drive-in window as accessory to a bank facility.
[Added 4-5-2005]
L. (Reserved)217
M. Bar, tavern, or night club. [Added 10-25-2011]
N. Outside seating and/or outside bar service as an accessory use to a
permitted bar, tavern or nightclub, subject to the following
requirements: [Added 10-25-2011]
(1) The outdoor area shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any
single-family residence.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers of any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) The outside area shall not be permitted to operate past 2:00 a.m.
(4) Outside seating shall be permitted on the sidewalk area adjacent to
a dedicated roadway between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. for dining purposes only, provided it does not encroach onto
the sidewalk by more than 50% and further provided there is a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet. If on-street
parking is permitted adjacent to the sidewalk, then a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk area of five feet shall be required. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. [Amended
6-19-2012]
O. Assembly and social recreation hall. [Added 6-19-2012]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
217. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection L, regarding two-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-257.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-257.2
66:848
§ 68-258. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
§ 68-259. Accessory uses.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
(2) Outside display.
(3) Health club.
A. Public utility where no repair or storage facilities are maintained.
B. Single-family detached dwelling, provided the requirements for height,
yard setbacks, plot area and width, and occupancy for dwellings in a
Residence AA District are met. [Added 12-17-2019]
C. Two-family detached dwelling, provided the requirements for height,
yard setbacks, plot area and width, and occupancy for two-family
dwellings in a Residence CAA District are met. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot with the authorized use:
(1) Private garage.
(2) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(3) Signs as permitted and regulated in Article XXIX.
(4) Game room as an accessory to a bar, tavern or nightclub only.218
[Added 12-17-2019]
(5) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
[Amended 12-15-1981]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
218. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(4), Game center, added 12-15-1981, was repealed
8-5-2014.
§ 68-257.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-259
66:849
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-257 or by special exception pursuant to § 68-258, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by that Board which authorized the use.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the erection,
alteration, addition, maintenance or use of premises which shall
provide outside storage, carhopping service or drive-through service.
[Amended 7-7-1987; 10-6-1987; 4-8-1997; 9-11-2001]
E. Within a Business District (BD) zone only, outside seating may be
permitted as of right as an accessory use to a restaurant or minor
restaurant use, provided the site otherwise complies with all applicable
Code requirements and subject to the following requirements: [Added
9-11-2001]
(1) Outside seating shall be subject to the prior written approval of the
Planning Department, which Department shall have the authority
to require whatever information may be necessary to evaluate such
a request and may charge a reasonable fee for this review.
(2) Outside seating shall be permitted for dining purposes only. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. No outside
bar shall be permitted. In no case shall the service of alcohol be
permitted off site.
(3) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(4) Outside seating shall only be permitted to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(5) Outside seating shall be permitted on the subject parcel or on the
sidewalk area adjacent to a dedicated roadway, provided it does not
encroach onto the sidewalk by more than 50% and further provided
there is a minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet. If onstreet
parking is permitted adjacent to the sidewalk, then a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of five feet shall be required.
[Amended 10-13-2010]
F. Within a Business District (BD), a walk-up counter or service window
may be permitted as of right as an accessory use to a restaurant or
minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise complies with all
applicable Code requirements and subject to the following
requirements: [Added 9-11-2001]
(1) A walk-up counter or service window shall be subject to the prior
written approval of the Planning Department, which Department
shall have the authority to require whatever information may be
necessary to evaluate such a request and may charge a reasonable
fee for this review.
§ 68-259 ISLIP CODE § 68-259
66:850
§ 68-259.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-260. Height.
§ 68-261. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 11-1-1988]
(2) A walk-up counter or service window shall be permitted for food
purposes only. Service of alcoholic beverages from a walk-up
counter or service window shall not be permitted.
(3) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(4) A walk-up counter or service window shall only be permitted to
operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(5) A minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of at least eight feet shall
be maintained in front of any walk-up counter or service window.
A. Buildings and structures. [Amended 11-1-1988; 12-17-2019
(1) In Business BD District, no building or structure shall be erected or
altered to a height in excess of 35 feet or three stories.
(2) The Planning Department reserves the right to require additional
architectural elements, such as cornices, parapets, pitched roofs
and windows. The design and materials of all elements of the
building shall be subject to Planning Division approval.
B. Dwellings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) The height regulations for detached dwellings shall be the same as
those in the Residence AAA District.
C. Accessory buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.60.
B. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a single-family dwelling.
C. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.60 for other permitted buildings.
D. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a two-family dwelling.
§ 68-259 WATER QUALITY § 68-262
66:851
§ 68-262. Area density. [Amended 11-1-1988; 9-11-2001]
§ 68-263. Living area.
§ 68-264. Width of lot.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family detached dwelling
or two-family dwelling shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. (Reserved)
C. The minimum required plot area for business uses shall be 7,500 square
feet except as otherwise provided herein.
D. (Reserved)219
E. The minimum required plot area for a community building, nonprofit
fraternity or lodge, church or other similar place of worship, or parish
house, funeral parlor/home, public school, private or parochial school,
university or college dormitory, and community theater shall be 20,000
square feet. [Amended 9-11-2001]
A. For a single-family dwelling hereafter erected, the minimum required
ground floor area, exclusive of attached garages, carports, open
porches and breezeways, shall be:
(1) For a one-story dwelling, 900 square feet.
(2) For a two-story dwelling where the second story contains the same
living area as the first story, the minimum ground floor area shall
be 650 square feet, and both stories must be finished in accordance
with the provisions of the New York State Building Code.
B. For all other types of dwellings, the minimum living area of the ground
floor shall be 750 square feet; provided, however, that at least 150
square feet of living area above the ground floor must be finished in
accordance with the provisions of the New York State Building Code.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, "ground floor area" shall mean the area
within the exterior walls of the dwelling at grade level, and further
provided that the distance from floor to ceiling shall not be more than
50% below grade.
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family detached dwelling, a
two-family detached dwelling, lodging house or boardinghouse
shall be 100 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for all permitted buildings shall be 65
feet except as otherwise provided herein.
219. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding minimum lot area requirements for a
lodging house or boardinghouse, amended 11-1-1998, was repealed 2-28-2017.
§ 68-262 ISLIP CODE § 68-264
66:852
§ 68-265. Front yard.
(3) The minimum width of lot for a hotel, motel, boatel shall be 150 feet
throughout.
(4) The minimum width of lot for an indoor moving picture theater,
community building, church or other similar place of worship,
parish house shall be 100 feet throughout.
(5) The minimum width of lot for all uses permitted pursuant to
§§ 68-257 and 68-258 shall be 100 feet throughout.
(6) The minimum width of lot for all other permitted uses shall be 100
feet throughout.
B. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot requirements
of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. Main building. All buildings, except one-family and two-family
residences, hereafter erected shall have a minimum frontyard setback
of one foot and a maximum frontyard setback of 25 feet from all streets,
except as otherwise provided. (See § 68-265G.) In addition, in a BD
District parking shall be prohibited from said front yard area unless
modified by the Planning Board. [Amended 4-8-1997; 4-21-1998;
5-28-2008]
B. One-family and two-family dwellings. All residences hereafter erected
in a BD District shall have a minimum front yard setback as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling, 40 feet.
(2) One-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 30 feet facing the side street.
(3) One-family dwelling upon a through lot, 40 feet from each street.
(4) Two-family dwellings, 25 feet.
(5) Two-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 25 feet facing the side street.
(6) Two-family dwelling upon a through lot, 25 feet from each street.
C. Other permitted buildings. Buildings permitted in a BD District
pursuant to § 68-256C, F, H, M and O shall have a minimum front yard
setback of 25 feet from all streets.
D. (Reserved)220
§ 68-264 WATER QUALITY § 68-265
66:853
§ 68-266. Side yards.
No side yards shall be required except as otherwise provided in the Building
Code.
§ 68-267. Rear yard.
§ 68-268. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments shall be permitted.
§ 68-269. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
9-4-1973]
This district is specifically designed to encompass the so-called "downtown"
areas of the Town of Islip. These areas do not have adequate parking, and
in each "downtown" section the Town has endeavored to purchase land
and provide parking itself. Therefore, the following guidelines are to be
followed:
E. Corner lots. All main buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a
front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall have at least a
ten-foot setback, unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article
XXXII).
F. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 10 feet shall be required
on both street frontages of a through lot, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
G. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a BD District
abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district, the minimum front
yard setback for the building on the plot in a BD District shall be the
minimum requirement for the front yard setback in the residence
district.
A. Main and accessory buildings.
(1) All buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear yard of
not less than 10 feet.
(2) (Reserved)221
A. For other than residential buildings, whenever there is a reconstruction
of a building, as long as the reconstruction is not eliminating any
existing parking, there shall be imposed no parking requirements.
B. Parking within the front yard area shall be prohibited. All parking shall
be located to the rear or side of the building pursuant to the direction of
the Planning Board. [Added 4-8-1997]222
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Accessory buildings, was repealed 11-1-1988.
221. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding accessory buildings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
§ 68-265 ISLIP CODE § 68-269
66:854
§ 68-270. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
C. If a new building is constructed, if an existing building is altered or
expanded so as to increase its total floor area or if the use of a building
is changed to one which generates a need for more parking spaces than
required by the previous use, then parking facilities must comply with
Article XXXI of Chapter 68 and the Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations. [Amended 5-7-1985; 8-19-1986; 4-5-2005]
D. Curbs and curb cuts. Curbing shall be installed on all street frontages in
accordance with Article XXXI. Curb cuts are to be located and
maintained in accordance with Article XXXI.
E. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed along all street frontages in
accordance with Article XXXI.
F. Screen planting. Screen planting shall be installed in accordance with
Article XXXI. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance
with Town standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any
residential use or zone. [Amended 4-8-1997]
G. Buildings. Windows of occupied or unoccupied buildings shall not be
removed nor shall such windows be boarded up for a period exceeding
10 working days without the approval of the Commissioner of the
Department of Planning, Housing and Development. Such approval may
be granted by the Commissioner in those circumstances where the
building is under construction or reconstruction, has been damaged by
fire or when the owner or occupant, for reasons beyond his control, is
unable to obtain replacement materials. [Added 2-5-1985]
H. Except as provided herein, all improvements required pursuant to the
Islip Town Code and Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
shall be maintained. [Added 4-8-1997]
222. Editor's Note: A former Subsection B, which provided guidelines for off-street parking and
self-contained drainage for new residences and multiple dwellings, was repealed 5-7-1985.
§ 68-269 WATER QUALITY § 68-270
66:855

ARTICLE XX
Use District Regulations: Business 1 District
§ 68-271. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-6-1973; 7-3-1973; 4-15-1975;
8-19-1980; 3-15-1983; 1-7-1986; 2-25-1992; 11-17-1992; 4-8-1997]
In a Business 1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. Museum. [Amended 4-5-2005; 6-8-2010]
B. Craft trade shop.223 [Added 12-17-2019]
C. Public school. [Added 3-23-1999]
D. Store, office, bank, broadcasting studio, laundromat and community
building.
E. Private or parochial school, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools, vocational schools and other non-degreegranting
schools including self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics
and similar instruction/programs, except those associated with
manufacturing or truck driving. [Added 3-23-1999]
F. Personal service establishment, including but not limited to
barbershop, beauty parlor, shoe repair shop.
G. Retail dry-cleaning establishment using New York Board of Fire
Underwriters' Class I liquids.
H. The operation of any retail business if the same is confined to the
interior of the building, except as otherwise provided herein.
I. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
J. Historical or memorial monument.
K. Church or other similar place of worship or parish house, provided that
a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards is
maintained adjacent to any residential use or zone and a site plan is
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board, or its designee,
indicating compliance with all applicable land development standards.
L. Collateral loan broker.224 [Added 6-23-2009]
M. Mini-storage warehouse, provided that the lot on which the use is
located has frontage along Sunrise Highway or the Long Island
Expressway. [Added 5-15-2018]
223. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which designated two-family detached dwellings as
permitted uses, was repealed 6-8-2010. See now § 68-272.1P.
224. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding the outdoor sale and display of holiday
plants, was repealed 8-14-2007. See now § 68-271.1A.
§ 68-271 WATER QUALITY § 68-271
66:857
§ 68-271.1. Uses permitted with administrative approval of Town
Clerk. [Added 8-14-2007]
Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk shall be as
follows:
N. Child day-care center.
O. (Reserved)225
P. Funeral parlor/home. (Note: Funeral parlors/homes and child day-care
centers were previously permitted in BD and Business I Districts by
virtue of being permitted in General Service Districts and will continue
to be permitted.)
Q. (Reserved)226
R. Health club.
S. Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the building.
A. By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the outdoor sale
and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es) and/or plant(s) used as
a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or religiously significant season,
including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other
holiday and/or religiously significant plants or decorations.
(1) The following guidelines shall be followed by the Town Clerk:
(a) A permit shall be for a maximum of 30 days. Only one permit
shall be issued per location and/or applicant per calendar year.
(b) The applicant for a permit shall show proof of being a legal
business entity in the State of New York. A New York State
sales tax number shall be required.
(c) The applicant shall provide a lease and/or deed and/or other
such proof of permission of the owner of the property on which
the sales are to occur. Sales on or within the right-of-way of any
roadway shall require proof of permission of the governmental
agency having jurisdiction.
(d) A cash bond of $500 shall be deposited with the Town Clerk's
office. This bond shall be returned when sales have ceased and
the site is found to be clean and neat and all materials/goods
are removed therefrom. Failure to remove materials/goods
within 10 days of the expiration date of the permit will result in
the forfeiture of the bond or a portion thereof sufficient to
provide for the removal and disposal of any debris, materials or
225. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, which listed elementary and secondary schools,
colleges, correspondence and vocational schools and other non-degree-granting schools,
was repealed 3-23-1999.
226. Editor's Note: Former Subsection Q, listing dental clinic, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-271 ISLIP CODE § 68-271.1
66:858
§ 68-272. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
goods found on the subject parcel. The applicant shall, as part
of his or her request for the release of the bond, provide dated
photographs of the site and a receipt for the disposal of the
materials/goods formerly sold on the subject parcel.
(e) No permit is to be issued for a vacant or undeveloped property
within 1,500 feet of an established and legal business which
commonly engages in the sales of horticultural and/or floral
products throughout the year.
(f) Prior to the issuance of the permit, it is to be determined with
the aid of the Planning Department, the Engineering Division
and the Traffic Safety Division that the site is of adequate size
to accommodate the use, that the site has adequate access and
on-site parking and that there would appear to be no public
safety issues and/or public nuisance issues created and/or
exacerbated by the proposed use. This review shall take place
within 10 working days from the submission of the application.
(g) For legally established and registered nonprofit groups, there
shall be no fee for a permit nor shall a cash bond be required.
(h) Existing licensed peddlers shall continue to be regulated under
Chapter 39 of the Town Code, entitled "Peddlers."
(i) Proof of liability insurance in accordance with that required in
Chapter 39 of the Town Code entitled "Peddlers" shall be filed
with the Town Clerk at the time of issuance of the permit.
(2) The Town Clerk shall be hereby empowered to create the necessary
applications and set the appropriate fees for the permit. The Town
Clerk shall also have the right to require additional information as
may be needed to implement and facilitate the permitting process.
(3) Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the above provisions
shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of an offense, which shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500
for each and every day said violation shall occur.
A. (Reserved)227
B. (Reserved)228
C. (Reserved)229
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, listing indoor theater or motion-picture house, was
repealed 4-8-1997.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which listed hotels, added 12-7-1971, was repealed
9-16-1986.
§ 68-271.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-272
66:859
§ 68-272.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997;
4-21-1998; 3-23-1999; 9-12-2000]
D. (Reserved)230
E. (Reserved)231
F. (Reserved)232
G. Psychiatric clinics or similar health-related facilities, excluding
overnight residential treatment facilities. [Added 1-7-1986; amended
4-8-1997]
H. (Reserved)233
A. Minor restaurants, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. (Reserved)234
C. Outside seating as an accessory use to a restaurant or minor restaurant
use, provided the site otherwise complies with all applicable Code
requirements, and subject to the following requirements: [Amended
9-11-2001]
(1) Outside seating shall be permitted for dining purposes only. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. No outside
bar shall be permitted. In no case shall the service of alcohol be
permitted off site.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) Outside seating shall only be permitted to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) Outside seating shall be permitted on the subject parcel or on the
sidewalk area adjacent to a dedicated roadway, provided it does not
encroach onto the sidewalk by more than 50% and further provided
there is a minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet.
229. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, University or college dormitory or similar residential
use, added 3-23-1999, was repealed 5-15-2018.
230. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding bars, taverns and nightclubs, added
4-8-1997, was repealed 10-25-2011.
231. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Restaurants, added 6-5-1973, as amended, was
repealed 9-12-2000.
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Manufacture exclusively limited to needle trades,
added 1-6-1981, was repealed 9-12-2000.
233. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Nursing homes or rest homes, added 1-7-1986, was
repealed 5-15-2018. Former Subsection K, Assembly and social recreation hall, added
4-8-1997, was repealed 9-12-2000. Former Subsection J, regarding stores or offices on Fire
Island, was repealed 4-5-2005.
234. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding billiard halls, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-272 ISLIP CODE § 68-272.1
66:860
D. (Reserved)235
E. Outside display, except as otherwise provided herein.
F. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
G. Restaurant.
H. Assembly and social recreation hall.
I. A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with all applicable Code requirements and subject to the
following requirements: [Added 9-11-2001]
(1) A walk-up counter or service window shall be permitted for food
purposes only. Service of alcoholic beverages from a walk-up
counter or service window shall not be permitted.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) A walk-up counter or service window shall only be permitted to
operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) A minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of at least eight feet shall
be maintained in front of any walk-up counter or service window.
J. Taxi office, when adjacent to a residential use or zone. [Added
5-20-2003; amended 5-15-2018]
K. Stores or offices, located on Fire Island in a Business 1 District, in
which goods or commodities or services are sold at retail and solely in
support of community activities. [Added 4-5-2005]
L. Any single-user freestanding retail use in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area. [Added 4-5-2005]
M. A drive-through window for a bank, as an accessory to said use, subject
to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added 4-5-2005;
amended 5-28-2008; 6-8-2010]
N. (Reserved)236
O. A drive-through window for a pharmacy facility, as an accessory to said
use, subject to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added
6-8-2010]
P. (Reserved)237
235. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding single-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, regarding spray booths, added 6-12-2007, as
amended, was repealed 6-19-2012.
§ 68-272.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-272.1
66:861
§ 68-272.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
Q. Bar, tavern, or nightclub. [Added 10-25-2011]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria: [Amended
5-15-2018]
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.238
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
(2) Outside seating as an accessory use to a restaurant or minor
restaurant use, provided the site otherwise complies with the
provisions of Subsection A of this section and subject to the
requirements set forth in § 68-272.1C of this article. [Amended
9-11-2001; 4-5-2005]
(3) Outside display.
(4) A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with the provisions of Subsection A of this section and
subject to the requirements set forth in § 68-272.1I of this article.
[Added 9-11-2001; amended 4-5-2005]
(5) Outdoor storage of registered passenger vehicles, recreational
vehicles or marine vessels, including rental moving trucks as an
accessory use to a mini storage warehouse, provided that all
vehicles are set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any street
and 200 feet from any residential use or zone and provided that
such vehicles are properly screened from view with fencing and/or
landscaping pursuant to the direction of the Planning Board. Said
storage shall consist of no more than 20% of the overall area of the
site and height of vehicles shall not exceed 20 feet. Outdoor storage
237. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection P, regarding two-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
238. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding spray booths, which immediately
followed, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-272.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-272.2
66:862
§ 68-273. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Amended 4-21-1998; 4-5-2005]
§ 68-274. Accessory uses.
shall not count towards minimum parking requirements. A
supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations when said outdoor storage is
adjacent to a residential use or zone. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. Public utility when no repair or storage facilities are maintained.
B. The location of a wholesale food-distribution station in any business
district.
C. Single-family detached dwelling and accessory structures, provided the
requirements for height, yard setbacks, plot area and width, and
occupancy in a Residence AA District are met. [Added 12-17-2019]
D. Two-family detached dwelling, provided the requirements for height,
yard setbacks, plot area and width, and occupancy for two-family
dwellings in a Residence CAA District are met. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot of the authorized use:
(1) Private garage.
(2) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(3) Signs as regulated and permitted in Article XXIX.
(4) Game center. [Added 12-15-1981239]
(5) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
[Amended 12-15-1981]
(6) Minor restaurant accessory to a retail use of no less than 25,000
square feet in gross floor area, and subject to the following
conditions: [Added 2-28-2017]
(a) The minor restaurant shall share the same entrance as the
retail use, and not have its own entrance.
(b) The minor restaurant shall not have its own exterior signage.
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building; and no accessory building shall be
239. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 1-3-1982.
§ 68-272.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-274
66:863
§ 68-274.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-275. Height.
§ 68-276. Percentage of lot occupancy.
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced; and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Wherever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-272 or § 68-272.1, or special exception pursuant to § 68-273, no
accessory use shall be permitted unless the same shall have been
specifically authorized by that board which authorized the use.
[Amended 8-5-2014]
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the erection,
alteration, addition, maintenance or use of any premises which shall
provide outdoor storage, car-hopping service or drive-through service.
[Amended 2-16-1971; 4-8-1997; 9-11-2001]
A. Buildings and structures.
(1) In Business B1 District, no building or structure shall be erected or
altered to a height in excess of 35 feet.240
B. Dwellings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) The height regulations for detached dwellings shall be the same as
those in the Residence AAA District.
C. Accessory buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
E. Any mini-storage building shall have a minimum of two stories. [Added
5-15-2018]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.40. [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a single-family dwelling. [Amended 11-1-1988]
C. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.40 for other permitted buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988]
240. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), Exception, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-274 ISLIP CODE § 68-276
66:864
§ 68-277. Area density.
D. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a two-family dwelling. [Amended 11-1-1988]
E. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the total lot area
nor more than 25% of the rear yard area.
F. A mini-storage warehouse and its associated accessory structures shall
not occupy more than 40% of the lot on which they are situated. The
floor area ratio may be increased to a maximum of 0.65 subject to
complying with the following criteria: [Added 5-15-2018]
(1) The submission of a surety bond to cover the costs of demolition of
all or part of the mini-storage warehouse to allow for its future
conversion to other permitted uses in a fashion compliant with the
permissible FAR in the Business 1 district and the requirements of
the subdivision and land development regulations. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement.
(2) A thirty-foot strip of landscaping shall be provided along street
frontages.
(3) The incorporation of renewable energy that provides for a
minimum of 50% of the building's energy demand.
(4) Use of "superior architecture," as defined in § 68-3, Word usage
and definitions, on the facade for building elevations that are
visible from streets.
(5) Use of architecture similar to the superior architecture on the
facade for building elevations that are not visible from streets.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family detached dwelling
shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. The minimum required plot area for a two-family dwelling shall be
20,000 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1997]
C. The minimum required plot area for business uses shall be 7,500 square
feet except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended 11-1-1988;
9-11-2001]
D. The minimum required lot area for a lodging house or boardinghouse
shall be 40,000 square feet and not less than 1,250 square feet of lot
area for each sleeping room. [Amended 11-1-1988]
E. The minimum required plot area for public school, private or parochial
school, nonprofit fraternity or lodge, church or other similar place of
worship or parish house, funeral parlor/home, university or college
dormitory, psychiatric clinics or similar health-related facilities, nursing
homes or rest homes shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended
9-11-2001]
§ 68-276 WATER QUALITY § 68-277
66:865
§ 68-278. Living area. [Amended 4-5-2005]
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those required
in the Business District.
§ 68-279. Width of lot.
§ 68-280. Front yard.
F. The minimum required plot area for a mini-storage warehouse shall be
60,000 square feet. [Added 5-15-2018]
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family detached dwelling, a
two-family detached dwelling, lodging house or boardinghouse
shall be 100 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for all permitted buildings shall be 65
feet except as otherwise provided herein.
(3) (Reserved)241
(4) The minimum width of lot for an indoor moving picture theater,
mini-storage warehouse, community building, church or other
similar place of worship or parish house shall be 100 feet
throughout. [Amended 5-15-2018]
(5) The minimum width of lot for all uses permitted pursuant to
§§ 68-272 and 68-273 shall be 100 feet throughout.242
B. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with the adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot
requirements of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such
amendment and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this
ordinance.
A. Main building. All buildings, except one-family and two-family
residences, hereafter erected, shall have a minimum front yard setback
of 10 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater
(see Article XXXII), and except as otherwise provided (see § 68-280F).
[Amended 5-21-2013]
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
241. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding minimum lot width for a hotel, motel or
boatel, was repealed 5-15-2018.
242. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding minimum lot width for all other
permitted uses, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-15-2018.
§ 68-277 ISLIP CODE § 68-280
66:866
§ 68-281. Side yards.
§ 68-282. Rear yard.
least 10 feet except as otherwise provided herein, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII). [Amended 8-5-2014]
C. One-family and two-family dwellings. All residences hereafter erected
in a B1 District shall have a minimum front yard setback, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII), as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling, 40 feet.
(2) One-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have second front yard
of 30 feet facing the side street.
(3) One-family dwelling upon a through lot, 40 feet from each street.
(4) Two-family dwellings, 25 feet.
(5) Two-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 25 feet facing the side street.
(6) Two-family dwellings upon a through lot, 25 feet from each street.
D. Other permitted buildings. Buildings permitted in a B1 District
pursuant to § 68-271C, F, H and M shall have a minimum front yard
setback of 25 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback is
greater (see Article XXXII).
E. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings in a B1 District shall have a
minimum setback of 35 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
F. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a B1 District
abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district, the minimum front
yard setback for the building on the plot in a B1 District shall be the
minimum requirement for the front yard setback in the residence
district.
A. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard along each
lot line other than a street or a rear line. Side yards shall be 10 feet.
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a Business 1
District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts other than B1,
then the minimum required side yard for all buildings in a B1 District
shall be the more restrictive side yard so abutted.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a
minimum rear yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater
depth shall be required to accomplish rear yard transition.
B. Rear yard transition. Whenever any rear yard of a plot in a B1 District
abuts a plot or plots in one or more residence use districts, the
§ 68-280 WATER QUALITY § 68-282
66:867
§ 68-283. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments shall be permitted.
§ 68-284. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
§ 68-285. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
minimum required rear yard of all main or accessory buildings in a B1
District shall be 15 feet.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition.
(2) Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
§ 68-282 ISLIP CODE § 68-285
66:868
ARTICLE XXI
Use District Regulations: Business 2 District
§ 68-286. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-5-1973; 7-3-1973;
12-18-1979; 11-17-1992; 4-8-1997]
In a Business 2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used or
occupied and no building or part thereof or any other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. Museum. [Amended 6-8-2010]
B. (Reserved)243
C. Store, office, bank, broadcasting studio, laundromat and community
building.
D. Collateral loan broker. [Added 6-23-2009]
E. Personal service establishments, including but not limited to
barbershop, beauty parlor, shoe repair shop.
F. Retail dry-cleaning establishment using New York Board of Fire
Underwriters' Class I liquids.
G. (Reserved)244
H. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
I. Historical or memorial monument.
J. Church or other similar place of worship, or parish house, provided that
a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards is
maintained adjacent to any residential use or zone and a site plan is
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board, or its designee,
indicating compliance with all applicable land development standards.
K. (Reserved)245
L. Automobile parking field, provided that a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board or its designee indicating compliance
with all Town standards.
M. Health club.
N. Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the building.
O. Child day-care center.
243. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which designated two-family detached dwellings as
permitted uses, was repealed 6-8-2010. See now § 68-287.1O.
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding retail businesses allowed in a Business 1
District, was repealed 9-12-2000.
245. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding the outdoor sale and display of holiday
plants, as amended, was repealed 8-14-2007. See now § 68-286.1A.
§ 68-286 WATER QUALITY § 68-286
66:869
§ 68-286.1. Uses permitted with administrative approval of Town
Clerk. [Added 8-14-2007]
Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk shall be as
follows:
§ 68-287. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
P. Public school. [Added 3-23-1999]
Q. Private or parochial school, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools and other non-degree-granting schools including
self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics and similar instruction/
programs, except those associated with manufacturing or truck driving.
[Added 3-23-1999]
A. By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the outdoor sale
and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es) and/or plant(s) used as
a symbol of expressing holiday and/or religiously significant season,
including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other
holiday and/ or religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to
the provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
A. 246University or college dormitory or similar residential use. [Added
3-23-1999]
B. (Reserved)247
C. (Reserved)248
D. (Reserved)249
E. (Reserved)250
F. (Reserved)251
G. Psychiatric clinics, drug-treatment centers or similar health related
facilities, excluding overnight residential treatment facilities. [Added
4-8-1997]
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Indoor theater or motion-picture house, was repealed
4-8-1997.
247. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Bars, taverns and nightclubs, added 4-8-1997, was
repealed 10-25-2011.
248. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Motels and boatels, added 12-7-1971, was repealed
9-16-1986.
249. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Boardinghouse or lodging house, added 12-7-1971,
was repealed 9-19-2017.
250. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Restaurants, added 11-14-1995, as amended, was
repealed 9-12-2000.
251. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Convenience market, added 9-16-1986, was repealed
4-8-1997.
§ 68-286 ISLIP CODE § 68-287.1
66:870
§ 68-287.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997;
3-23-1999; 9-12-2000]
A. Minor restaurant, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Assembly and social recreation hall. [Amended 12-17-2019]
C. Outside seating as an accessory use to a restaurant or minor restaurant
use, provided the site otherwise complies with all applicable Code
requirements, and subject to the following requirements: [Amended
9-11-2001]
(1) Outside seating shall be permitted for dining purposes only. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. No outside
bar shall be permitted. In no case shall the service of alcohol be
permitted off site.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) Outside seating shall only be permitted to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) Outside seating shall be permitted on the subject parcel or on the
sidewalk area adjacent to a dedicated roadway, provided it does not
encroach onto the sidewalk by more than 50% and further provided
there is a minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet.
D. Convenience market.
E. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
F. Restaurant.
G. A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with all applicable Code requirements and subject to the
following requirements: [Added 9-11-2001]
(1) A walk-up counter or service window shall be permitted for food
purposes only. Service of alcoholic beverages from a walk-up
counter or service window shall not be permitted.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) A walk-up counter or service window shall only be permitted to
operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) A minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of at least eight feet shall
be maintained in front of any walk-up counter or service window.
§ 68-287.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-287.1
66:871
§ 68-287.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
H. Taxi office. [Added 5-20-2003]
I. Any single-user freestanding retail use in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area. [Added 4-5-2005]
J. A drive-through window for a bank, as an accessory to said use, subject
to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added 4-5-2005;
amended 5-28-2008; 6-8-2010]
K. Outside display, except as otherwise provided herein. [Added
4-5-2005]
L. (Reserved)252
M. A drive-through window for a pharmacy facility, as an accessory to said
use, subject to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added
6-8-2010]
N. (Reserved)253
O. (Reserved)254
P. Bar, tavern, or nightclub. [Added 10-25-2011]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
(2) Outside seating as an accessory use to a restaurant or minor
restaurant use, provided the site otherwise complies with the
252. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding spray booths, added 6-12-2007, as
amended, was repealed 6-19-2012.
253. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection N, regarding single-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
254. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection O, regarding two-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-287.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-287.2
66:872
§ 68-288. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
§ 68-289. Accessory uses.
provisions of Subsection A of this section and subject to the
requirements set forth in § 68-287.1C of this article. [Amended
9-11-2001; 4-5-2005]
(3) Outside display.
(4) A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with the provisions of Subsection A of this section and
subject to the requirements set forth in § 68-287.1G of this article.
[Added 9-11-2001; amended 4-5-2005]
A. Public utility when no repair or storage facilities are maintained.
B. The location of a wholesale food distribution station in any business
district.
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot with the authorized use:
(1) Private garage.
(2) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(3) Signs as regulated and permitted in Article XXIX.
(4) Game center. [Added 12-15-1981255]
(5) Other customary accessory uses, structures and building, provided
that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business.256
[Amended 12-15-1981]
(6) Minor restaurant accessory to a retail use of no less than 25,000
square feet in gross floor area, subject to the conditions in
§ 68-274. [Added 2-28-2017]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
255. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 1-3-1982.
256. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding spray booths, added 5-28-2008, which
immediately followed, was repealed 6-19-2012.
§ 68-287.2 WATER QUALITY § 68-289
66:873
§ 68-289.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-290. Height.
§ 68-291. Percentage of lot occupancy.
§ 68-292. Area density.
C. Wherever a use has been authorized by a special permit pursuant to
§ 68-287 or special exception pursuant to § 68-288, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by the Board which authorized the use.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the erection,
alteration, addition, maintenance or use of premises which shall
provide outside storage, carhopping service or drive-through service.
[Amended 9-11-2001]
A. Buildings and structures.
(1) In a B2 District, no building or structure shall be erected or altered
to a height in excess of 35 feet.257
B. Dwellings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) The height regulations for detached dwellings shall be the same as
those in the Residence AAA District.
C. Accessory buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.30. [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a single-family dwelling. [Amended 11-1-1988]
C. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.30 for other permitted buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988]
D. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25 for a two-family dwelling. [Amended 11-1-1988]
E. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the total lot area
nor more than 25% of the total rear yard area.
257. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), Exception, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-289 ISLIP CODE § 68-292
66:874
§ 68-293. Living area. [Amended 4-5-2005]
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those required
in the Business District.
§ 68-294. Width of lot.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family detached dwelling
or a two-family detached dwelling shall be 20,000 square feet.
[Amended 8-5-2014]
B. The minimum required plot area for business uses shall be 7,500 square
feet, except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended 4-8-1997;
8-5-2014]
C. The minimum required plot area for a convenience market shall be
20,000 square feet. [Amended 11-1-1988; 9-11-2001; 8-5-2014]
D. (Reserved)258
E. The minimum required plot area for nonprofit fraternity or lodge,
church or other similar place of worship or parish house, public school,
private or parochial school, university or college dormitory, and
psychiatric clinics, drug treatment centers or similar health-related
facilities shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended 9-11-2001]
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family detached dwelling, or
a two-family detached dwelling, shall be 100 feet throughout.
[Amended 9-19-2017]
(2) The minimum width of lot for all permitted buildings shall be 65
feet, except as otherwise provided herein.
(3) (Reserved)259
(4) The minimum width of lot for a community building, church or
other similar place of worship or parish house shall be 100 feet
throughout. [Amended 4-8-1997]
(5) The minimum width of lot for all uses permitted pursuant to
§§ 68-287 and 68-288 shall be 100 feet throughout.
(6) The minimum width of lot for all other permitted uses shall be 100
feet throughout.
B. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
258. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, which set forth the minimum required lot area for a
lodging house or boardinghouse, as amended 11-1-1988, was repealed 9-19-2017.
259. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3), which set forth the minimum lot width for a hotel,
motel or boatel, was repealed 9-19-2017.
§ 68-292 WATER QUALITY § 68-294
66:875
§ 68-295. Front yard.
§ 68-296. Side yards.
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with the adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot
requirements of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such
amendment and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this
ordinance.
A. Main building. All buildings, except one-family and two-family
residences, hereafter erected, shall have a minimum front yard setback
of 25 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater
(see Article XXXII), and except as otherwise provided (see § 68-295F).
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 15 feet except as otherwise provided herein, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
C. One-family and two-family dwellings. All residences hereafter erected
in a B2 District shall have a minimum front yard setback as follows,
unless arterial highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII):
(1) One-family dwelling, 40 feet.
(2) One-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 30 feet facing the side street.
(3) One-family dwelling upon a through lot, 40 feet from each street.
(4) Two-family dwellings, 25 feet.
(5) Two-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 25 feet facing the side street.
(6) Two-family dwellings upon a through lot, 25 feet from each street.
D. Other permitted buildings. Buildings permitted in a B2 District
pursuant to § 68-286C, F, H and M shall have a minimum front yard
setback of 25 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback is
greater (see Article XXXII).
E. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings in a B2 District shall have a
minimum setback of 35 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
F. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a B2 District
abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district, the minimum front
yard setback for the building on the plot in a B2 District shall be the
minimum requirement for the front yard setback in the residence
district.
§ 68-294 ISLIP CODE § 68-296
66:876
§ 68-297. Rear yard.
§ 68-298. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments shall be permitted.
§ 68-299. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
§ 68-300. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a side yard along each
lot line other than a street or a rear line. Side yards shall be 10 feet,
except where a greater side yard shall be required to accomplish side
yard transition.
B. Side yard transitions. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a Business 2
District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts other than B2,
then the minimum required side yard for all buildings in a B2 District
shall be the more restrictive side yard so abutted.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a
minimum rear yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater
depth shall be required to accomplish rear yard transition.
B. Rear yard transition. Whenever any rear yard of a plot in a B2 District
abuts a plot or plots in one or more residence use districts, the
minimum required rear yard of all main or accessory buildings in a B2
District shall be 15 feet.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition.
(2) Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards
shall be maintained adjacent to any residential zone or use.
§ 68-296 WATER QUALITY § 68-300
66:877

ARTICLE XXII
Use District Regulations: Business 3 District
§ 68-301. Permitted uses.
In a Business 3 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. Museum. [Amended 7-3-1973260; 4-5-2005; 6-8-2010]
B. Accessory restaurant, as defined in § 68-3. [Amended 7-3-1973261;
4-5-2005; 6-8-2010]
C. Store, office, bank, broadcasting studio, laundromat and community
building. [Amended 12-18-1979262; 8-14-2007]
D. The operation of any retail business will be permitted which is allowed
in Business 1 and Business 2 Districts, except as otherwise provided
herein.
E. 263 Child day-care center. [Added 4-21-1998]
F. 264 Personal service establishments, including, but not limited to,
barbershop, beauty parlor, shoe repair shop. [Added 8-14-2007;
amended 5-28-2008]
G. 265 Craft trade shop. [Added 12-17-2019]
H. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
I. Historical or memorial monument.
J. Church or other similar place of worship or parish house, provided that
a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards is provided and maintained adjacent to any residential use or
zone and a site plan is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board
or its designee indicating compliance with all applicable land
development standards. [Amended 4-8-1997]
K. Commercial automobile parking field, provided that a site plan is
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board or its designee
indicating compliance with all Town standards.
260. Editor's Note: This amendment is to take effect and be in force on and after 7-21-1973.
261. Editor's Note: This amendment is to take effect and be in force on and after 7-21-1973.
262. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsection C, regarding uses in General
Service Districts C and D, as amended 12-7-1971, and redesignated Subsections D through
L as Subsections C through K, respectively.
263. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding motion-picture theaters, added 3-19-9191,
was repealed 4-8-1997.
264. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which listed indoor moving-picture theaters or indoor
theaters as permitted uses, as amended 4-19-1977, was repealed 1-20-1987.
265. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, allowing broadcast studios as a permitted use, was
repealed 8-14-2007.
§ 68-301 WATER QUALITY § 68-301
66:879
§ 68-301.1. Uses permitted with administrative approval of Town
Clerk. [Added 8-14-2007]
Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk shall be as
follows:
§ 68-302. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
L. Health club. [Added 4-8-1997]
M. Veterinarian, provided that a minimum setback of 50 feet is maintained
for any outside activity and that buffers and fencing are maintained in
accordance with Town standards. [Added 4-8-1997]
N. Public school. [Added 3-23-1999]
O. Private or parochial school, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools, vocational schools and other non-degreegranting
schools including self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics
and similar instruction/programs, except those associated with
manufacturing or truck driving. [Added 3-23-1999]
P. Restaurant, minor. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the outdoor sale
and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es) and/or plant(s) used as
a symbol of expressing holiday and/or religiously significant season,
including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other
holiday and/or religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to
the provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
A. Any outdoor storage as defined in § 68-3, except where provided herein.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
B. (Reserved)266
C. Gasoline service station. (See Article XXVII.)267 [Added 12-12-2006]
D. (Reserved)268
E. 269 University or college dormitory or similar residential use. [Added
3-23-1999]
F. Motor vehicle dealership.270 [Added 12-12-2006]
266. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which designated outdoor displays as permitted uses
by special permit from the Town Board after a public hearing, was repealed 6-8-2010.
267. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Supply house and wholesale establishment, was
repealed 9-12-2000.
268. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding car washes, was repealed 12-17-2019.
269. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which listed automobile repair as a use permitted by
special permit, was repealed 4-5-1977, effective 4-23-1977.
270. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which listed public garage, was repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-301 ISLIP CODE § 68-302
66:880
G. Restaurant, fast-food.271 [Added 12-12-2006]
H. Animal exhibit, display or farm when conducted as a commercial
attraction.272 [Added 12-12-2006]
I. Regional theater, subject to a determination by the Planning Board and
Town Board that the site is in conformance with the following minimum
site conditions:273 [Added 12-12-2006]
(1) The site maintains a minimum lot area of 25 acres.
(2) The theater use shall be a component of a mixed-use development
consisting of retail, food service and/or public assembly uses.
(3) A site plan indicating public amenities such as plazas, open space,
arcades, walkways, fountains and/or similar features is submitted
to and approved by the Planning Board.
J. Public transportation terminal facility, including airports.
K. Lumberyard or building materials establishment.
L. Taxi station.274 [Added 12-12-2006]
M. Racetracks or exhibition tracks of any kind.275 [Added 12-12-2006]
N. Commercial boat storage, indoor or outdoor.276 [Added 12-12-2006]
O. Commercial shipyard or boat repair yard.277 [Added 12-12-2006]
P. Ferry terminal, slip, landing or facility.278 [Added 12-12-2006]
Q. (Reserved)279
R. Marina or marine wharf.280 [Added 12-12-2006]
271. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, which listed automobile laundry or car wash, was
repealed 4-8-1997.
272. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Printing plant, was repealed 9-12-2000.
273. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, Lithographic establishment, was repealed 9-12-2000.
274. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, which listed automobile muffler or brake repair or
installation, was repealed 4-8-1997.
275. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, which listed automobile radiator repair or
installation, was repealed 4-8-1997.
276. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, Assembly and social recreation hall or dance hall, as
amended, was repealed 9-12-2000.
277. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, which designated hotels as a use permitted by special
permit from the Town Board after public hearing, added 12-7-1971, repealed 9-16-1986.
278. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, which designated motels or boatels as a special use
permitted by special permit from the Town Board after public hearing, added 12-7-1971
was repealed 9-16-1986.
279. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection Q, regarding bordinghouses or lodging houses, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
280. Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, Restaurant, added 6-5-1973, as amended, was
repealed 9-12-2000.
§ 68-302 WATER QUALITY § 68-302
66:881
§ 68-302.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997;
4-21-1998; 3-23-1999; 9-12-2000]
S. Farmers' market, provided that the following minimum requirements
are complied with:281 [Added 12-12-2006]
(1) A lot area of not less than 15 acres shall be provided.
(2) No vending or selling of produce, merchandise, wares, foods or
other materials shall be permitted outside any building or structure
used or intended to be used as farmers' market without specific
approval of the Town Board.
(3) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on a suitably paved
area for such use, in a ratio of not less than four square feet of
parking space for each one square foot of usable floor area.
(4) No structure shall be erected or used for the operation of any
farmers' market unless it shall conform in all respects with the
Building Code of the Town of Islip.
(5) The use of a public address system or systems for the purpose of
vending any produce, wares or other materials is hereby forbidden.
T. Psychiatric clinics or similar health-related facilities, excluding
overnight residential treatment facilities. [Added 4-8-1997]
U. (Reserved)282
V. (Reserved)283
A. Minor restaurants, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Billiard hall.
C. Vehicle repair shop, except as otherwise provided herein.
D. Convenience market, subject to the lot having a minimum of 20,000
square feet. [Amended 6-8-2010]
E. Outside seating as an accessory use to a permitted bar, tavern,
nightclub, restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site
otherwise complies with all applicable Code requirements and subject
to the following requirements: [Amended 9-11-2001]
281. Editor's Note: Former Subsection S, listing convenience market, added 9-16-1986, was
repealed 4-8-1997.
282. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection U, regarding kennels for dogs and cats requiring a
special permit, added 4-8-1997, was repealed 2-28-2017.
283. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection V, regarding bars, taverns and nightclubs, added
4-8-1997, was repealed 10-25-2011, and former Subsection W, regarding bars, taverns and
nightclubs, added 9-12-2000, and which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-11-2001.
§ 68-302 ISLIP CODE § 68-302.1
66:882
(1) Outside seating shall be permitted for dining purposes only. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. No outside
bar shall be permitted. In no case shall the service of alcohol be
permitted off site.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) Outside seating shall only be permitted to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) Outside seating shall be permitted on the subject parcel or on the
sidewalk area adjacent to a dedicated roadway, provided it does not
encroach onto the sidewalk by more than 50% and further provided
there is a minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet.
F. Game room.
G. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
H. Restaurant.
I. Assembly and social recreation hall or dance hall.
J. A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with all applicable code requirements and subject to the
following requirements: [Added 9-11-2001]
(1) A walk-up counter or service window shall be permitted for food
purposes only. Service of alcoholic beverages from a walk-up
counter or service window shall not be permitted.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) A walk-up counter or service window shall only be permitted to
operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) A minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of at least eight feet shall
be maintained in front of any walk-up counter or service window.
K. Taxi office. [Added 1-14-2003]
L. Any single-user freestanding retail use in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area. [Added 4-5-2005]
M. A drive-through window for a bank, as an accessory to said use, subject
to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added 4-5-2005;
amended 12-12-2006; 5-28-2008; 6-8-2010]
N. Animal care center.284 [Added 2-28-2017]
§ 68-302.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-302.1
66:883
O. Outdoor recreation use, including mini-golf, court games, and field
sports. Outdoor batting cages and go-kart uses are not allowed as part
of this special permit. [Added 12-2-2008]
P. Any outside display, as defined in § 68-3, exclusive of motor vehicles.
[Added 6-8-2010]
Q. A drive-through window for a pharmacy facility, as an accessory to said
use, subject to the lot having a minimum of 35,000 square feet. [Added
6-8-2010]
R. Indoor recreational use. [Added 6-8-2010]
S. (Reserved)285
T. (Reserved)286
U. Ambulette office, including the outside storage of ambulette vans,
provided that the following criteria are met: [Added 10-13-2010]
(1) Ambulette van(s) shall not exceed 9,000 pounds in unladen weight
or exceed 19 feet in length.
(2) No ambulette vans are located within any front yard or second
front yard unless hidden or screened from view from any adjoining
residential zone or use or from any adjacent right-of-way at the
direction of the Planning Board.
(3) The number of parked ambulette vans and area for their parking
are clearly shown on, and limited by, an approved site plan. The
Planning Board shall determine the maximum number of permitted
ambulette vans on a property. At no time may the number of parked
ambulette vans exceed the number permitted by the Planning
Board. Ambulette van parking stalls shall not count towards the
overall parking calculation for the entire property.
(4) All ambulette vans shall have a current registration and inspection
from the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, shall be
licensed by the New York State Department of Transportation and
shall be fully operational.
(5) Repair, other than routine maintenance, of any ambulette van shall
be prohibited, unless a special permit is obtained by the Planning
Board.
V. Bar, tavern, or nightclub. [Added 10-25-2011]
284. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, regarding spray booths, added 6-12-2007, as
amended, was repealed 6-19-2012.
285. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection S, regarding single-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
286. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection T, regarding two-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-302.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-302.1
66:884
§ 68-302.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
§ 68-303. (Reserved)288
§ 68-304. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Amended 4-8-1997; 4-21-1998; 12-12-2006]
§ 68-305. Accessory uses.
W. Car wash (motor vehicle wash). [Added 12-17-2019]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria: [Amended
12-17-2019]
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) (Reserved)287
(2) Vehicle repair shop.
(3) Outside seating as an accessory use to a permitted bar, tavern,
nightclub, restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site
otherwise complies with the provisions of Subsection A of this
section and subject to the requirements set forth in § 68-302.1E of
this article. [Amended 9-11-2001; 4-5-2005]
(4) A walk-up counter or service window as an accessory use to a
restaurant or minor restaurant use, provided the site otherwise
complies with the provisions of Subsection A of this section and
subject to the requirements set forth in § 68-302.1J of this article.
[Added 9-11-2001; 4-5-2005]
A. Gambling vessel.
287. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), regarding minor restaurants, was repealed
12-17-2019.
288. Editor's Note: Former § 68-303, Uses permitted in B3 District only, and in no other
business or industrial district, by special permit from Town Board after public hearing, as
amended, was repealed 12-12-2006.
§ 68-302.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-305
66:885
§ 68-305.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-9-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-306. Height.
A. The following accessory uses shall be permitted when located on the
same lot with the authorized use:
(1) Signs as regulated and permitted in Article XXIX.
(2) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(3) A single live-work unit as an accessory use to a permitted marina.
[Added 8-19-1980; amended 12-17-2019]
(4) Spray booth when operated as an accessory to a primary permitted
use, provided the booth has received a permit from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or evidence is
submitted demonstrating exemption for said permit. [Added
5-28-2008; amended 6-19-2012]
(5) Minor restaurant accessory to a retail use of no less than 25,000
square feet in gross floor area, subject to the conditions in
§ 68-274. [Added 2-28-2017]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Wherever a use has been authorized by a special permit pursuant to
§§ 68-302 and 68-303 or special exception pursuant to § 68-304, no
accessory use shall be permitted unless the same shall have been
specifically authorized by the Board which authorized the use.
A. Buildings and structures.
(1) In a B3 District, no building or structure shall be erected or altered
to a height in excess of 35 feet.289
B. Dwellings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
(1) The height regulations for detached dwellings shall be the same as
those in the Residence AAA District.
C. Accessory buildings. [Amended 11-1-1988; 4-5-2005]
289. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), Exception, which immediately following this
subsection, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-305 ISLIP CODE § 68-306
66:886
§ 68-307. Percentage of lot occupancy.
§ 68-308. Area density.
(1) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR
of 0.25. [Amended 11-1-1988]
B. (Reserved)290
C. (Reserved)291
D. (Reserved)292
E. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the total lot area
nor more than 25% of the total rear yard area.
A. The minimum required plot area for a single-family detached dwelling
or two-family dwelling shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended
9-11-2001]
B. (Reserved)293
C. The minimum required plot area for business uses, shall be 20,000
square feet except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended
11-1-1988; 9-11-2001; 12-17-2019]
D. The minimum required lot area for a lodging house or boardinghouse
shall be 40,000 square feet and not less than 1,250 square feet of lot
area for each sleeping room. [Amended 11-1-1988]
E. The minimum required plot area for nonprofit fraternity or lodge,
church or other similar place of worship or parish house, public school,
private or parochial school, university or college dormitory, public
transportation terminal facility, psychiatric clinics or similar healthrelated
facilities, kennel for dogs and/or cats, and private or parochial
college or university shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended
9-11-2001]
F. The minimum required plot area for a car wash (motor vehicle wash), or
fast-food restaurant shall be 40,000 square feet. [Added 4-8-1997;
amended 12-17-2019]
290. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding motion picture theaters, as added
3-19-1991 and amended 4-8-1997, was repealed 3-23-1999.
291. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding other permitted buildings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
292. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding two-family dwellings, was repealed
11-1-1988.
293. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which provided for a minimum plot area for twofamily
dwellings, was repealed 9-11-2001. See now Subsection A.
§ 68-306 WATER QUALITY § 68-308
66:887
§ 68-309. Living area. [Amended 4-5-2005]
The minimum living area requirements shall be the same as those required
in the Business District.
§ 68-310. Width of lot.
G. The minimum required plot area for a vehicle repair shop shall be
20,000 square feet. [Added 4-8-1997]
H. The minimum required plot area for a regional theater shall be 25
acres. [Added 4-8-1997]
I. The minimum required plot area for a marina shall be 80,000 square
feet. [Added 9-11-2001]
J. The minimum required plot area for a lumberyard or building materials
establishment shall be 40,000 square feet. [Added 9-11-2001]
K. The minimum required plot area for a motor vehicle dealership shall be
160,000 square feet. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) The minimum width of lot for a single-family detached dwelling, a
two-family detached dwelling, lodging house or boardinghouse
shall be 100 feet throughout.
(2) The minimum width of lot for all permitted buildings shall be 65
feet, except as otherwise provided herein.
(3) (Reserved)294
(4) The minimum width of lot for a community building, church or
other similar place of worship or parish house shall be 100 feet
throughout. [Amended 4-8-1997]
(5) The minimum width of lot for all uses permitted pursuant to
§§ 68-302, 68-303 and 68-304 shall be 100 feet throughout.
(6) The minimum width of lot for all other permitted uses shall be 100
feet throughout.
(7) The minimum width of lot for a regional theater shall be 500 feet.
[Added 4-8-1997]
B. Separate ownership. A single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
which was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance
or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto
heretofore adopted, and which has not come into common ownership
with the adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot
294. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding minimum lot width for a hotel, motel or
boatel, was repealed 5-15-2018.
§ 68-308 ISLIP CODE § 68-310
66:888
§ 68-311. Front yard.
§ 68-312. Side yards.
requirements of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such
amendment and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this
ordinance.
A. Main building. All buildings, except one-family and two-family
residences, hereafter erected, shall have a minimum front yard setback
of 25 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater
(see Article XXXII), and except as otherwise provided (see § 68-311F).
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at least
15 feet except as otherwise provided herein, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
C. One-family and two-family dwellings. All residences hereafter erected
in a B3 District shall have a minimum front yard setback, unless arterial
highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII), as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling, 40 feet.
(2) One-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 30 feet facing the side street.
(3) One-family dwelling upon a through lot, 40 feet from each street.
(4) Two-family dwellings, 25 feet.
(5) Two-family dwellings upon a corner lot shall have a second front
yard of 25 feet facing the side street.
(6) Two-family dwellings upon a through lot, 25 feet from each street.
D. Other permitted buildings. Buildings permitted in a B3 District shall
have a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet from all streets, unless
arterial highway setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
E. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings in a B3 District shall have a
minimum setback of 35 feet from all streets, unless arterial highway
setback is greater (see Article XXXII).
F. Front yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a B3 District
abuts the side yard of a plot in a residence district, the minimum front
yard setback for the building on the plot in a B3 District shall be the
minimum requirement for the front yard setback in the residence
district.
G. (Reserved)295
295. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Display setback, added 4-8-1997, was repealed
12-9-1997.
§ 68-310 WATER QUALITY § 68-312
66:889
§ 68-313. Rear yard.
§ 68-314. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments shall be permitted.
§ 68-315. Exterior site improvements and parking. [Amended
4-8-1997]
§ 68-316. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. All main and accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a side
yard along each lot line other than a street or a rear line. Side yards
shall be 10 feet, except where a greater side yard shall be required to
accomplish side yard transition. [Amended 2-28-2017]
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side yard of a plot in a Business 3
District abuts a plot or plots in one or more use districts other than B3,
then the minimum required side yard for all buildings in a B3 District
shall be the more restrictive side yard so abutted.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a
minimum rear yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater
depth shall be required to accomplish rear yard transition.
B. Rear yard transition. Whenever any rear yard of a plot in a B3 District
abuts a plot or plots in one or more residence use districts, the
minimum required rear yard of all main or accessory buildings in a B3
District shall be 15 feet.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition.
(2) Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use.
§ 68-312 ISLIP CODE § 68-316
66:890
ARTICLE XXIIA
Business Improvement Districts
[Added 2-26-1991 by L.L. No. 1, 1991]
§ 68-316.1. Establishment and extension.
The provisions of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law of the State
of New York, entitled "Business Improvement Districts," shall be applicable
to the establishment or extension of business improvement districts in the
Town of Islip.
§ 68-316.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-316.1
66:891

ARTICLE XXIII
Use District Regulations: Industrial Districts Generally
§ 68-317. Legislative intent: purposes of industrial districts.
The industrial districts established in this ordinance are designed to
promote and protect public health, safety and general welfare. These
general objectives include, among others, the following specific purposes:
§ 68-318. Road improvements.
A. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the needs of
the Town's expected future economy for all types of industrial and
related activities, with due allowance for the need for the choice of
sites.
B. To provide, as far as possible, that such space will be available for use
for industrial and related activities, and to protect residences by
separating them from industrial activities and by prohibiting the use of
such space for new residential development, where required.
C. To encourage industrial development which is free from danger of fire,
explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and
from offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust and other particulate
matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable
influences, by permitting such development in areas where this
ordinance restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to
the industrial products and process enveloped.
D. To protect adjacent residential and other areas, and to protect the labor
force in other establishments engaged in less offensive types of industry
and related activities, by restricting those activities which involve
danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other
hazards, or create offensive noise, vibration, smoke and other
particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other
objectionable influences, to those limited areas which are appropriate
therefor.
E. To protect industry and related development against congestion, as far
as is possible and appropriate in each area, by limiting the bulk of
buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by
providing space off public streets for parking and loading facilities
associated with such activities.
F. To promote the most desirable use of land in accord with a wellconsidered
plan, to promote stability of industry and related
development, to strengthen the economic base of the Town, to protect
the character of the district and its particular suitability for particular
uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings.
A. No building permit shall be issued for any main building or use in any
industrial district unless a road improvement plan has been approved
§ 68-317 WATER QUALITY § 68-318
66:893
§ 68-319. Site improvements.
Unless specifically exempted therefrom, in whole or in part, by the Town
Board upon cause shown, no building hereafter erected or land hereafter
used in any industrial district shall be so erected or used unless and until all
minimum requirements for the following site improvements have been met:
as provided herein, showing the plot to have a frontage of at least 100
feet on a street or road or highway to be improved in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. If said street or road shall be on a subdivision map filed in the office of
the County Clerk, or if said street or road shall be an official highway,
the same shall be improved in compliance with the requirements of the
Planning Board pursuant to Section 280A of Town Law.
C. Any other street, way or road other than one on a subdivision map filed
in the office of the County Clerk, or other than an official highway, shall:
(1) Be placed upon the Official Map in accordance with Sections 270
and 273 et seq. of Town Law; and
(2) Be shown on a detailed road improvement plan which has been
submitted to the Town Engineer; and [Amended 6-8-2010]
(3) Be improved in compliance with the provision of Subsection D
hereof.
D. Detailed road improvement plans and requirements. Such road
improvement plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
approval.
E. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all of the
requirements hereunder shall have been met and improvements
installed, inspected and approved. The Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee is authorized to issue any certificate of
occupancy notwithstanding the incompletion of site or road
improvements whenever weather, acts of God, war, strikes or other
circumstances exist which delay the installation or completion thereof
and provided a suitable cash bond, performance bond, irrevocable
letter of credit or other guaranty is provided in lieu thereof. [Amended
12-17-2019]
A. Off-street parking. Parking spaces installed and maintained as required
pursuant to Article XXXI hereof.
B. Parking surfacing. All parking spaces, loading areas, entrances, exits
and maneuvering areas shall be installed and maintained pursuant to
Article XXXI hereof.
C. Curbs and sidewalks. Curbs shall be installed along all street, highway
or road frontages in accordance with Town of Islip Standard Highway
Specifications. The area between the street, highway or road curbing
§ 68-318 ISLIP CODE § 68-319
66:894
§ 68-320. Detailed plot plans. [Amended 12-17-2019
No building shall be erected or land hereafter used for any purpose in an
industrial district until plot plans are submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee. Such plot plan
shall comply with Article XXXI and:
and the improved travelway of the road shall be hard-surfaced with a
minimum of two inches' thickness of stabilized bituminous plant mix
and seal coat of emulsified oil and chip blotter. Sidewalks may be
required as directed by the Planning Board.
D. Entrance and exits. The number and location of all entrances and exits
shall be established and maintained in accordance with the plot plan as
approved by the Chief Building Inspector.
E. Curb cuts.
(1) All curb cuts for entrances and exits shall be not less than 10 feet in
width nor more than 25 feet in width. Such curb cuts shall not be
located as follows:
(a) Within 10 feet of an interior property line.
(b) Within 25 feet of a corner, or within 15 feet of the point of
tangency of the property line with the curve of a corner, if the
corner is rounded or pie-shape.
(c) Allowing access to an unimproved street.
(2) Curb cuts shall be no closer to each other than 25 feet.
F. Drainage. All drainage from structures and hard-surfaced areas shall be
self-contained and located on the subject premises. All drainage shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with Article XXXI hereof.
G. Screen planting. Screen planting shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with Article XXXI hereof.
H. Building setbacks from residence districts. No main buildings or offstreet
loading area shall be located within 50 feet of a residence district
boundary. [Added 1-15-1985]
I. (Reserved)296
J. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Added 8-12-2003]
A. Be drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals 30 feet.
B. Contain and show full compliance with § 68-319.
296. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, Fence, added 1-14-2003, was repealed 5-15-2018.
§ 68-319 WATER QUALITY § 68-320
66:895
§ 68-321. Fences.
See Article XXX.
C. Contain and show location, size, entrances and exits of all proposed
structures.
D. Contain and show direction of flow of surface drainage.
§ 68-320 ISLIP CODE § 68-321
66:896
ARTICLE XXIV
Use District Regulations: Planned Development District
[Added 4-18-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989297]
§ 68-322. Legislative intent: Central Islip District. [Amended
7-12-2005]
§ 68-323. Designation of subdistricts.
The following subdistricts shall be spatially defined on the Master Plan and
shall be so designated on the Official Map of the Town of Islip:
Educational Campus (PDD-EC)
Research - Industrial (PDD-RI)
Retail/Service (PDD-RS)
Office (PDD-OFF)
Residential
MF-Multiple Family (PDD-MF)
SC-Senior Citizen (PDD-SC)
Recreation (PDD-REC)
Municipal (PDD-MUN)
§ 68-324. Subdistrict regulations.
A. The intent of this district is to encourage superior mixed use
development in accordance with a Master Plan for the Central Islip
Planned Development District (hereinafter the "Master Plan"),
approved by the Town Board, which shall specify the location of land
uses and the ultimate scale and density of development. Development
in this district shall be in accordance with the approved Master Plan,
which shall contain specific guidelines in terms of height, architecture,
landscaping, streetscape, traffic mitigation and drainage.
B. To the extent that this local law is inconsistent with Town law § 267,
Subdivision 2, 280a, Subdivision 4 and 274-a, and the Islip Town Code
§ 68-415 or Chapter 47B, Local Law No. 4 of 1974, it shall supersede
such provisions.
A. Educational campus.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Not-for-profit colleges or universities, including but not limited
to classrooms, libraries, student laboratories, lecture halls,
studios, drafting rooms, computer rooms, galleries,
297. Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Article XXIV, Use District
Regulations: Industrial Planned Development District.
§ 68-322 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:897
administration offices, faculty and staff offices, student health
centers and student activities building(s), but not including
colleges or trade schools operated for profit, and not including
the use of any building or other facility for commercial
purposes. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(b) Churches or other similar places of worship, parish houses or
cemeteries.
(c) Fire substation. [Added 12-2-2014]
(d) Mini-storage warehouse. [Added 5-15-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
(e) Health club. [Added 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
(2) Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board after a
public hearing when consistent with § 68-324A(1)a. [Amended
4-5-2005]
(a) Conference centers, as a principal use.
(b) Restaurants, luncheonettes, cafes and other places for the
serving of food and beverages as a principal use subject to all
other provisions of the Islip Town Code.
(c) Staff housing in conjunction with an educational facility or
other authorized use.
(d) Assemblies and social recreation centers, as a principal use.
(e) Power plants or facilities for the cogeneration of electricity and
steam.
(f) Public utilities where no commercial office, repair or storage
facilities are maintained.
(g) Hospitals, geriatric centers, nursing homes and health-related
facilities licensed by the State of New York.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) The following uses shall be permitted within the district but
must clearly be incidental to the principal use and shall not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business:
[1] Complementary academic, scientific or technological uses,
applied research and developmental activities of a not-forprofit
college or university. [Amended 4-5-2005]
[2] Storage buildings for products, merchandise or vehicles
incidental or accessory to the authorized use.
[3] Parking associated with authorized uses.
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:898
[4] Housing for students only, in conjunction with an
educational facility.
[5] Cafeterias or eating and drinking establishments, when
located within a building of authorized use.
[6] Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses. [Amended
4-5-2005]
[7] Bowling alleys within the student activities center.
[8] Day-care centers licensed by the New York State
Department of Social Services.
[9] Signs as permitted in Article XXIX and as approved by the
Planning Board.
(b) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal
use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a
business.
(4) Height. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 70 feet,
except if adjacent to residential uses, which then shall be
limited to 45 feet in height. [Amended 5-15-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
(5) Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio (FAR). [Amended
4-5-2005]
(a) The total lot area and the FAR of all principal and accessory
buildings located on both sides of Carleton Avenue in the
Educational Campus Subdistrict and on the east side of
Carleton Avenue in the Recreation Subdistrict shall not exceed
the following levels:
[1] Percentage of lot occupancy: 8.75%.
[2] Floor area ratio: 0.36.
[3] The Planning Board may modify the lot area and the FAR
for individual sites, provided that the aggregate lot area
and the FAR for the entire subdistrict do not exceed the
limits set forth herein, and provided that such
modifications are consistent with the Master Plan.
(6) Subdivision of lots. There shall be no subdivision of any property
within this district, except as permitted in the covenants set forth in
the deed of conveyance and letters patent for the subject property
from the State of New York to the Town of Islip pursuant to Chapter
719 of the Laws of 1982, or any amendment thereto, and as
approved by the Planning Board. [Amended 12-2-2014]
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:899
(7) Setback requirements.
(a) All buildings hereafter erected shall be a minimum of 200 feet
from the Carleton Avenue, the entire extent of which shall be
landscaped or left in its natural condition.
(b) All buildings hereafter erected shall be a minimum of 70 feet
from all other public roads.
(c) All buildings hereafter erected shall be a minimum of 20 feet
from all private roadways.
(d) Exceptions.
[1] Robbins Hall South, site: One hundred foot setback from
Carleton Avenue permitted, as delineated in the Master
Plan, provided the structure does not exceed the height
and footprint of Robins Hall as presently constructed.
[2] The Planning Board may reduce or modify the setbacks
contained in Subsection A(7)(b) and (c) by up to 25%,
provided that the same is consistent with the Master Plan
and reasonably necessary to permit appropriate
development in this subdistrict.
B. Research and industrial.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Office buildings.
(b) Laboratories for scientific and industrial research, testing and
development.
(c) Manufacturing, warehousing, distribution and assembly,
including warehousing and distribution of foods and food
ingredients, with all activities entirely contained within
enclosed buildings, excluding any use prohibited in an
Industrial 2 District and the exclusive manufacturing or
warehousing of furniture and construction materials.
[Amended 3-8-2011]
(2) Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board after public
hearing. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(a) Public utilities where no repair or storage facilities are
maintained.
(b) Power plants or facilities for the cogeneration of electricity
and/or steam as a principal use.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted
within the subdistrict but must be clearly incidental to the principal
use:
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:900
(a) Power plants or facilities for the cogeneration of electricity
and/or steam.
(b) Child day-care centers. [Amended 4-8-1997 by L.L. No.
6-1997]
(c) Signs as permitted in Article XXIX and as approved by the
Planning Board.
(d) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal
use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a
business.
(e) Parking structures, subject to Planning Board approval.
(f) Overnight parking of registered vehicles, subject to Planning
Board approval. [Added 3-8-2011]
(4) Height. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
(b) Exceptions. Office and manufacturing buildings may be
erected to a height of 60 feet, provided that any portion of any
building in excess of 35 feet is set back one additional foot for
each one foot of additional height beyond the required
setbacks from public streets, planned public streets or district
boundary lines.
(5) Percentage of lot occupancy.
(a) The total lot area of any building on an industrial lot in this
subdistrict shall not exceed 40%. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(b) The total floor area ratio of any building in this subdistrict shall
not exceed 0.50. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(c) The Planning Board may modify the lot area and FAR for
individual sites, provided that the aggregate lot area and FAR
for the entire subdistrict do not exceed the limits set forth in
Subsection B(5)(a) and (b) of this section and Article XLV, and
provided that such modifications are consistent with the
Master Plan.
(6) Lot area.
(a) There shall be a range of minimum lot areas in this subdistrict
as follows: [Amended 4-5-2005]
[1] All lots shall have a minimum of one acre.
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:901
(b) The location of all lots within this subdistrict shall be
consistent with the Master Plan and approved by the Planning
Board.
(c) The requirement set forth above may be modified by the
Planning Board by up to 25%, provided that such modifications
are consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary
to permit appropriate development in the PDD. [Amended
4-5-2005]
(7) Width of lot. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(a) The minimum width of lot shall be 150 feet.
(b) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the width of the lot
up to 25% for all lots, provided that the same is consistent with
the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to permit
appropriate development in this subdistrict.
(8) Setbacks.
(a) Front yard setbacks from North Research Place and South
Research Place (as shown on the Master Plan) shall be 50 feet,
the entire extent of which shall be landscaped, except for
approved driveways and sidewalks. The front yard setbacks of
all other roads shall be 50 feet. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 50
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 25 feet.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from the secondary street.
(f) All buildings located adjacent to a residential lot line shall be
set back 95 feet from said lot line.
(g) A minimum distance of 50 feet shall be provided between
adjoining buildings or as otherwise approved by the Planning
Board and consistent with the Master Plan.
(h) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the setback
requirements by up to 25%, provided that the same is
consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to
permit appropriate development in this subdistrict.
(9) All buildings, except those already lawfully existing prior to April
18, 1989, located adjacent to a residential lot line shall be set back
95 feet from said lot line. [Added 3-8-2011]
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:902
C. Retail/service.
(1) Permitted uses. [Amended 6-22-1999; 4-5-2005]
(a) Hotel, maximum of 300 guest rooms.
(b) Retail.
[1] Florists.
[2] Stationery/card stores.
[3] Office supply.
[4] Hardware, paint.
[5] Specialty.
[6] Bookstores.
[7] Dry goods.
[8] Clothing.
[9] Appliances.
[10] Department stores.
[11] Sporting goods.
[12] Bakeries.
[13] Variety stores.
[14] Drugstores.
[15] Convenience stores.
[16] Delicatessens.
[17] Supermarket.
(c) Personal service.
[1] Barbershops.
[2] Beauty parlors.
[3] Shoe repair.
[4] Tailors.
[5] Health clubs.
(d) Art galleries.
(e) Bowling centers.
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:903
(f) Dry cleaning.
(g) Photography.
(h) Business service establishments, including printing, office
supplies, business machines and computers.
(i) Motion-picture theaters containing not more than 20
projection screens nor more than 4,500 seats.
(j) Offices, banks.
(k) Other uses similar to those permitted as of right within this
subdistrict and consistent with the Master Plan.
(l) Churches or other similar places of worship, parish houses or
cemeteries. [Added 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
(2) Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board after a
public hearing: [Amended 4-5-2005]
(a) Conference centers.
(b) Performing arts centers.
(c) Assembly or social recreation centers.
(d) Restaurants, luncheonettes, cafes, quick service restaurants
and other places for the serving of food, beverages, or both,
whether served inside and/or outside a structure.
(e) Day-care center.
(f) Single-user bulk retail establishment.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Signs as permitted in Article XXIX and as approved by the
Planning Board.
(b) Other customary accessory uses, provided that such uses are
clearly incidental to the authorized principal use and do not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(c) No accessory buildings shall be permitted within this
subdistrict except as specified in Subsection C(7)(a) of this
section.
(4) Height.
(a) No building shall exceed 40 feet in height.
(b) Exceptions.
[1] Office buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet,
provided that any portion of any building in excess of 40
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:904
feet is set back one additional foot for each one foot of
additional height beyond the required setbacks from
public streets, planned public streets or district boundary
lines.
[2] A single hotel structure within the Retail/Service
Subdistrict may be constructed to a height of 95 feet,
subject to prior review and approval by the Planning
Board, provided that the same is consistent with the
Master Plan and reasonably necessary to permit
appropriate development in this subdistrict. [Amended
8-16-2001298]
(5) Percentage of lot occupancy.
(a) The total lot area of all buildings in the subdistrict shall not
exceed 25% of the total area of the subdistrict. [Amended
4-5-2005]
(b) The floor area ratio (FAR) of this subdistrict shall not exceed
0.40. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(c) The Planning Board may modify the lot area and FAR for
individual sites, provided that the aggregate FAR for this
subdistrict does not exceed 0.25, and provided that such
modifications are consistent with the Master Plan. [Amended
8-16-2001299]
(6) Subdivision of property within subdistrict. There shall be no
subdivision of property within the Retail/Service Subdistrict.
Exception: Lots may be subdivided, provided the created lots
remain functionally joined to the original lot, subject to the review
and approval of the Planning Board. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(7) Setbacks.
(a) All buildings between North Research Drive and South
Research Drive shall have a minimum setback from Carleton
Avenue of 150 feet, except for accessory structures located to
the interior of Research Drive North and South within the open
space area as shown on the Master Plan and approved by the
Planning Board. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(b) All buildings located north of North Research Drive or south of
South Research Drive shall have a minimum setback of 67 feet
from Carleton Avenue, from North Research Drive and from
South Research Drive, the entire extent of which shall be
landscaped.
298. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided an effective date of 12-9-2001.
299. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided an effective date of 12-9-2001.
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:905
(c) All buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet from all other public
roads.
(d) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the setback
requirements contained in Subsection C(7)(b) and (c) of this
section by up to 25%, provided that the same is consistent with
the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to permit
appropriate development in this subdistrict.
(8) A maximum of 350,000 square feet of retail space may be
constructed pursuant to the review and approval of the Planning
Board in accordance with the Master Plan and in conformance with
Volume 10 of the Town of Islip Comprehensive Plan (Commercial
and Industrial Development). [Amended 6-22-1999;
8-16-2001300; 4-5-2005]
D. Office.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Offices.
(b) Medical centers and dental clinics, excluding a psychiatric or
drug treatment clinics.
(c) Courtrooms. [Added 5-2-2000]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) The following uses shall be permitted within the subdistrict but
must clearly be incidental to the principal use:
[1] Day-care centers by special permit from the Planning
Board after a public hearing. [Amended 4-5-2005]
[2] Signs as permitted in Article XXIX or as approved by the
Planning Board.
[3] Cafeteria. [Added 5-2-2000]
[4] Bank, excluding drive-through facilities, provided it does
not exceed a gross floor area of 3,500 square feet, is
located within a permitted office use and does not occupy
greater than 2.5% of the total gross floor area for the office
use. [Added 8-16-2001301 ]
(b) Other customary accessory uses or structures, provided that
such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use, do not
include any activities commonly conducted as a business and
are located to the rear of the principal building.
300. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided an effective date of 12-9-2001.
301. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided an effective date of 12-9-2001.
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:906
(c) All accessory structures, except signs, shall be located to the
rear of the principal building. No accessory buildings shall be
permitted except by permission of the Planning Board.
(3) Height.
(a) No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 40 feet.
(b) Exceptions. [Amended 5-2-2000]
[1] Office buildings may be erected to a height of 50 feet,
provided that any portion of any building in excess of 40
feet is set back one additional foot for each one foot of
additional height beyond the required setbacks from
public streets, planned public streets or district boundary
lines.
[2] Existing structures erected on or before May 4, 2000, shall
be exempt from this requirement. Additions and/or
alterations to existing structures shall also be exempt from
this requirement, provided that they do not increase the
existing maximum height of the structure and further
provided that the architectural elevations are deemed
consistent with the Master Plan and approved by the
Planning Board.
(4) Lot area (office). The lot area shall be a minimum of two acres.
(5) Width of lot.
(a) The width of lot shall be a minimum of 150 feet throughout.
(b) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the width of lot up to
25%, provided that the same is consistent with the Master Plan
and reasonably necessary to permit appropriate development
in this subdistrict.
(6) Percentage of lot occupancy.
(a) The maximum percentage of lot occupancy shall not exceed
15%.
(b) The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.20.
(c) The Planning Board may modify the lot area and FAR for
individual sites, provided that no FAR shall be increased
beyond 0.35 and further provided the increase is deemed
consistent with the Master Plan. [Amended 5-2-2000]
(7) Setbacks.
(a) All future buildings shall have the following minimum
setbacks: [Amended 4-5-2005]
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:907
[1] A minimum of 100 feet from Carleton Avenue.
[2] A minimum of 20 feet from public roads except as set forth
in Subsection D(7)(a)[1] above.
[3] A minimum of 50 feet from the residential Subdistrict
boundary line.
[4] All buildings shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from
each other or as otherwise approved by the Planning
Board and consistent with the Master Plan.
(b) The Planning Board may modify or reduce the setback
requirements of Subsection D(7)(a)[2] and [3] above and the
minimum building separation distance in Subsection D(7)(a)[4]
of this subdivision up to 25%, provided that the same is
consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to
permit appropriate development in this subdistrict.
E. Residential.
(1) Permitted uses. [Amended 8-16-2001; 4-5-2005]
(a) Multiple-family dwellings (MF). Attached one- and two-family
multiple townhouse-type dwelling units developed under one
unified site plan and maintained by an association of owners
approved by the Attorney General of the State of New York or
rental apartments. [Amended 3-8-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2017;
2-28-2017]
(b) Senior citizen units (SC). Units especially designed for senior
citizens and their immediate families. A "senior citizen" is
defined as a person 55 years of age or older. The senior
citizen's immediate family is limited to the senior citizen's
spouse, children and grandchildren 19 years of age or older.
[Amended 12-2-2008]
(c) Congregate care facility, assisted living facility, or nursing
home. [Amended 3-8-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2017; 2-28-2017]
(2) Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
subdistrict but must be clearly incidental to the principal use:
(a) Recreation uses, including but not limited to community
buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities.
(b) Maintenance buildings.
(c) Signs as permitted in Article XXIX and as approved by the
Planning Board.
(d) Other customary accessory uses, excluding detached garages.
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:908
(3) Area density. The maximum area density shall not exceed 12 units
per acre. [Amended 4-5-2005]
(4) Height. The maximum height of all buildings in this subdistrict
shall not exceed 35 feet. Exception: The maximum height permitted
within this subdistrict may be increased in order to allow for the
adaptive reuse of existing structures erected on or before May 4,
2000, pursuant to the review and approval of the Planning Board.
[Amended 8-16-2001302]
(5) Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio, excluding cellars,
garages, decks, utility rooms and firewalls. [Amended 8-16-2001;
4-5-2005]
(a) The percentage of lot occupancy for all structures shall not
exceed 25%, and the combined FAR for all structures in this
section shall not exceed 0.40.
(6) 303Setbacks.
(a) All buildings located in that portion of the subdistrict
designated for non-age-restricted dwellings shall have the
following setbacks:
[1] A minimum of 100 feet from Carleton Avenue.
[2] A minimum of 25 feet from all public roads, except as set
forth in Subsection E(7)(a)[1] above.
[3] A minimum of 12 feet from all private roads. [Amended
4-5-2005]
(b) All buildings located in that portion of the subdistrict
designated for senior citizen apartments shall have the
following setbacks:
[1] A minimum of 75 feet from the Carleton Avenue.
[2] A minimum of 40 feet from all other public roads.
[3] A minimum of 25 feet from all private roads.
(c) All apartment buildings shall be a minimum of 40 feet from
each other.
(d) The Planning Board may modify or reduce the setback
requirements of Subsection E(6)(a)[2] and [3] and (b)[2] and
[3] above up to 25%, provided that the same is consistent with
the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to permit
appropriate development in this subdistrict. [Amended
5-21-2013; 12-2-2014]
302. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided an effective date of 12-9-2001.
303. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(6), Subdivision of property, was repealed 4-5-2005.
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-324
66:909
F. Recreation.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Golf courses.
(b) Recreation buildings.
(c) Tennis, handball, basketball and other court game areas.
(d) Baseball, soccer and other ballfields and stadiums.
(e) Private or not-for-profit recreational facilities and customary
accessory uses such as snack bars, ancillary retail, physical
fitness or therapy, child care for patrons, and similar uses.
[Added 8-14-2007]
(f) Museums with attendant facilities. [Added 5-21-2013;
12-2-2014]
(2) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided
that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do
not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(b) Use of the existing restaurant at Gull Haven Golf Course is
permitted as a food and beverage serving establishment or as a
golf accessory structure. Replacement structures are
permitted with the approval of the Planning Board.
(c) Accessory uses, including snack bars and ancillary retail.
[Added 5-21-2013; 12-2-2014]
(3) Dimensional requirements. The location, dimension and design of
all buildings, structures and uses permitted in this subdistrict shall
be consistent overall with the Master Plan.
(4) Percentage of lot occupancy. The percentage of lot occupancy shall
not exceed 15%, and the FAR shall not exceed 0.30. The Planning
Board may modify or reduce this requirement, provided that the
same is consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary
to permit appropriate development in this subdistrict. [Amended
8-14-2007; 9-24-2013]
(5) Setbacks.
(a) A minimum of 98 feet from Carleton Avenue. [Amended
9-24-2013]
(b) Setbacks from all public and private roads for all new buildings
shall be 25 feet. The Planning Board may modify or reduce this
setback requirement by up to 25%, provided that the same is
§ 68-324 ISLIP CODE § 68-324
66:910
§ 68-325. Architecture. [Amended 4-5-2005]
Prior to the issuance of any building permits or the commencement of the
construction of any building or exterior building renovations, representative
exterior architectural drawings shall be submitted to the Planning Director.
The Planning Director shall review the plans for architectural consistency
with the Master Plan in terms of overall building design, materials, colors,
consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to
permit appropriate development in this subdistrict.
(c) Setbacks of any proposed retaining walls shall be as authorized
by the Town Engineer. [Amended 9-24-2013]
G. Municipal.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Municipal buildings, equipment and material storage areas,
excluding a resource recovery facility, transfer station and
composting storage.
(b) Courts and related administrative facilities, excluding any
prison or correctional facility.
(c) Private or not-for-profit recreational facilities and customary
accessory uses, such as snack bars, ancillary retail, physical
fitness or therapy, child care for patrons, and similar uses.
[Added 6-12-2007]
(2) Height.
(a) The maximum height of all buildings or structures shall not
exceed 80 feet. [Amended 6-12-2007]
(b) Exception. Buildings included in the County Court Complex, as
designated in the approved design.
(3) Percentage of lot occupancy. The total lot area of all buildings shall
not exceed 15%, and the FAR shall not exceed 0.30. [Amended
6-12-2007]
(4) Setbacks.
(a) All structures hereafter erected shall have a minimum setback
of 100 feet from Carleton Avenue, the entire extent of which
shall be landscaped or left in a natural state.
(b) All buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum setback
of 25 feet from all other roads. The Planning Board may modify
or reduce this setback requirement up to 25%, provided that
the same is consistent with the Master Plan and reasonably
necessary to permit appropriate development in this
subdistrict.
§ 68-324 WATER QUALITY § 68-325
66:911
encroachments and other architectural considerations. No building permit
shall be issued until written architectural approval has been granted by the
Director of Planning. A denial of architectural approval by the Director of
Planning may be appealed to the Planning Board within 30 days.
§ 68-326. Landscaping.
All landscaping shall be in conformance with the recommendations of the
Master Plan and the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any building permits, a landscaped
plan for each subdivision or site plan shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Division.
§ 68-327. Buffers and screening.
§ 68-328. Exterior lighting.
A. All properties located within the Research - Industrial or Office
Subdistrict shall be buffered from adjoining residential property. The
buffer shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width and shall include a berm
with a minimum height of 10 feet, a double row of screen plantings, or
equal, along the top of the berm constructed pursuant to the Islip
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations, such additional
planting as may be determined by the Planning Division and a six-foot
chain link fence along the residential property line.
B. The location of all loading and unloading areas shall be subject to the
review of the planning division. There shall be no loading or unloading
areas located on any building wall facing and adjacent to a buffer area
except by approval of the Planning Board upon a finding of practical
difficulty or hardship in locating the loading area on the site and with
such other mitigating measures as may be determined by the Planning
Board.
C. Doors located on a building wall adjacent to a buffer area shall be
designed and constructed solely for pedestrian egress and ingress,
unless otherwise permitted under Subsection B of this section. All
windows located on a building or wall adjacent to a buffer area shall be
fixed and double glazed.
D. Exterior public address systems or loudspeakers shall be prohibited
within the Research - Industrial Subdistrict.
A. All exterior street and pedestrian lighting fixtures and columns shall be
consistent throughout each subdistrict of the PDD and shall be in
harmony with the Master Plan, but need not duplicate any particular
design in the Master Plan.
B. All other lighting shall be positioned or shielded to illuminate the
subject parcel only.
§ 68-325 ISLIP CODE § 68-328
66:912
§ 68-329. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-330. Public hearing notification. [Amended 4-5-2005]
All uses regulated by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall provide the following form of notification:
§ 68-331. Applications subject to written certification; amendment
to Master Plan.
C. All lighting adjacent to a buffer zone shall be positioned in such a
manner so as to minimize glare on adjoining properties.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys or bay windows projecting not more
than 48 inches.
B. One-story open porches and terraces not exceeding five feet in height
and projecting not more than 10 feet.
C. One-story enclosed vestibules not greater than 12 feet wide.
D. Guard booths, flagpoles, identification signs, sculptures, seatings, bus
shelters or gazebos.
E. Shielded mechanical systems.
F. Power plant stack towers, silos and antennas as part of a permitted use,
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
A. Advertisement of the public notice in the official newspaper of the Town
of Islip at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
B. Posting of public notice signs every 200 feet on that portion of any
public or private road contiguous to the subject parcel at least 10 days
prior to the public hearing, except in the Education Subdistrict, where
such posting shall be every 200 feet on that portion of any public or
private road within a radius of 1,000 feet of the location or site of the
proposed amendment.
C. Any application for a power plant, cogeneration plant or public utility
shall require notification to all property owners within 200 feet of the
application parcel.
A. All applications for building, site plan, subdivision, road opening,
special permit or land clearing shall be subject to a written certification
from the Director of Planning or the Planning Board that the proposed
action is consistent with the Master Plan.
B. The Planning Board may amend the road layouts contained in all
subdistricts of the Master Plan, provided that the same is consistent
§ 68-328 WATER QUALITY § 68-331
66:913
§ 68-332. Determination by Planning Board. [Amended 4-5-2005]
Except as otherwise provided herein, all matters referred to the Planning
Board in this Article XXIV may be determined without a public hearing,
pursuant to Town Law § 274-a, Subdivision 2. In making such
determinations the Planning Board shall give consideration to the following:
the effect and compatibility of the proposed modification on the overall
Master Plan and Planned Development District design, criterion and
standards.
§ 68-333. Open development area.
Pursuant to § 280-a of the Town Law, the Town Board hereby declares this
zoning district an open development area within the Town, wherein building
permits may be issued for the erection of structures to which access is given
by right-of-way or easement, upon such conditions or regulations as may be
prescribed by the Planning Board.
§ 68-334. Mitigation fees. [Added 4-5-2005]
with the Master Plan and reasonably necessary to permit appropriate
development.
C. The Master Plan may be amended by the Town Board after a public
hearing and upon a report of the Planning Board or the Director of
Planning. For the purposes of this subdivision, notice of such public
hearing shall be published at least once in the official Town newspaper
no fewer than 10 days prior to the public hearing. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any and all modifications to the Master Plan by the Planning
Board as provided in this Article XXIV shall not be deemed an
amendment to the Master Plan.
A. All development not pursuant to a lease with the Town of Islip occurring
within the Planned Development District, as depicted on the Official
Map, shall be assessed a mitigation fee of $2 per square foot of gross
floor area for recreation improvements and/or transportation
improvements in accordance with the findings of the Supplemental
Generic Environmental Impact Statement analysis and any subsequent
SEQR determinations on future development/redevelopment
applications. This fee will be utilized within the Planned Development
District and the Central Islip Hamlet Center to, at a minimum, provide
public improvements, foster reinvestment, and conduct necessary
studies to further the stated goals of the Master Plan and the
Comprehensive Plan for Central Islip. [Amended 6-12-2007;
3-8-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2017; 2-28-2017]
B. 50% of the total mitigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The remaining 50% of the total fee shall be paid prior
to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy. All development/
redevelopment occurring on or after the adoption of this section is
§ 68-331 ISLIP CODE § 68-334
66:914
§ 68-335. Affordable housing. [Added 4-5-2005; amended 7-25-2017
by L.L. No. 2-2017]
All residential development within the Planned Development District shall
provide that a minimum of 10% of the total dwellings in the approved
plan be deemed affordable housing. The schedule of affordable housing
provision shall be approved by the Town of Islip Department of Planning
and Development in consultation with the Community Development Agency
prior to the issuance of building permits for the units.
§ 68-336. Legislative intent: Hauppauge District. [Added 7-12-2005]
The Planned Development District (PDD): Hauppauge is conceived and
enacted to protect the public health, safety, property values and general
welfare while promoting mixed use developments within unique areas of the
Town of Islip. This legislation is also enacted for the following purposes, in
addition to those goals stated above:
§ 68-336.1. Interpretation and conflict with other provisions.
[Added 7-12-2005]
subject to this mitigation requirement. [Amended 12-17-2019 by L.L.
No. 3-2019]
A. To provide the opportunity and flexibility for the coordinated
development and/or redevelopment of parcels of appropriately located,
business-zoned land to accommodate residential communities in the
form of modern, well-planned, compatibly designed and
comprehensively planned units.
B. To encourage the creation of visually appealing developments of quality
design that help to foster a synergy between commercial, residential
and recreational uses.
C. To provide an appropriate form of diversified residential development
within the Town not currently available, but which is a characteristic of
maturing suburban municipalities in large metropolitan areas.
D. To promote fiscally responsible development by encouraging a housing
type which will provide assessed valuation, attendant revenues in
excess of the cost of services needed for the development.
E. To incorporate mechanisms for the provision of affordable housing and
open space.
A. In applying the provisions of this section, the Town Board may make
such interpretations as it determines to be consistent with the
legislative intent of this section.
B. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and
other provisions of the Town Zoning Code, the provisions of this section
shall govern.
§ 68-334 WATER QUALITY § 68-336.2
66:915
§ 68-336.2. Standards and uses. [Added 7-12-2005]
All Planned Development District (PDD): Hauppauge shall conform to the
following standards and requirements:
§ 68-336.3. Development density. [Added 7-12-2005]
Residential dwelling units shall be in a midrise tower configuration and
shall not exceed one unit per 1,500 square feet of lot area of the parcel
designated for this use, or a maximum of 150 units, whichever is less. In no
case shall the maximum number of residential units permitted exceed 150.
§ 68-336.4. Height. [Added 7-12-2005]
No building constructed within the PDD: Hauppauge shall exceed 60 feet
in height, except the building height may be increased by one foot for each
five feet that the building is set back from the Town, county or state road
in which its main entrance is located, but in no event will any proposed
building exceed the height of any existing building used for principal use
within the PDD: Hauppauge.
§ 68-336.5. Setbacks. [Added 7-12-2005]
A. Minimum area. The minimum site area for the PDD: Hauppauge shall
be at least five acres of contiguous land, not separated by any public
street and under common ownership at time of application.
B. Permitted uses. Within the PDD: Hauppauge, a building or structure
may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises maybe used for
one or more of the following purposes:
(1) Residential dwelling units:
(a) Accessory facilities for the residential dwelling units, including
a clubhouse, for the exclusive use of the residential dwelling
units and their guests, which may include a lobby; a lounge or
social room; card rooms; fitness center: beauty salon and spa;
pools and parking garages.
(b) Other uses customarily incidental and accessory for residential
dwelling units in a planned residential community.
A. Perimeter property line. No main building shall be constructed within
25 feet of any perimeter property line of the PDD: Hauppauge.
B. Front yard. All main buildings must have a minimum front yard setback
of 500 feet from a state, Town or county road. [Amended 7-11-2006]
C. Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall have a minimum
twenty-five-foot landscaped setback from all perimeter property lines,
including the front yard property line.
§ 68-336.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-336.5
66:916
§ 68-336.6. Building separation. [Added 7-12-2005]
§ 68-336.7. Exterior lighting. [Added 7-12-2005]
§ 68-336.8. Permitted encroachments. [Added 7-12-2005]
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-336.9. Landscaping. [Added 7-12-2005]
All landscaping shall be in conformance with the Town of Islip Subdivision
and Land Development Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any new
construction building permits, a landscaped plan for each site shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning Division.
§ 68-336.10. Parking. [Added 7-12-2005]
D. Interior property lines. All buildings, including accessory structures,
shall be set back from interior property lines as required by the New
York State Uniform Building and Fire Code.
A. (Reserved)304
B. Accessory structures shall maintain a minimum building separation as
required by the New York State Uniform Building and Fire Code.
A. All exterior street and pedestrian lighting fixtures and columns shall be
consistent throughout the PDD: Hauppauge and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Commissioner.
B. All existing lighting shall be positioned or shielded to illuminate the
immediate areas around the main buildings or appropriate areas of the
subject parcels only.
C. All lighting adjacent to a buffer zone shall be positioned in such a
manner so as to minimize glare on adjoining properties.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys or bay windows projecting not more
than 48 inches.
B. One-story enclosed vestibules not greater than 12 feet wide.
C. Guard booths, flagpoles, identification signs, sculptures, seating, bus
shelters or gazebos.
D. Shielded mechanical systems.
E. Required utilities, silos, antennas, and other minor structures
incidental to a permitted use, subject to the approval of the Planning
Board.
304. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, which set forth building separation requirements
within the PDD: Hauppauge, was repealed 3-8-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2017 and 2-28-2017.
§ 68-336.5 WATER QUALITY § 68-336.10
66:917
§ 68-336.11. Location requirements and compatible uses. [Added
7-12-2005]
§ 68-336.12. Architecture. [Added 7-12-2005]
§ 68-336.13. Buffers and screening; noise restrictions. [Added
7-12-2005]
A. Generally, all off-street parking requirements shall be established by
the Planning Board during site plan review.
(1) Residential dwelling units shall maintain a minimum of 2.25 spaces
per unit. Eighty percent of these spaces shall be located subsurface
and within a structure of superior architectural and engineering
design.
B. In considering any future development within the PDD: Hauppauage,
the Planning Board will consider the anticipated parking demands for
each land use and the potential for the shared use of parking with other
uses. Structured and/or subsurface parking designs may be considered.
A. The PDD: Hauppauge District shall be directly adjacent to a full-service
hotel and major recreation/cultural facility (i.e., golf course), whose
services shall be made available to all residents of the PDD:
Hauppauge.
B. Any proposed building within the PDD: Hauppauge District shall be
located within 300 feet of a full-service hotel and major recreation/
cultural facility (i.e., golf course), whose services shall be made
available to all residents of the PDD: Hauppauge as described herein.
A. Structures within a PDD: Hauppauge shall have harmonious
architectural design features and be subject to an architecture review
by the Planning Department to insure compatibility within the
immediate community.
B. Prior to the issuance of any new construction building permits or the
commencement of the construction of any building or exterior building
renovations, representative exterior architectural drawings shall be
submitted to the Planning Commissioner. The Planning Commissioner
shall review the plans for architectural consistency in terms of overall
building design, materials, colors, encroachments and other
architectural considerations. No building permit shall be issued until
written architectural approval has been granted by the Commissioner.
A denial of architectural approval by the Commissioner may be
appealed to the Planning Board within 30 days.
A. All properties located in the PDD: Hauppauge shall be buffered from
adjoining property. The buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width
and shall include a double row of screen plants, or equal, pursuant to
the Islip Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. Additional or
§ 68-336.10 ISLIP CODE § 68-336.13
66:918
§ 68-336.14. General requirements. [Added 7-12-2005]
§ 68-336.15. Mitigation fees. [Added 7-12-2005]
supplemental planting may be required by the Planning Division on any
parcel requesting the PDD: Hauppauge category.
B. The location of all loading and unloading areas shall be subject to the
review of the Planning Division. There shall be no loading or unloading
areas located on any building wall facing and adjacent to a buffer area
except by approval of the Planning Board upon a finding of practical
difficulty or hardship in locating the loading area on the site and with
such other mitigating measures as may be determined by the Planning
Board.
C. Exterior public address systems or loudspeakers shall be prohibited.
A. Services. The PDD: Hauppauge must be served by municipal public
sewer and water districts.
B. Recreational. Recreational access and pedestrian access to areas
within the PDD: Hauppauge, as well as proximate to public or private
recreational facilities, shall be encouraged.
C. Ownership. Any property proposed for PDD: Hauppauge zoning and
development may be owned by one or more persons, partnerships,
limited partnerships, trusts or corporations, but must be presented as a
cooperative application to the Town Board.
D. Application. Any petition for PDD: Hauppauge zoning and applications
for related approvals shall comply with the application requirements
and procedures as such may, from time to time, be established and/or
amended by the Commissioner of the Town of Islip Department of
Planning and Development.
E. Subdivision. Further subdivision of the parcels within the PDD:
Hauppauge shall not be permitted without the prior review and
approval of the Planning Board.
F. Energy and water efficiency. Any new structure built in the district will
utilize proven technology to minimize the amount of energy and water
utilized by the development.
A. All development occurring within the Planned Development District:
Hauppauge as depicted on the Official Map shall be assessed a
mitigation fee per residential dwelling unit for general recreation
improvements. This fee will be utilized within the Town of Islip to
provide public improvements, foster reinvestment, and conduct
necessary studies to further the stated goals of the Comprehensive Plan
for Central Islip. All development/redevelopment occurring on or after
the adoption of this section is subject to this mitigation requirement.
§ 68-336.13 WATER QUALITY § 68-336.15
66:919
§ 68-336.16. Open space contribution. [Added 7-12-2005]
As a mitigation for the proposed density permitted for residential dwelling
units in this application, a contribution of land or financial resources for
the sole purpose of acquiring open space in a location consistent with the
Comprehensive and/or Open Space Plan shall be required. The land to be
acquired or the amount to be contributed shall be set by the Planning
Commissioner and collected by the Comptroller of the Town of Islip, as
appropriate.
§ 68-336.17. Affordable housing. [Added 7-12-2005]
A plan to provide an impact mitigation, either on or off site, in land
construction or equivalent resources for work force/affordable housing shall
be required of any proposed building expansion or residential development
within the Planned Development District: Hauppauge: The plan may include
participation in the Affordable Housing Project sponsored by the Town
of Islip, the Long Island Housing Partnership, or similar appropriate
initiatives. The schedule of affordable housing provision shall be approved
by the Town of Islip Department of Planning and Development in
consultation with the Community Development Agency prior to the issuance
of building permits for any building expansion or residential development
that occurs subsequent to the effective date of this section.
§ 68-336.18. Decision making and PDD: Hauppauge requirements.
[Added 7-12-2005]
B. Fifty percent of the mitigation fee shall occur upon the issuance of a
building permit. The balance of the fee shall be submitted upon final
certificate of occupancy. All development/redevelopment occurring on
or after the adoption of this section is subject to this mitigation
requirement.
A. Legislative review considerations. The Town Board, without limiting its
legislative discretion, shall consider at least the following matters in
determining the suitability of any proposed PDD: Hauppauge District
zone change petition and development plan:
(1) The extent to which the application serves to implement the
legislative intent, purposes and goals of PDD: Hauppauge zoning as
set forth in this section.
(2) The potential impact of the proposed development upon the area in
which it is located, as well as upon the Town and the region as a
whole.
(3) The geographic area in which the PDD: Hauppauge is requested
and the unique factors of the development, both existing and
proposed, that warrant such request.
(4) The compatibility of the proposal with the provisions of this section.
§ 68-336.15 ISLIP CODE § 68-336.18
66:920
B. Town Board action.
(1) The Town Board shall either approve or disapprove the proposed
PDD: Hauppauge zone change and approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the proposed development plan.
Approval or approval with modifications of the PDD: Hauppauge
shall not be deemed to waive the Town's rights with respect to
subsequent detailed reviews of any specific aspect of the proposed
development as may be required pursuant to the subdivision and/or
site plan review process.
(2) A PDD: Hauppauge change of zone petition shall be granted only in
conjunction with the simultaneous preliminary approval of a PDD:
Hauppauge development plan. The plan, as modified by any
conditions which may be established by the Town Board in its
approval and/or in notations required to be placed upon said PDD:
Hauppauge and accompanying documents, will establish the
zoning density and land use limitations thereafter applicable within
said district.
C. Approval conditions. Any resolution of PDD: Hauppauge approval or
approval with modifications issued by the Town Board shall be subject
to the applicant obtaining all necessary approvals, licenses and/or
permits as may be required from other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction thereof. As a condition of approval, each applicant shall be
required to file such legal documentation as the Planning Board
determines necessary to provide for and ensure the proper future
maintenance, use and ownership responsibility for all lands, common
areas, facilities, utilities and services both within each section of the
PDD: Hauppauge, if more than one, and in relation to the PDD:
Hauppauge as a whole. Such documentation shall be in form and
substance acceptable to the Town Attorney.
D. Amendments. Any proposed amendment to an approved PDD:
Hauppauge site development plan may be made subject to the approval
of the Town Board.
E. Site plan and subdivision approval.
(1) Approval. The approval of a change of zone by the Town Board,
shall formally authorize the applicant to proceed with the detailed
design, planning and engineering of the development plan and to
submit an application to the Planning Board for site plan approval,
as appropriate and in accordance with the procedures and
requirements for such applications as set forth in Town Code and
the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. Subdivision
and/or site plan approvals, as appropriate, shall be required prior
to the issuance of any building permit within the PDD: Hauppauge.
(2) Expiration. Any approval, or approval with modifications, of a site
plan within a PDD: Hauppauge shall expire at the end of three
years unless the applicant has initiated substantial construction
§ 68-336.18 WATER QUALITY § 68-336.18
66:921
§ 68-336.19. Public hearing notification; amendments. [Added
7-12-2005]
and continues to diligently pursue such construction, or such time
limit has been extended by resolution of the Town Board.
A. All parcels requesting Planned Development District: Hauppauge shall
follow the procedures set forth in Town Code § 68-32.
B. The Planned Development District: Hauppauge ordinance (§§ 68-336
through 68-336.19) may be amended by the Town Board after a public
hearing and upon the recommendation of the Planning Board.
§ 68-336.18 ISLIP CODE § 68-336.19
66:922
ARTICLE XXV
Use District Regulations: Industrial 1 District
§ 68-337. Legislative intent. [Amended 4-5-2005]
This district is designed for a wide range of industrial and related activities
which can meet a reasonable level of performance standards as set forth
in the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations and this article.
Enclosure of such activities is not required except in areas or instances as
provided in this chapter. No new residences are permitted except as herein
specified.
§ 68-338. Permitted use. [Amended 8-30-1977; 12-18-1979;
7-7-1981; 3-15-1983; 3-15-1988; 4-8-1997]
In an Industrial 1 District, the following uses shall be permitted:
A. Office.
B. Manufacturing and warehouse uses, including, but not limited to:
[Amended 8-5-2014]
(1) Printing plants.
(2) Mini storage warehouses.
(3) Supply house or wholesale establishment as defined in § 68-3.
(4) Taxidermy.
(5) Industrial/business service use involving office support services,
including printing, document reproduction and similarly related
functions.
C. Transfer station/recycling center, subject to compliance with Chapter
21 of the Islip Town Code, all necessary permits required by New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation and approval by the
Planning Department.
D. 305Collateral loan broker. [Added 6-23-2009]
E. Health clubs.
F. Banks.
G. Psychiatric clinic, drug treatment center or similar health related
facility, excluding overnight residential treatment facilities.
H. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
I. Church or other similar place of worship, provided that a minimum
buffer area of 25 feet in width is provided and maintained adjacent to
305. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding correspondence and vocational schools,
was repealed 3-23-1999.
§ 68-337 WATER QUALITY § 68-338
66:923
any residential use or zone and a site plan is submitted to and approved
by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating compliance with all
applicable land development standards.
J. Historical or memorial monument.
K. 306 A single accessory retail use within an industrial building or that
shares a common wall with it and sells only goods being manufactured
in the principal industrial building. The area devoted to this accessory
retail use, including all storage, stocking and business space, shall not
exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the industrial building or 2,000
square feet, whichever is less, and separate exterior signage for this
use shall be prohibited. [Added 6-8-2010; amended 2-28-2017]
L. Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards or freight stations.
M. Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the building.
N. Agriculture or nursery, including the retail sale of products raised on
the premises.
O. Park, municipal playground or municipal recreation building or use.
P. 307Community theater with 100 or fewer seats, subject to meeting the
public assembly requirements of the Town of Islip and the requirements
of New York State Fire Code. [Added 6-19-2012; amended
8-5-2014]
Q. Sales of firearms.308 [Added 2-28-2017]
R. 309Indoor storage and sales of vehicles. Outdoor storage is expressly
prohibited for this use. [Added 6-8-2010]
S. 310 Auction house. [Added 12-17-2019]
T. Public school, private school or parochial school, including child daycare
centers, preschool programs, elementary and secondary schools,
vocational schools and other non-degree-granting schools, including
self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics and similar instruction/
programs, except those associated with manufacturing or truck driving.
[Added 3-23-1999; amended 8-5-2014]
306. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, Park, playground or recreational building or use, was
repealed 4-22-2003.
307. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, regarding outdoor sales and display of holiday plants,
as amended, was repealed 8-14-2007. See now § 68-338.1A.
308. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection Q, Child day-care center, added 4-21-1998, was repealed
8-5-2014.
309. Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, Supply house and wholesale establishment, added
4-21-1998, was repealed 5-28-2008.
310. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection S, Public school, added 3-23-1999, was repealed
8-5-2014.
§ 68-338 ISLIP CODE § 68-338
66:924
§ 68-338.1. Use permitted with administrative approval of Town
Clerk. [Added 8-14-2007]
Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk shall be as
follows:
§ 68-339. Prohibited uses. [Amended 7-7-1987; 10-6-1992;
4-8-1997; 12-16-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to permit the erection, alteration, addition, maintenance
or use of any premises of either a business or industrial operation which
shall provide outdoor storage, outside service, outside display, outside
counter or window service, carhopping service or drive-in or drive-up
counter or window service in an Industrial 1 District.
§ 68-340. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 12-7-1971; 5-6-1975; 4-5-1977;
8-19-1980; 4-7-1981; 10-4-1982; 12-26-1983; 4-1-1986; 9-16-1986;
2-25-1992; 11-14-1995; 4-8-1997]
U. Research and development uses involving laboratories for scientific or
industrial research, testing and development. [Added 3-23-1999]
V. Animal care center.311 [Added 2-28-2017]
W. Commercial laundry establishments. [Added 9-12-2000]
X. 312Restaurant, minor.
Y. Delicatessen, provided the gross floor area does not exceed 2,000
square feet. [Added 6-8-2010]
A. By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the outdoor sale
and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es) and/or plant(s) used as
a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or religiously significant season,
including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other
holiday and/or religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to
the provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
A. (Reserved)313
B. University or college dormitory or similar residential use. [Added
3-23-1999]
C. (Reserved)314
311. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection V, Printing plants, added 9-12-2000, was repealed
8-5-2014.
312. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection X, Mini storage warehouse, added 9-12-2000, was
repealed 8-5-2014.
313. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding laundries and dry-cleaning establishments,
was repealed 9-12-2000.
§ 68-338 WATER QUALITY § 68-340
66:925
§ 68-340.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997]
D. (Reserved)315
E. (Reserved)316
F. (Reserved)317
G. (Reserved)
H. (Reserved)
I. (Reserved)
J. (Reserved)
K. Off-track betting facility.
A. Minor restaurants, except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended
9-12-2000]
B. Vehicle repair shop, except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended
9-12-2000]
C. Businesses which involve the outdoor or overnight parking of
registered vehicles as an accessory use to a permitted principal use,
including rental car/truck agencies as a principal use, provided that all
vehicles are set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any street and
200 feet from any residential use or zone and provided that such
vehicles are properly screened from view with fencing and/or
landscaping pursuant to the direction of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall determine the maximum number of permitted
vehicles on a property. Uses involving the indoor storage and sales of
consumer vehicles shall not be considered a part of this definition.
Vehicle storage yards, freight facilities, private carting companies,
transportation facilities, parcel post companies and similar uses which
are characterized by a predominance of outside storage shall not be
considered as a part of this definition and shall be permitted only in an
Industrial 2 District and/or the Industrial Transition District. A
supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations when this use is adjacent to a residential use
or zone. [Amended 3-23-1999; 8-14-2007; 6-8-2010; 6-19-2012]
D. Private parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principle
use.
314. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Assembly and social recreation hall or dance hall, was
repealed 4-5-2005.
315. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding bars, taverns and nightclubs, was repealed
10-25-2011.
316. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding certain retail stores, was repealed
4-5-2005.
317. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Restaurants, was repealed 9-12-2000.
§ 68-340 ISLIP CODE § 68-340.1
66:926
E. Accommodations for a single security guard not to exceed 500 square
feet in gross floor area as an accessory use to a permitted principal use.
F. Automobile parking field provided a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating compliance
with all Town standards.
G. Convenience market, no more than 3,000 square feet in gross floor
area, subject to the lot having a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
[Amended 6-8-2010; 2-28-2017]
H. Adult day-care facility. [Added 3-23-1999]
I. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses. [Added 3-23-1999]
J. Non-degree-granting schools associated with manufacturing or driver
training. [Added 3-23-1999]
K. Restaurant. [Added 9-12-2000]
L. Sale, lease, or rental of heavy construction vehicles, emergency
vehicles, unattached trailers and related equipment, provided such
vehicle or equipment is not located within the front yard, or second
front yard, and is set back a minimum of 200 feet from any residential
use or zone, and further provided such vehicle or equipment is properly
screened from view with fencing and/or landscaping at the direction of
the Planning Board. A supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations when this use is
adjacent to a residential use or zone. [Added 9-11-2001; amended
1-14-2003; 8-14-2007; 6-8-2010]
M. Taxi office, when operating adjacent to a residential use or zone.
[Added 1-14-2003; amended 6-8-2010]
N. Indoor recreational use. [Added 4-22-2003; amended 4-5-2005]
O. Ambulette office, including the outside storage of ambulette vans,
provided that the following criteria are met: [Added 4-22-2003;
amended 4-5-2005; 8-14-2007; 6-8-2010]
(1) Ambulette van(s) shall not exceed 9,000 pounds in unladen weight
or exceed 19 feet in length.
(2) No ambulette vans are located within any front yard or second
front yard unless hidden or screened from view from any adjoining
residential zone or use or from any adjacent right-of-way at the
direction of the Planning Board.
(3) The number of parked ambulette vans and area for their parking
are clearly shown on, and limited by, an approved site plan. The
Planning Board shall determine the maximum number of permitted
ambulette vans on a property. At no time may the number of parked
§ 68-340.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-340.1
66:927
ambulette vans exceed the number permitted by the Planning
Board. Ambulette van parking stalls shall not count towards the
overall parking calculation for the entire property.
(4) All ambulette vans shall have a current registration and inspection
from the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, be licensed
by the New York State Department of Transportation and shall be
fully operational.
(5) Repair, other than routine maintenance, of any ambulette van shall
be prohibited unless a special permit is obtained by the Planning
Board.
P. Outside parking of unattached box trailers, provided that the following
criteria are met: [Added 5-20-2003; amended 6-8-2010]
(1) No trailers are located within the front yard or second front yard
setbacks. No trailer may be visible from any right-of-way.
(2) The trailer parking area is set back a minimum of 200 feet from any
residential use. The trailer parking area is set back a minimum of
50 feet from any street.
(3) All trailers and trailer parking areas are completely screened from
view with fencing, landscaping, and berms at the direction of the
Planning Board. A supplemental buffer shall be installed as per the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations when this use is
adjacent to a residential use or zone.
(4) The number of parked trailers and the area for their parking are
clearly shown on, and limited by, an approved site plan. The
Planning Board shall determine the maximum number of permitted
trailers on a property. At no time may the number of parked trailers
exceed 10. Trailer parking stalls shall not count towards the
parking calculation of the property. A supplemental buffer shall be
planted as per the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
when this use is adjacent to a residential use or zone.
(5) The trailer parking area and stall configuration shall be safely
designed, pursuant to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
(6) The use of the parked trailers shall be an active, integral and
accessory component of a permitted main use on the same
property. The Planning Board shall determine that the use of
parked trailers on a property is active, integral and accessory to the
main use. Outdoor storage of trailers shall be prohibited.
(7) All parked trailers shall have current registration and inspection
from the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. New
trailers that are being held as inventory prior to being sold shall not
be required to maintain a current registration and inspection;
§ 68-340.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-340.1
66:928
§ 68-340.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
however, they shall be kept in neat, clean condition. [Amended
8-14-2007]
(8) Any violation of the above items or any conditions of the Planning
Board shall result in the immediate termination of the special
permit pursuant to § 68-36D of the Town Code and the immediate
removal of the trailers. Once notified that any trailers are in
violation of this ordinance or the Town Code, then every day that
they remain on the property shall constitute a separate offense.
Q. Assembly and social recreation hall, excluding those uses which qualify
as bar/tavern or nightclubs. [Added 4-5-2005]
R. Showrooms, as defined in § 68-3, when operated as accessory to a
primary permitted use, which do not fall into the category of shopping
center or do not meet the criteria listed in § 68-338K. [Added
4-5-2005; amended 6-8-2010]
S. 318 Outdoor overnight storage of vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles,
construction and heavy construction equipment, and related equipment
in connection with sale by auction provided that such vehicle, boat or
equipment is not located within the front yard, or second front yard.
Passenger vehicles shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential use or zone, and shall be properly screened from view with
fencing and/or landscaping at the direction of the Planning Board. All
other vehicles, boats or equipment shall be setback a minimum of 100
feet from any residential use or zone, and shall be property screened
from view with fencing and/or landscaping at the direction of the
Planning Board. A supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations when this use is
adjacent to a residential use or zone. Such supplemental buffer may be
waived at the reasonable discretion of the Planning Board upon a
determination that there already exists there is an adequate buffer and
plantings. [Added 12-17-2019]
T. Museum. [Added 6-8-2010]
U. Car wash (motor vehicle wash) when not located immediately adjacent
to any residential use or zone, school, day-care center, camp, park,
playground or playing field and the subject lot is no smaller than 30,000
square feet. [Added 6-8-2010]
V. Bar, tavern, or nightclub. [Added 10-25-2011]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
318. Editor's Note: Former Subsection S, regarding spray booths, added 6-12-2007, as
amended, was repealed 6-19-2012.
§ 68-340.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-340.2
66:929
§ 68-341. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.319
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria: [Amended
5-15-2018]
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Outdoor storage of registered passenger vehicles, recreational
vehicles or marine vessels, including rental moving trucks as an
accessory use to a mini storage warehouse, provided that all
vehicles are set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any street
and 200 feet from any residential use or zone and provided that
such vehicles are properly screened from view with fencing and/or
landscaping pursuant to the direction of the Planning Board. Said
storage shall consist of no more than 20% of the overall area of the
site and height of vehicles shall not exceed 20 feet. Outdoor storage
shall not count towards minimum parking requirements. A
supplemental buffer shall be planted as per the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations when said outdoor storage is
adjacent to a residential use or zone.
(2) Vehicle repair shop.
(3) Private parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use. [Added 5-15-2018]
(4) Automobile parking field, provided a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating
compliance with all Town standards and a minimum thirty-foot strip
of landscaping along street frontages. [Added 5-15-2018]
(5) Showrooms, as defined in § 68-3, when operated as accessory to a
primary permitted use, which do not fall into the category of
shopping center or do not meet the criteria listed in § 68-338K.
[Added 5-15-2018]
A. (Reserved)320
319. Editor's Note: See also § 68-341.1, Adult uses.
§ 68-340.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-341
66:930
§ 68-341.1. Adult uses. [Added 9-23-1980; 4-8-1997]
Adult uses shall be allowable in an Industrial 1 District pursuant to the
following:
B. Flour or feed mill.
C. Poultry slaughterhouse.
D. Gas manufacture from coal, coke or petroleum, or the storage thereof.
E. Railway roundhouse or shop.
F. Commercial poultry farm.
G. Sheep or goat farm.
H. Fox, mink, chinchilla, rabbit farm.
I. 321Public utility, when no repair or storage facilities are maintained.
[Added 8-5-2014]
A. Purposes and considerations.
(1) In the execution of this chapter it is recognized that there are some
uses which, due to their very nature, have serious objectionable
characteristics. The objectionable characteristics of these uses are
further heightened by their concentration in any one area, thereby
having deleterious effects on adjacent areas. Special regulation of
these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhoods or land uses.
(2) It is further declared that the location of these uses in regard to
areas where our youth may regularly assemble and the general
atmosphere encompassing their operation is of great concern to
the Town of Islip.
(3) These special regulations are itemized in this section to accomplish
the primary purposes of preventing a concentration of these uses in
any one area and restricting their accessibility to minors.
B. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, other
periodicals, films, slides and video tapes and which establishment is
320. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, regarding brewing or distilling of beverages as a
special exception, was repealed 2-28-2017.
321. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, regarding child day-care centers, added 4-8-1997, was
repealed 4-21-1998.
§ 68-341 WATER QUALITY § 68-341.1
66:931
customarily not open to the public generally but excludes any minor by
reason of age.
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — A drive-in theater that customarily
presents motion pictures that are not open to the public generally but
excludes any minor by reason of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which presents topless dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or exotic dancers, or other similar
entertainments, and which establishment is customarily not open to the
public generally but excludes any minor by reason of age.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel which is not open to the public generally
but excludes minors by reason of age, or which makes available to
its patrons in their rooms films, slide shows or videotapes, which if
presented in a public movie theater would not be open to the public
generally but would exclude any minor by reason of age.
ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion
pictures, films, videotapes or slide shows, that are not open to the
public generally but exclude any minor by reason of age.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home
or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
osteopath or duly licensed physical therapist or barbershops or beauty
salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck
or shoulders. This definition also shall exclude health clubs which have
facilities for physical exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts
or exercise rooms, and which do not receive their primary source of
revenue through the administration of massages.
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents material in the form of live
shows, films or videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure, for
which a fee is charged and which is not open to the public generally but
excludes any minor by reason of age.
VAPE LOUNGE — An establishment intended for the gathering of
people for the purpose of using of electronic cigarettes. vapor products
or hookah.[Added 5-24-2016]
VAPE SHOP — A retail outlet specializing in the sale and/or
distribution, with a minimum of 10% of the store's inventory and/
or display, of any electronic cigarette or vapor products, including
but not limited to electronic cigarettes; vape pens; dissolvable liquids;
vaporizing liquids, oils or gels; mods; atomizers; vape tanks; coilheads;
hookahs; hookah tobaccos.[Amended 5-24-2016; 12-17-2019]
C. The adult uses as defined in Subsection B above are to be restricted as
to location in the following manner in addition to any other
requirements of this Code.
§ 68-341.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-341.1
66:932
(1) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a five-hundredfoot
radius of any area zoned for residential use.
(2) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a one-half-mile
radius of another such use. Exception: vape shops or lounges shall
only be measured from other vape shops or lounges. [Amended
12-17-2019]
(3) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a five-hundredfoot
radius of any school, church or other place of religious
worship, park, playground or playing field.
D. The restrictions enumerated in Subsection C above may be waived by
the Town Zoning Board of Appeals if the applicant shows and the Board
finds that the following conditions have been met in addition to the
general conditions contained in Article XXXIII of this ordinance:
(1) That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or
injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of this
ordinance will be observed;
(2) That the establishment of an additional use of this type in the area
will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation
or improvement, either residential or nonresidential; and
(3) That 51% or more of the property owners within the restricted area
as defined in Subsection C(1) of this section have signed a petition
stating that they have no objection to the establishment of one of
the uses defined above.
E. No more than one of the adult uses as defined above shall be located on
any lot.
F. By amortization, the right to maintain a legal nonconforming adult use
shall terminate in accordance with the following schedule: [Amended
12-17-2019]
Amount of Capital Investment
to Establish Use* Use Shall Terminate Prior to:
0 to $20,000 1 year from qualifying as adult
use herein
$20,001 to $30,000 2 years from qualifying as adult
use herein
$30,001 to $50,000 3 years from qualifying as adult
use herein
$50,001 to $75,000 4 years from qualifying as adult
use herein
$75,001 or more 5 years from qualifying as adult
use herein
§ 68-341.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-341.1
66:933
§ 68-342. Accessory uses.
* NOTE: The term "capital investment," as used above, is defined
to mean the initial outlay by the owner or operator of the use to
establish the business, exclusive of the fair market value of the
structure in which the use is located.
A. The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot as
the authorized use:
(1) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(2) Signs as permitted and regulated under Article XXIX.
(3) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(4) Game center. [Added 8-19-1980]
(5) Accommodations for a single security guard not to exceed 500
square feet in gross floor area subject to the issuance of a special
permit from the Planning Board after due public hearing. [Added
4-8-1997]
(6) Private parking garage after special permit by the Planning Board.
[Added 4-8-1997]
(7) 322Spray booth when operated as an accessory to a primary
permitted use, provided the booth has received a permit from the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
evidence is submitted demonstrating exemption for said permit.
[Added 5-28-2008; amended 6-19-2012]
(8) Industrial accessory wind energy turbines as defined in § 68-3 of
this chapter. [Added 9-29-2009]
(9) Loading bay or dock. Such use shall have its distance maximized
from a residential use or zone as per the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations. [Added 6-8-2010]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
322. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), which designated the overnight parking of
registered vehicles as an accessory use, was repealed 9-11-2001.
§ 68-341.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-342
66:934
§ 68-343. Height.
§ 68-344. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio.
[Amended 10-6-1987; 1-14-2003]
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit pursuant to
§ 68-340 or by special exception pursuant to § 68-341, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by that Board that authorized the use.
A. In an Industrial 1 District, no building or structure shall be erected or
altered to a height in excess of 60 feet or four stories.
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Amended
4-5-2005]
C. Exceptions. The provision hereof shall not apply to the height of a
church or similar place of worship, tower, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water tank or
elevator. In the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation Agency shall
be secured and any and all conditions imposed met. [Amended
9-11-2001]
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed a FAR
of 0.35 except as otherwise provided herein. An additional FAR of 0.10
is permitted for mezzanines used for storage purposes only, complying
with the Codes of New York State. Parking for said mezzanines shall be
calculated at one space per 600 square feet. [Amended 12-12-2006]
B. For mini-storage warehouse, the total building area, including all
structures, shall not exceed an FAR of 0.42. A mini-storage warehouse
and its associated accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 42%
of the lot on which they are situated. The floor area ratio may be
increased to a maximum of 1.00, subject to complying with the
following criteria:
(1) The submission of a surety bond to cover the costs of demolition of
all or part of the mini-storage warehouse to allow for its future
conversion to other permitted uses in a fashion compliant with the
permissible FAR in the Industrial 1 district and the requirements of
the subdivision and land development regulations. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement.
(2) Twenty-five percent of the lot area is landscaped, with a minimum
of 50% located within the front yard.
(3) The incorporation of renewable energy that provides for a
minimum of 50% of the building's energy demand.
§ 68-342 WATER QUALITY § 68-344
66:935
§ 68-345. Area density.
§ 68-346. Width of lot.
§ 68-347. Front yard.
(4) Use of "superior architecture," as defined in § 68-3, Word usage
and definitions, on the facade for building elevations that are
visible from streets.
(5) Use of architecture similar to the superior architecture on the
facade for building elevations that are not visible from streets.
A. The minimum required plot area for any use authorized in this district
shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this ordinance and which has not come into
common ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the area
density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification
and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum width of a lot for any use permitted in this district shall be
100 feet throughout.
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this ordinance and which has not come into
common ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the width
of lot requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification
and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. Main buildings. All permitted buildings, including accessory buildings,
hereafter erected shall have a required front yard of 50 feet.
[Amended 3-23-1999]
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 25 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article
XXXII.)
C. (Reserved)323
D. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 50 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See
Article XXXII.)
323. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding front yard transition, as amended
1-15-1985, was repealed 3-23-1999.
§ 68-344 ISLIP CODE § 68-348
66:936
§ 68-348. Side yards. [Amended 1-15-1985; 3-23-1999]
All buildings, including accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall have a
side yard along each lot line other than a street or a rear line. Each side yard
shall be not less than 10 feet, except where 50 feet is required adjoining
residential uses or districts.
§ 68-349. Rear yard.
§ 68-350. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments are permitted.
§ 68-351. Exterior site improvements. [Amended 8-12-2003]
Exterior site and road improvements shall be installed pursuant to the
requirements of Article XXIII.
§ 68-352. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet, except where 50 feet is required adjoining
residential uses or districts. [Amended 1-15-1985]
B. (Reserved)324
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition. [Amended
5-15-2018]
(2) Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
324. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to rear yard transitions, was repealed
1-15-1985.
§ 68-348 WATER QUALITY § 68-352
66:937

ARTICLE XXVI
Use District Regulations: Industrial 2 District
§ 68-353. Legislative intent. [Amended 4-5-2005]
This district is designed for a wide range of industrial and related activities
which can meet a reasonable level of performance standards than other
Industrial Districts. The minimum standards of this district and the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations shall be met. Enclosure of
such activities is not required except in areas or instances as provided in
this chapter. No new residences are permitted except as herein specified.
§ 68-354. Permitted uses.
In an Industrial 2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be so
erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-355. Prohibited uses.
A. Any lawful permitted purpose, unless prohibited herein.
B. Additional structures and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, providing that all requirements of this ordinance are met.
A. In an Industrial 2 District, the following uses are prohibited:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Apartment house, garden apartments.
(4) Boardinghouse, lodging house.
(5) Hotel.
(6) Nursing home, convalescent home.
(7) Abattoirs or stockyards and poultry slaughterhouses or live storage
of poultry.
(8) Acetylene gas manufacturing.
(9) Ammonia, chloride or bleaching powder manufacturing.
(10) Asphalt plants, except plants for the mixing and stabilization of
bituminous road material.
(11) Blast furnaces, rolling mills, smelter or boiler works or glass
manufacture.
(12) Brick, tile or terra-cotta manufacturing.
§ 68-353 WATER QUALITY § 68-355
66:939
(13) Creosote manufacture or pressure or steam treatment of products
with creosote.
(14) Distillation of coal, petroleum, tar, refuse, grain, wood or bones,
except when conducted in a laboratory for research or analysis
purposes.
(15) Dumping of dead animal offal, garbage or rubbish.
(16) Dyestuff manufacturing, dyeing, textile converting and finishing
plants.
(17) Emory cloth manufacturing or sandpaper manufacturing.
(18) Fertilizer manufacturing.
(19) Foundries, boiler shop.
(20) Glue, sizing or gelatin manufacturing.
(21) Assaying, other than gold or silver.
(22) Bag cleaning.
(23) Crematory.
(24) Lampblack manufacturing.
(25) Starch, glucose, dextrine manufacturing.
(26) Sugar refining.
(27) Textile covering, finishing and dyeing plants.
(28) Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.
(29) Paper manufacture.
(30) Celluloid manufacture.
(31) Oxygen manufacture.
(32) Duck farms.
(33) Ore reduction or the smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc, lead or any
other metal.
(34) Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine, shellac, printing ink or enamel
manufacturing.
(35) Sale, curing or tanning of rawhides or raw skins.
(36) Rubber or gutta-percha manufacturing from crude or scrap
materials or the synthetic manufacture thereof.
(37) Steel furnace.
§ 68-355 ISLIP CODE § 68-355
66:940
(38) Blooming or rolling mill.
(39) Pickle, sauerkraut or vinegar manufacture.
(40) Soap manufacture.
(41)Wool scouring.
(42) Small arms, ammunition or fireworks manufacture.
(43) Linoleum or oilcloth manufacture.
(44) Ammonia, bleaching powder or other chemical plants emitting
corrosive or toxic fumes carrying beyond the limits of premises.
(45) Petroleum or kerosene refining, cracking or washing or distillation
of derivative by-products.
(46) Cement, lime gypsum, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture.
(47) Chlorine or hydrochloric, nitric, picric or sulfuric acid manufacture
or storage.
(48) Smelting of copper, tin, zinc, lead or iron ores.
(49) Explosives manufacture.
(50) Meat-packing, distillation of bones, fat rendering and manufacture
of tallow, greases, oils, lard or associated products, fertilizer
manufacture, hair manufacture, offal or dead animal reduction.
(51) Piggery, pigpens, pigsty or pig farm.
(52) Those uses which are a nuisance, including but not limited to those
nuisances which are noxious or offensive by reason of the emission
of odors, stenches, dust, smoke, gas, pollution or noise which
cannot be confined within the building and removed by the use of
effective devices.
(53) Retail stores or group of stores, commonly referred to as a
"shopping center."
(54) Rest home, hospital or sanatorium, philanthropic institution, penal
or correctional institution, medical center or health clinic,
professional building, mortuary or undertaking parlor, hotel, motel
or boatel or boardinghouse or lodging house, mobile home parks.
[Added 12-18-1979]
(55) Game room. [Added 6-1-1982]
(56) 325Restaurant, fast-food. [Added 6-8-2010]
(57) Farmer's market. [Added 6-8-2010]
325. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(56), Child day-care center, was repealed 4-22-2003.
§ 68-355 WATER QUALITY § 68-355
66:941
§ 68-356. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 12-7-1971; 1-2-1979; 8-19-1980;
1-19-1982; 9-16-1986; 11-14-1995; 4-8-1997]
(58) Banks. [Added 6-8-2010]
(59) Billiard hall. [Added 6-8-2010]
(60) Motor vehicle dealership. [Added 6-8-2010]
(61) Personal service establishment. [Added 6-8-2010]
(62) Community or regional theater. [Added 6-8-2010]
(63) Community building. [Added 6-8-2010]
(64)Racetracks or exhibition tracks. [Added 6-8-2010]
(65) Mini-storage warehouses.326 [Added 5-15-2018]
(66) Assembly and social recreation hall or dance hall. [Added
6-8-2010]
(67) Mixed-use building. [Added 6-8-2010]
A. (Reserved)327
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. Public and private transportation terminal facility, including airports
and heliports.
E. (Reserved)328
F. (Reserved)329
G. 330Junkyards and scrap metal processing facilities, provided that no
such junkyard or scrap metal processing facility is located within 500
feet of any residential use or zone, church, school, hospital, public
building or place of public assembly. [Added 3-10-2009]
H. Auto wrecking and yards. [Amended 3-10-2009]
326. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(65), Operation of all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles or
similar uses, added 6-8-2010, was repealed 9-19-2017.
327. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding laundries and dry-cleaning establishments,
was repealed 9-12-2000.
328. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which designated assembly and social recreation halls
or dance halls as permitted uses by special permit from the Town Board after a public
hearing, was repealed 6-8-2010. See now § 68-355A(66).
329. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding bars, taverns and nightclubs, was repealed
10-25-2011.
330. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Restaurants, as amended, was repealed 9-12-2000.
§ 68-355 ISLIP CODE § 68-356
66:942
§ 68-356.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 11-14-1995; amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-356.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
I. (Reserved)
A. Minor restaurants, except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended
9-12-2000]
B. Vehicle repair shop, except as otherwise provided herein. [Amended
9-12-2000]
C. Private parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principle
use.
D. Automobile parking field, provided that a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board or its designee indicating compliance
with all Town standards.
E. Convenience market.
F. Restaurant. [Added 9-12-2000]
G. Taxi office. [Added 1-14-2003]
H. Sale, lease, or rental of heavy construction vehicles, emergency
vehicles, and related equipment, provided such vehicle or equipment is
not located within the front yard, or second front yard, and is set back a
minimum of 200 feet from any residential use or zone, and further
provided such vehicle or equipment is properly screened from view
with fencing and/or landscaping at the direction of the Planning Board.
[Added 1-14-2003]
I. Child day-care center, subject to a requirement that any outside storage
be at least 100 feet from said center. [Added 4-22-2003]
J. (Reserved)331
K. Bar, tavern, or nightclub. [Added 10-25-2011]
L. Motocross track, subject to the following conditions: [Added
9-19-2017]
(1) Planning Board approval of a noise mitigation plan.
(2) Planning Board approval of a dirt and dust management plan.
(3) Location a minimum of 500 feet from any residential use or zone.
331. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding spray booths, added 6-12-2007, as
amended, was repealed 6-19-2012.
§ 68-356 WATER QUALITY § 68-356.2
66:943
§ 68-357. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing.
§ 68-358. Accessory uses.
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
(2) Vehicle repair shop.
A. (Reserved)332
B. Flour or feed mill.
C. Poultry slaughterhouse.
D. Gas manufacture from coal, coke or petroleum, or the storage thereof.
E. Railway roundhouse or shop.
F. Commercial poultry farm.
G. Sheep or goat farm.
H. Fox, mink, chinchilla or rabbit farm.
I. Producing, processing, extraction or temporary or permanent storage
of radioactive materials.
J. 333Public utility. [Added 8-5-2014]
A. The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot as
the authorized use:
332. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, regarding brewing or distilling of beverages, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
333. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, which provided for auto wrecking yards and junkyards
as uses permitted as special exceptions, was repealed 1-19-1982.
§ 68-356.2 ISLIP CODE § 68-358
66:944
§ 68-359. Height.
(1) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(2) Signs as permitted and regulated under Article XXIX.
(3) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(4) Game center. [Added 8-19-1980]
(5) Private parking garage after special permit by the Planning Board.
[Added 4-8-1997]
(6) Spray booth when operated as an accessory to a primary permitted
use, provided the booth has received a permit from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or evidence is
submitted demonstrating exemption for said permit. [Added
5-28-2008; amended 6-19-2012]
(7) Industrial accessory wind energy turbines as defined in § 68-3 of
this chapter. [Added 9-29-2009]
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit pursuant to
§ 68-356 or by special exception pursuant to § 68-357, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by that Board that authorized the use.
A. In an Industrial 2 District, no building or structure shall be erected or
altered to a height in excess of 60 feet or four stories.
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height. [Amended
4-5-2005]
C. Exceptions. The provision hereof shall not apply to the height of a
church or similar place of worship, tower, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water tank or
elevator. In the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation Agency shall
be secured and any and all conditions met. [Amended 9-11-2001]
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
§ 68-358 WATER QUALITY § 68-360
66:945
§ 68-360. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 10-6-1987334]
The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed an FAR of
0.35.
§ 68-361. Area density.
§ 68-362. Width of lot.
§ 68-363. Front yard.
A. The minimum required plot area for any use authorized in this district
shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended 3-23-1999]
(1) Exception. The minimum required plot area for motocross tracks
shall be 200,000 square feet. [Added 9-19-2017]
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this ordinance and which has not come into
common ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the area
density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification
and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum width of a lot for any use permitted in this district shall be
75 feet throughout.
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this ordinance and which has not come into
common ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the width
of lot requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification
and conforms to all other minimum requirements of this ordinance.
A. Main buildings. All permitted buildings hereafter erected shall have a
required front yard of 50 feet, unless arterial highway setback is
greater. (See Article XXXII.)
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 25 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article
XXXII.)
C. Front yard transition. Whenever a plot in an Industrial 2 District abuts
property in a residence district, the minimum required front yard for all
buildings shall be the same as that required in the residence district.
[Amended 1-15-1985]
334. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 10-25-1987.
§ 68-360 ISLIP CODE § 68-363
66:946
§ 68-364. Side yards. [Amended 1-15-1985; 8-5-2014]
All main buildings and accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a
side yard along each lot line other than a street or a rear line. Each side yard
shall be not less than 10 feet, except where 50 feet is required adjoining
residential uses or districts.
§ 68-365. Rear yard.
§ 68-366. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments are permitted.
§ 68-367. Exterior site improvements. [Amended 4-8-1997;
8-12-2003]
Exterior site and road improvements shall be installed pursuant to the
requirements of Article XXIII.
§ 68-368. Fences.
(See Article XXX.)
D. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 50 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See
Article XXXII.)
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where 50 feet is required adjoining
residential uses or districts. [Amended 1-15-1985]
B. (Reserved)335
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition.
(2) Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
335. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Rear yard transition, was repealed 1-15-1985.
§ 68-363 WATER QUALITY § 68-368
66:947

ARTICLE XXVII
Retail Fuel Service Stations336
§ 68-369. Location restrictions; exceptions.
§ 68-370. Use permitted only by special permit from Town Board or
Planning Board after public hearing. [Amended 12-17-2019]
A gasoline service station shall be permitted in a Business 3 District only
when specifically authorized by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing, or in the Industrial Corridor District only when specifically
authorized by special permit from the Planning Board after public hearing.
§ 68-371. Accessory uses.
A. Location. No gasoline service station premises shall be permitted to
locate within 200 feet of a school, playground, recreation center, public
library, or church, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Exceptions. A gasoline service station premises may be located within
200 feet of the uses enumerated in Subsection A, provided:
(1) The gasoline service station premises are in use prior to the
location of one of the uses enumerated in Subsection A.337
A. No accessory uses shall be permitted unless specifically authorized
pursuant to this article.
B. The following uses, supplying goods and services generally required in
the maintenance and operation of motor vehicles, are deemed
accessory to a gasoline service station and shall be permitted, provided
that the requirements of this article are met:
(1) Sale of products required in the maintenance and operation of
motor vehicles, provided all storage of said products and all display
of said products are confined entirely to the interior of a building or
buildings located on said premises.
(2) Storage of a maximum number of five registered vehicles, provided
that: [Amended 4-8-1997]
(a) The total plot area of the premises allotted to said storage is
not less than 2,000 square feet; and
(b) The percentage of lot occupancy by the existing buildings and
structures does not exceed 25% of the total lot area: and
336. Editor's Note: The Title of this article was changed from "Gasoline Service Stations" to
"Retail Fuel Service Stations" 10-13-2010.
337. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding written consent, was repealed
2-28-2017.
§ 68-369 WATER QUALITY § 68-371
66:949
§ 68-372. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited at premises whereat a gasoline service
station is located:
§ 68-373. Height.
No building or structure at a gasoline service station shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
§ 68-374. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 9-19-2017]
(c) All areas necessary to ingress and egress are maintained clear;
and
(d) No violations of the provisions of the ordinance exist; and
(e) Permission therefor has been granted by the Board of Appeals
as a special exception pursuant to Article XXXIII hereof.
(3) Convenience market after the issuance of a special permit from the
Planning Board. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 12-9-1997]
C. Exceptions. New and reconditioned tires, batteries and lubrication
items may be displayed outside during the times when said gasoline
service station shall be open for business, provided same are displayed
in movable or enclosable cabinets or racks designed for the display of
said merchandise.
D. Canopy as defined in § 68-3, Definitions. [Added 1-14-2003]
E. Canopy sign as defined in § 68-3, Definitions. [Added 1-14-2003]
A. Sale or display of automobiles, boats, trailers or other vehicles.
B. Use of bright-colored banners, whirling pennants or other novelties.
C. Use of floodlighting and all other external neon lighting after 10:00
p.m., other than necessary for the operation of the gasoline service
station. Flashlighting shall be prohibited at all times.
D. All outdoor storage.
E. Outdoor repair work.
F. Outdoor automotive adjustment work.
G. Auto wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles.
A. A retail fuel service station shall not occupy more than 25% of the total
lot area, including accessory buildings, however, excluding permanent
canopies over fuel dispensers.
§ 68-371 ISLIP CODE § 68-375
66:950
§ 68-375. Area. [Amended 4-8-1997]
The minimum required lot area for a gasoline service station shall be 40,000
square feet.
§ 68-376. Width of lot.
The minimum width of lot for a gasoline service station shall be 100 feet
throughout.
§ 68-377. Front yard.
§ 68-378. Side yards.
§ 68-379. Rear yard.
A. The minimum front yard setback for all structures whereat a gasoline
service station is to be located shall be the minimum setback
requirements as established in the area or along the highway in
question, and in no case less than 25 feet. Gas pumps are included in
the term "structure."
B. Exception. The Town Board, upon application therefor at the public
hearing for approval of the use or location of a gasoline service station,
may authorize less setback than otherwise required and may impose
appropriate conditions thereon.
A. All buildings or structures hereafter erected at premises whereat a
gasoline service station is to be located shall have a side yard along
each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the width of the
two side yards shall be 20 feet, with a minimum width of either of such
yards of 10 feet. The required side yards shall remain open and
unobstructed.
B. Side yard transition. Wherever any side of a plot whereat a gasoline
service station shall be located abuts a plot or plots in one or more use
districts other than Business 3 Districts, then the minimum required
side yard for all main buildings whereat the gasoline service station
shall be located shall be equal to the more restrictive side yard so
abutted.
C. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall have a minimum side
yard of 10 feet.
A. All main buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
B. Accessory buildings. All accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear
yard of 10 feet.
§ 68-375 WATER QUALITY § 68-380
66:951
§ 68-380. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments are permitted except cornices, eaves, gutters and
chimneys projecting not more than 24 inches.
§ 68-381. Pumps. [Amended 10-13-2010]
A maximum of one fuel dispenser unit will be allowed for each 75 feet of
frontage along any highway.
§ 68-381.1. Canopy regulations. [Added 1-14-2003]
§ 68-382. Entrances and exits.
§ 68-383. Exterior site improvements.
A. Canopy signage may be permitted pursuant to § 68-396N. All canopy
signs require a permit.
B. In no case may a canopy sign face towards an adjacent residential zone
or use.
C. All underside canopy lighting shall be recessed or shielded so as to
illuminate only that area beneath the subject canopy. Underside canopy
lights shall not be visible from neighboring properties and adjacent
rights-of-way.
D. Canopy faces shall not be backlit nor contain any other form of
illumination. This shall not include permitted canopy signs.
E. Canopy fascia shall be of uniform color, except for the canopy sign.
A. (Reserved)338
B. (Reserved)339
C. Width. Entrances and exits shall be at least 10 feet and not more than
25 feet wide and shall communicate directly with the street.
D. Distance. Entrances and exits shall not be closer than 25 feet to the
corner of the property, except 10 feet on an interior lot. Where there is a
pie-shaped or rounded corner, the distance shall be measured from the
point of tangency of the property line with the curve of the corner, and a
minimum distance of 15 feet is required in place of 25 feet.
A. Off-street parking and self-contained drainage. Hard-surfaced off-street
parking with self-contained drainage shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXI. Such parking shall be
designed to accommodate the traffic.
338. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, Number, was repealed 10-25-2011.
339. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Access, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 68-380 ISLIP CODE § 68-383
66:952
B. Curbs and curb cuts.
(1) Curbing shall be installed on all street frontages in accordance with
Article XXXI.
(2) Curb cuts are to be located and maintained in accordance with
Article XXXI.
C. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed along all street frontages in
accordance with Article XXXI.
D. Screen planting. Screen planting shall be installed in accordance with
Article XXXI.
E. Fences. Fencing shall be installed in accordance with Article XXX.
F. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Added 8-12-2003]
§ 68-383 WATER QUALITY § 68-383
66:953

ARTICLE XXVIII
Swimming Pools
[Amended 8-3-1976; 8-20-1977; 9-4-1984]
§ 68-384. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool which is entirely
self-supporting and at no point is more than 18 inches below existing or
finished grade.[Amended 6-7-2016]
DECORATIVE POND — Any artificial, semi artificial or natural receptacle,
or other container, capable of containing water and used or designed for
purposes other than swimming. Decorative ponds shall be made subject to
all provisions of this article, except that they will be required to maintain
four-foot side and rear yards when less than 150 square feet in area, with
design features no higher than five feet. Decorative ponds, on properties
zoned or used for single-family residential purposes, shall only be permitted
in the rear yard and shall be completely and continuously surrounded by a
permanent durable wall, fence or barrier. A dwelling or accessory building
may be used as part of such wall, fence or barrier, provided it conforms
to New York State Code. Decorative ponds, on properties zoned or used
for commercial, office, industrial or multifamily purposes, may exist within
any yard. Said decorative ponds must be designed with any applicable
safety devices and in accordance with all New York State codes.[Added
1-14-2003; amended 6-8-2010; 5-21-2013; 6-7-2016]
GRADE, FINISHED — The average natural surface of the ground or surface
of the ground after completion of any change in contour in the area where
the swimming pool is or is to be situated.
IN-GROUND SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool which at any point is
more than 18 inches below existing or finished grade.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool constructed, installed
or maintained as an accessory use on the same lot with a one- or twofamily
dwelling, intended solely for the private use of any occupant of such
dwelling and such occupant's family and guests.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool which is not a private
swimming pool, as defined above.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, basin, chamber or tank which is
intended for swimming, diving, recreational bathing or wading or which
contains, is designed to contain, or is capable of containing water, whether
temporary or permanent, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed for its
use, and shall include all buildings, structures, appurtenances, equipment,
appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the
operation and maintenance of a swimming, wading or soaking pool, or hot
tub.[Amended 1-14-2003; 6-7-2016]
§ 68-384 WATER QUALITY § 68-385
66:955
§ 68-385. Permitted uses.
Swimming pools may be installed, used or maintained only as accessory
to an occupied dwelling for the private use of the owners or occupants of
such dwelling or as accessory to a nursery school or day camp or as an
accessory to a hotel, motel, boatel, cooperative, condominium, apartment
house, garden apartment, boardinghouse or lodging house or uses
permitted in a Recreation Service G District and only on the conditions
provided in this article.
§ 68-386. Installation requirements; permit. [Amended 5-20-2003;
8-12-2003; 4-5-2005; 12-15-2009; 6-8-2010; 4-15-2011]
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, install, use or to allow or maintain a
swimming pool in any district, except in compliance with this article
and after a permit therefor has been procured from the Building
Division of the Department of Planning and Development. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. No swimming pool shall be constructed or installed by any entity or
individual, on behalf of the property owner, without first obtaining a
copy of the building permit issued by the Building Division from either
the Building Division or the property owner. This permit is to be
displayed on site at all times work is being performed.
(1) Any person found to have violated § 68-386A or § 68-386B shall be
guilty of a violation, which shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both; and each day's continued violation shall constitute a
separate additional violation.
C. Construction of walls, barriers or fences around swimming pools.
(1) Any outdoor swimming pool having a depth of 18 inches or less and
an area of 100 square feet or less shall be enclosed by a durable
wall, barrier or fence as described in Subsection C(2) below, unless
such outdoor swimming pool is covered with a suitable, strong,
protective covering fastened or locked in place when not in use or
unattended. A cover shall be considered to be of sufficient strength
and securely fastened or locked in place if, when fastened or locked
in place, it will support a minimum dead weight of 200 pounds.
(2) Every outdoor swimming pool having a depth of more than 18
inches or an area of more than 100 square feet, now existing or
hereafter constructed, installed, established or maintained, shall
be completely and continuously surrounded by a permanent
durable wall, fence or barrier which shall be located not less than
four feet from the furthest outside projection of the swimming pool
and which shall be no more than six feet nor less than four feet in
height above grade and shall be so constructed as to have no
opening, mesh, hole or gap other than that permitted under the
§ 68-385 ISLIP CODE § 68-386
66:956
New York State Building or Residential Code in any dimension;
provided, however, that if a picket fence is erected or maintained,
the horizontal dimension of any gap or opening shall comply with
the New York State Building or Residential Code requirement.
[Amended 6-7-2016]
(a) All walls, fences or barriers shall be constructed in accordance
with requirements of the State Building or Residential Code
and in conformity with all sections of the Code of the Town of
Islip.
(b) No wall, fence or barrier of any kind shall be constructed or
maintained which shall contain projections at any point on its
outer surface which present a substantial opportunity or risk of
unauthorized access to the swimming pool. Stockade-type
fences shall be erected with the side having the horizontal
beams facing in.
(c) Any and all temporary walls, barriers or fences employed
during the course of construction of a swimming pool,
pursuant to Subsection C(3) herein, shall be replaced by a
complying permanent barrier within either of the following
periods:
[1] Ninety days of the date of issuance of the building permit
for the installation or construction of the swimming pool;
or
[2] Ninety days of the date of commencement of the
installation or construction of the swimming pool.
(d) Subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement Official, the
time period for completion of the permanent wall, barrier or
fence may be extended for good cause, including, but not
limited to, adverse weather conditions delaying construction.
(e) A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of
such wall, fence or barrier.
(f) All gates and doors used in conjunction with such wall, fence or
barrier shall conform to the above requirements as to height
and dimensions of openings, mesh, holes or gaps, and all gates
and doors shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all
times. All gates and doors shall be locked when the pool is not
in use or is unguarded or unattended; provided, however, that
the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the wall, fence
or barrier need not be so equipped or locked.
(g) Any ladder, diving board or other means of access to such
swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a durable wall,
fence or barrier, and such wall, fence or barrier and any gate
§ 68-386 WATER QUALITY § 68-386
66:957
therein contained shall meet all other requirements set forth in
this subsection.
(h) No water shall be put or caused to be put in any swimming pool
unless a wall, fence or barrier, as required within this article,
shall have first been erected.
(3) Temporary walls, barriers, fences.
(a) During the course of construction of a swimming pool, a
temporary wall, barrier or fence surrounding the pool shall be
erected as required by the Building Department.
(4) Penalty for violations.
(a) Any person found to have violated any provision under
§ 68-386C shall be guilty of a violation, which shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
D. No pool shall be erected, maintained or used unless the minimum
setbacks from both the side and rear lines are met:
(1) In a Residence AAA or Residence AA District: 18 feet.
(2) In a Residence A District: 14 feet.
(3) In a Residence BAA District: 25 feet.
(4) In all other districts: 10 feet.
E. Said distances shall be measured from the outside edge of an in-ground
pool and from the outside edge of the structure of an aboveground pool.
F. Every swimming pool which employs the use of any electrical device in
connection therewith shall be equipped with a ground fault interrupter
approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. All electrical devices used
in connection with such swimming pools must be approved by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
G. Any private swimming pool with a water depth of more than 18 inches
shall be used and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in
good repair. The bottom and sidewalls of swimming pools shall be kept
free of sediment and visible soil and the pool water surface shall be
maintained free of floating matter. [Amended 6-7-2016]
H. Public swimming pools.
(1) No work shall be commenced on the construction or installation of
any public swimming pool, including excavating or removing of
sand, gravel, topsoil or other materials, until the plans and
specifications shall contain a certificate by a professional engineer
§ 68-386 ISLIP CODE § 68-386
66:958
§ 68-387. Percentage of rear yard occupancy.
Such pool shall not occupy more than 40% of the area of the rear yard,
excluding all garages or other accessory structures located in such area.
This limitation shall not apply in a Residence BAA District.
§ 68-388. Use of front yards.
licensed by the State of New York that the drainage of such
swimming pool is adequate and will not interfere with the public
or private water supply system, with existing sanitary facilities or
with the public highways.
(2) Every public swimming pool shall be used and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the New York State Sanitary
Code and the rules and regulations of the Suffolk County Health
Department.
I. In the event that an owner shall abandon any swimming pool, he shall
forthwith fill all voids and depressions and restore the premises to the
same grade and condition as before the swimming pool was constructed
and shall accordingly notify the Building Inspector when said
restoration has been completed.
J. The minimum required distance separation shall be six feet as
measured between the exterior walls of any building and the closest
water edge of the swimming pool on the same premises.
A. In the case of a motel, hotel, boatel or apartment house, no pool shall be
erected, maintained or used in a front yard unless minimum front yard
setbacks of 35 feet from all streets are maintained.
B. In the case of a private residence which fronts on two or more streets,
corner lots excepted, the following rules shall apply:
(1) The pool shall be erected and maintained in the portion of the yard
that is not used as the primary entrance to and exit from the house.
(2) The pool shall be erected and maintained at the minimum front
yard setback distance from the street property line as that for a
new accessory structure in that particular zoning district. In the
case of unopened or unimproved rights-of-way, the Planning
Commissioner, or his designee, may reduce the required setback of
the pool from the unopened or unimproved right-of-way to the
minimum side yard setback for pools of the zoning district. (See
§ 68-386C.) [Amended 4-5-2005]
C. For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and attached
dwellings, in residence districts, pools shall not be prohibited in front
yards, but shall be located subject to the required front yard setbacks
for accessory structures in each respective residence district.
[Amended 7-14-1993; 6-7-2016]
§ 68-386 WATER QUALITY § 68-388
66:959
§ 68-389. Loudspeakers and lighting.
Unreasonable and excessive lighting or the use of bright-colored banners
and whirling pennants or loudspeaker devices which can be heard beyond
the property line and other such novelties shall be prohibited at all times.
Floodlighting shall not be installed or maintained in any manner that would
allow any rays to fall beyond the property lines. Floodlighting shall not be
permitted after 10:00 p.m. Any lighting which impairs the vision or creates
a hazard or nuisance is prohibited.
§ 68-390. Drainage.
All swimming pools shall be provided with adequate drainage. Said
drainage shall be adequately contained or drained upon the premises on
which said pool is located.
§ 68-391. Drawings and plans.
§ 68-392. Penalty for violations. [Added 6-7-2016]
Any person found to have violated any provision under Article XXVIII shall
be guilty of a violation, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both;
and each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
§ 68-393. (Reserved)
D. In all other cases, no pool may be erected, maintained or used within
the front yard. [Added 6-7-2016]
A. All drawings and plans for the construction, erection, installation or
alteration of any pool shall be submitted to the Department of Planning,
Housing and Development for examination and approval as to location
and construction.
B. Plans and drawings shall show lot lines and shall include information
pertinent to the pool, fence, construction, water supply system,
drainage, water disposal system and all appurtenances, as well as
detailed plans.
C. No permit shall be issued for the construction, erection, installation or
alteration of any swimming pool unless plans therefor meet all
applicable laws, ordinances, local laws or regulations which may be
applicable.
§ 68-388 ISLIP CODE § 68-393
66:960
ARTICLE XXIX
Signs
[Amended 9-7-1976; 9-5-1978; 6-11-1979]
§ 68-394. Intent.
This article is intended to control outdoor signs of all types and in all zoning
districts by regulating size, location, quantity, quality, content and design
to:
§ 68-395. Permitted signs.
A. Protect the safety of the public.
B. Enhance the aesthetic environment of the Town.
C. Reduce motorist distraction.
D. Provide for uniform design standards.
E. Encourage excellence in sign design.
F. Improve business identification and sign comprehension.
G. Limit the use of energy in sign design and maintenance.
H. Amortize and replace signs which do not conform to the provisions of
this article.
A. Permitted signs may only identify the person, establishment, the
principal product and/or service available on the premises which
contains the sign. At least one of the signs identifying a business or
industrial establishment must contain the street address number in the
sign, using a minimum of four-inch numerals, or such number must be
displayed elsewhere on the building and be visible from the street.
B. The following signs are permitted in the zoning districts as specified in
the Schedule of Sign Regulations340 and in conformance with all other
provisions of this article:
(1) Address: a sign identifying the house number and/or name of the
occupant of a dwelling.
(2) Public interest: a sign containing a cautionary message, such as
"beware of dog" or "no trespassing," or an information message,
such as "exit" or "parking."
(3) Home occupation: a sign which identifies only the name and/or
occupation of a practitioner or one conducting a permitted home
occupation in a dwelling.
340. Editor's Note: See § 68-398.
§ 68-394 WATER QUALITY § 68-395
66:961
(4) Place: a sign identifying a community, residential development,
public facility or a historic facility.
(5) Institutional: a sign identifying a club, association, school, hospital,
church, firehouse, nursing home, care facility, boardinghouse,
institution or cemetery.
(6) Real estate: a sign indicating exclusively the sale, rental, lease or
development of the premises upon which it stands.
(7) Contractor's: a sign identifying the contractor or contractors doing
work on the premises or building which contains the sign.
(8) Office: a sign identifying any office building or mortuary.
(9) Business: a sign identifying an establishment which retails a
product or provides a service or entertainment to the general
public as distinguished from places [Subsection B(4)], institutions
[Subsection B(5)] or offices [Subsection B(8)] and which is
permitted in all business districts.
(10) Industrial: a sign identifying an establishment which produces or
assembles a product or warehouses a product and which is
permitted in all industrial districts.
(11) Marquee: a sign identifying a specific motion picture or event
which is subject to frequent change. A marquee sign is only
permitted if the design and location are approved by the Planning
Board.
(12) Directory: a sign identifying two or more persons, agencies or
establishments, located in a place or location common to all. Any
directory which identifies five or more establishments must be
approved by the Town of Islip Planning Director before installation.
(13) Corporate lawn: a sign identifying an office, industrial or business
establishment that is designed to integrate into the landscape
character of the subject parcel. Such signs shall be architecturally
compatible with the building(s) and site and must be located in a
landscaped lawn area having an area of at least 1,500 square feet.
Any pylons used to support the sign shall not exceed two feet in
height. [Added 10-6-1992341 ]
(14) Directional: a sign located outdoors which guides, instructs or
directs viewers to a place or event not located on the same
premises. Such a sign may only identify an establishment located in
the Town of Islip and cannot exceed 12 square feet. Directional
signs are only permitted if the location and quantity are approved
by the Planning Director. [Amended 6-5-1990]
341. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(13), regarding special event signs, was repealed
6-5-1990.
§ 68-395 ISLIP CODE § 68-395
66:962
§ 68-396. Prohibited signs. [Amended 12-15-1981]
Any sign not specifically permitted is prohibited and shall be removed.
Prohibited signs include but are not limited to the following:
(15) Gasoline price: A two-sided sign, limited to gasoline stations, which
indicates the price or prices of gasoline. The cumulative total of a
gasoline price or prices sign will not exceed four feet in height and
18 inches in width. Such signs shall be limited to one sign per
gasoline station. [Added 1-17-1984]
(16) (Reserved)342
C. Any sign permitted in this ordinance is allowed to contain
noncommercial copy in lieu of other copy. [Added 6-5-1990]
A. Any sign which is dangerous or hazardous to public safety by virtue of
its maintenance, structure, projection or any other reason as
determined by the Building Inspector.
B. Any sign which obstructs the visibility of drivers or which conflicts with
or obstructs a traffic control device for any reason.
C. Any sign which obstructs a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
D. Mobile or portable signs.
E. Flashing, revolving, moving, sound-producing or animated signs,
including signs which have the capability of motion in whole or in part,
except signs which display time and/or temperature exclusively.
F. Roof sign painted or supported upon or above any portion of a roof and
which is visible anywhere from the ground, except when approved by
the Board of Appeals.
G. Commercial billboard which is rented or used to advertise a product,
service or establishment which is not the principle product, service or
establishment found on the property containing the billboard.
H. Any sign attached to a tree, telephone pole, portable object or to the
face of another sign.
I. Any sign which uses breakable glass in its construction, except glass
used in illumination.
J. Any sign in any street right-of-way.
K. Immoral or obscene sign, as determined by the Town Board.
L. Any sign which requires a permit but does not have one.
342. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(16), regarding political signs, as added 2-7-1984, was
repealed 6-5-1990.
§ 68-395 WATER QUALITY § 68-396
66:963
§ 68-397. Type and quantity of permitted signs.
Permitted signs may only be ground, facial, window or awning type and
must conform to all other provisions as specified herein as well as in the
Schedule of Sign Regulations.344
M. Any sign attached to a fence, except by written permission of the
Commissioner of Planning and Development. [Added 8-25-1987343]
N. Any signs attached to or painted on a permanent canopy. [Added
8-25-1987]
(1) Exception: Canopy signs, as defined in § 68-3, may be permitted
with Sign Inspector and building permit review and approval within
the Business III District only, as an accessory use to a gasoline
service station, provided that the following criteria are met:
[Added 1-14-2003]
(a) The size of any canopy sign is limited to 10% of the area of that
face of the canopy on which it is located. In no case shall any
canopy sign be larger than 12 square feet.
(b) One canopy sign may be permitted per canopy. Exception:
Where a canopy is located on a corner of two public
thoroughfares, one canopy sign may be permitted on each
canopy face, for a maximum of two canopy signs.
(c) Canopy signs shall be of channel letter or block design only.
(d) Canopy signs may be illuminated with internal lighting or
indirect lighting during permitted business hours only.
(e) Canopy fascia is to be of one uniform color, except for canopy
signs.
O. Box and cabinet facial signs. Any sign with a plastic acrylic, or similar
material face (panel) attached to a metal or similar material frame
(cabinet). This shall include push-through and embossed type box and
cabinet facial signs. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. Ground sign: a freestanding sign attached to a structure which is
intended and designed only to support the sign and which is embedded
in the ground or anchored in concrete.
(1) When permitted. A ground sign is permitted to identify a building
or use within a building only if the building which it serves to
identify is set back more than 25 feet from the street curb or edge
of the street pavement. [Amended 2-7-1984]
343. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 9-13-1987.
344. Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 68-396 ISLIP CODE § 68-397
66:964
(2) Quantity. Only one ground sign is permitted on any parcel
containing one or more buildings for any permitted signs, except
public interest signs, which are permitted as required to safely
convey the message, and place signs which identify the hamlet or
neighborhood in which they are located. Where two or more
persons, agencies or establishments are located in a place or
location common to all, such as a shopping center or an office
complex, or where separate facilities share a common parking
area, only one ground sign is permitted in the location common to
all. One real estate sign may be attached to an existing sign as the
need arises. [Amended 2-7-1984; 8-5-2014]
(3) Sign area. The area of a ground sign shall be the area of a
rectangle, the sides of which completely enclose the sign,
excluding structural supports, each of which may not exceed 12
inches in any horizontal dimension or 24 inches in combination,
unless approved by the Planning Director. The maximum area of a
ground sign may not exceed 10 square feet plus one foot of sign
area for every 10 feet of lot frontage (along one street only, if the lot
has multiple frontages), or the maximum area listed in the
Schedule of Sign Regulations, whichever is smaller. Any sign may
be double-faced, and only one face shall be used in determining
conformity to sign area limitation. If the distance between faces
exceeds 12 inches, all sides of the sign shall be computed to
determine sign area, except the top and bottom of the sign. The
maximum sign area shall be the area specified in the Schedule of
Sign Regulations.
(4) Height. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be as specified
in the Schedule of Sign Regulations and shall be measured
vertically from the nearest street grade to the top of the sign or its
structural support, whichever is higher.
(5) Setback. The setback of a ground sign is the shortest horizontal
measurement from the property line to any part of the sign. A
ground sign shall be set back from any street, right-of-way,
property line or required buffer a horizontal distance equal to the
height of the sign. A ground sign may be erected within one foot of
a street right-of-way only if the sign is certified by a registered
architect or engineer to be able to withstand a one-hundred-mileper-
hour wind or if the height of the sign multiplied by the area of
the sign does not exceed 100.
(6) Construction. All ground signs, except in residential areas, must be
protected from vehicular damage by a masonry curb or planter, if
required and as approved by the Building Inspector.
(7) Illumination. Illumination of ground signs may be direct or indirect
as specified in the Schedule of Sign Regulations and in accordance
with § 68-400A.
§ 68-397 WATER QUALITY § 68-397
66:965
B. Facial sign: a sign painted on, applied on or otherwise attached to a wall
of a building or storefront and is designed as a unified message.
(1) Quantity. Only one facial sign is permitted per building in
residence, general service and industrial districts but may be
constructed in one or more parts, provided that it conveys one
unified message. In business districts, only one facial sign
(primary) is permitted on the face of the storefront or
establishment. Where an establishment has additional exterior
walls which are visible from the main thoroughfare, each such wall
may have one facial sign (secondary), but not more than two such
additional facial signs are permitted.
(2) Area. The area of a facial sign shall be the area of a rectangle, the
sides of which completely enclose the sign or letters which are
attached to the face of the building. The background area of a sign
shall not be included in sign area limitation only when such
background is an integral part of the design of the building. The
area of a primary facial sign may not exceed the amount set forth in
the Schedule of Sign Regulations. The area of a secondary facial
sign may not exceed 50% of the area permitted for the primary
sign, except that the area of each secondary sign may be increased
in the amount that the area of the primary sign is decreased, but
not in excess of the area permitted for the primary sign.
(3) Height. The maximum height of a facial sign shall be as specified in
the Schedule of Sign Regulations or as approved by the Planning
Director and shall be measured vertically from the first-floor
elevation of the building supporting the sign to the top of the sign.
(4) Construction. A facial sign in a Business District may not project
more than 18 inches from the wall to which it is attached except a
marquee sign as approved by the Planning Board and except for a
facial sign that is located perpendicular to the building facade and
extends no more than 36 inches from the wall to which it is
attached, and provided that said sign does not exceed an area of
eight square feet and provided that said sign is not directly
illuminated; in all other districts, the projection may not exceed 12
inches. [Amended 7-7-1992]
(5) Illumination. Illumination of facial signs may be direct or indirect
as specified in the Schedule of Sign Regulations and in accordance
with § 68-400A.
(6) Appearance. The shape, size and location of wall or facial signs
shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to fit into the
architectural features of the building. Indirectly lit wood or metal
letters, reverse lit channel letters, or individually lit channel letters
are preferred. [Added 8-25-1987; Amended 8-5-2014;
12-17-2019]
§ 68-397 ISLIP CODE § 68-397
66:966
§ 68-398. Schedule of Sign Regulations.346
§ 68-399. Criteria for bonus sign area.
To encourage design excellence, the maximum sign areas for certain
business, industrial, marquee and directory signs, as set forth in the
Schedule of Sign Regulations,347 may be increased by the percentages as
provided for herein. A separate bonus is granted for compliance with each
of the criteria and the area is cumulative, but the percentage increase is
based on the original sign area limitation.
(a) All wall or facial signs on a site, center, complex or on the same
building shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be
contextually compatible to each other and the surrounding
environment with regard to design, size, shape, location,
material, and illumination, Modifications of uniform design
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commissioner
or designee.
(b) Wall or facial signs shall not obscure windows or ornamental
features of the building.
(c) Wall or facial signs shall be set in at least 18 inches from each
end of the wall on which they are located.
(d) Any new or replaced box and cabinet facial signs are
prohibited as of the date of this subsection.
C. Window sign: a sign entirely contained inside a building and which is
comprehensible from the street. Such signs are permitted to allow for
the notification of products on the premises, merchandise sales, rental
or sale of the premises or special events to be held within the building
containing the window sign. Window signs are subject to the area
limitations as set forth in the Schedule of Sign Regulations.
D. Awning sign: a sign painted on a retractable window awning which
identifies only the name of the establishment. An awning sign may only
have one row of letters not higher than 12 inches along the bottom edge
of the awning.
E. Canvas sign: a stationary sign constructed for fire-retardant canvas or
similar material on a fire-retardant frame. Canvas signs shall conform
to the requirements of facial signs with respect to quantity, area,
height, construction and illumination. [Added 8-25-1987 345 ]
A. Ground signs may be increased as follows:
345. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 9-13-1987.
346. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations has been included as an attachment to
this chapter.
347. Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 68-397 WATER QUALITY § 68-399
66:967
§ 68-400. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Twenty percent when the sign is constructed of solid wood and uses
only the colors approved by the Planning Director.
(2) Ten percent when a directory sign utilizes uniform coloring and
lettering for all establishments listed in the directory, except the
one major facility.
(3) Twenty percent when the sign is installed in a landscaped planter
having an area four times the area of the resultant sign and the
entire design is approved by the Building Inspector.
(4) Ten percent if the sign is not designed or used with illumination.
(5) Five percent if the sign face is made from unbreakable material.
B. Facial signs may be increased as follows, but only if the projection of
the sign does not exceed 12 inches:
(1) (Reserved)348
(2) Ten percent if the sign is not designed or used with illumination.
(3) Ten percent if the facial sign is the only sign identifying the
establishment or its principal product. This bonus provision is not
applicable in BD and DDD Districts and for stores in a shopping
center.
(4) Ten percent if the sign is designed to contain only the identification
of the establishment without advertisement of any products sold on
the premises.
(5) Five percent of the sign face is made from unbreakable material.
A. Illumination. Where illumination of signs is permitted, such illumination
may only be between sundown and 10:00 p.m. or close of business,
whichever is later. Illumination shall only be of an even intensity at all
times and shall not use more than 15 watts per square foot of sign area
being illuminated, or as specified in the New York State Energy
Conservation Construction Code, whichever is more restrictive.
Illumination may be direct (giving forth light from the interior of the
sign through translucent material) or it may be indirect (when the light
source is not visible from any adjoining property or street and is
directed upon the sign) as specified in the Schedule of Sign
Regulations.349 All illuminated signs, except in residence districts, must
be wired to a separate circuit, and, in addition, directly illuminated
348. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), which provided for an increase in facial signs when
all lettering and background is uniform in style and color, was repealed 8-25-1987,
effective 9-13-1987.
349. Editor's Note: See § 68-398.
§ 68-399 ISLIP CODE § 68-400
66:968
§ 68-401. Removal of signs.
facial signs attached to combustible surfaces shall be approved by the
New York Board of Fire Underwriters.
B. Fire Island. On Fire Island, no sign may exceed one square foot in a BAA
District, and no sign may exceed four square feet in a business or
industrial district. Only one sign is permitted on any property, and no
sign may be illuminated.
C. All signs shall be maintained in a neat, safe and workable condition at
all times.
D. For fast-food restaurants, a single preview board, a maximum of 25
square feet in sign area and seven feet in height, and a single menu
board, a maximum of 50 square feet in sign area and 10 feet in height,
shall be permitted. These shall be in addition to other permitted
signage and shall otherwise comply with all other provisions of the Sign
Ordinance, including the requirement to obtain permits. [Added
9-19-2017]
A. Once a sign is removed for any reason, the replacement sign must
comply with all the provisions of these regulations.
B. Immediate removal. A sign and/or its supports shall be immediately
removed from a premises upon notification and as directed by the
Building Inspector for the following reasons:
(1) If any sign becomes dangerous or hazardous to public health or
safety.
(2) When a sign no longer serves its intended purpose.
C. Nonconforming signs. All existing signs which do not conform to the
requirements of these regulations, but which have valid permits issued
by the Town of Islip, shall be nonconforming but shall be made to
conform as follows:
(1) Any sign which is prohibited under § 68-396A, B, C, D, E, H, J, K
and L must be made to conform by December 31, 1980.
(2) Any sign which is prohibited under § 68-396I and any signs which
are painted on walls or roofs shall be made to conform by
December 31, 1981.
(3) Any sign which is not illuminated and which is substantially made
from one sheet or layer of material must be made to conform by
December 31, 1982.
(4) Any signs which are prohibited under § 68-396F and G must be
removed by December 31, 1985.
(5) All other signs must be made to conform by December 31, 1988.
§ 68-400 WATER QUALITY § 68-402
66:969
§ 68-402. Permits and fees.
§ 68-403. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-3-1981; 5-15-2018]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, the owner
or owners of the sign shall be held liable on conviction thereof for a
fine or penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $500 for each and
every offense. Each week of continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional offense.
§ 68-403.1. Severability. [Added 6-5-1990]
If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this
ordinance are severable.
A. Permits are required for all signs except as otherwise indicated in the
Schedule of Sign Regulations.350 No sign shall hereafter be erected or
altered or the content changed (except directory) until a permit
authorizing the same is issued by the Building Inspector. Such permit
shall be valid for the length of time set forth in the Schedule of Sign
Regulations. [Amended 3-3-1981]
B. Prior to the issuance of a permit to erect a sign, a fee must be paid as
established by the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and
Development. If a permit is revoked by the Commissioner or his/her
designee, for any reason, the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund
of any fee paid in connection therewith. [Amended 6-8-2010;
5-15-2018]
C. A permit may be revoked by the Building Inspector for any of the
following violations if the owner of the sign neglects to comply with the
Building Inspector's directives to correct the violations:
(1) If a sign constitutes a hazard to public health or safety.
(2) If a sign has been altered in a manner which would require a new
permit.
(3) If illegal signs are erected or maintained on the same premises as a
sign with a valid permit.
(4) If a sign has been altered in a manner which wouldrender the sign
prohibited.
350. Editor's Note: See § 68-398.
§ 68-402 ISLIP CODE § 68-403.1
66:970
ARTICLE XXX
Sight Obstructions, Fences and Walls
[Amended 4-16-1974; 5-1-1979; 8-12-2003]
§ 68-404. Obstructions to motorist's sight.
Visual obstructions to a motorist's view at the intersection of streets or
driveways are not permitted at any time within any sight triangle, as
specified herein. Such obstructions include but are not limited to any sign,
hedge, fence, shrubbery, foliage, automobile or other object as determined
by the Town of Islip, whether movable or stationary, which is higher than
three feet and lower than eight feet above the adjacent edge of pavement.
Such obstructions shall not include existing buildings, public utility poles,
traffic control devices, natural grades, sign posts or small trees which do
not exceed 12 inches in diameter or 38 inches in circumference and which
are trimmed to the trunk leaving a clear area between three feet and eight
feet above the adjacent edge of pavement as illustrated in Figure 404.
§ 68-405. Sight triangles.
A. Intersecting streets shall have a sight triangle at every corner. Each
sight triangle shall be bounded by the pavement edges and a diagonal
line joining points on the pavement edges which are located 30 feet
from the point of the actual or projected intersection of the pavement
edges as illustrated in Figure 405.
B. Driveways (except one- and two-family driveways) intersecting with
streets shall have two sight triangles as described in Subsection A,
except that the driveway legs of the sight triangles shall be 20 feet as
illustrated in Figure 405.
C. One- and two-family driveways intersecting with streets shall have two
sight triangles as described in Subsection A, except that the street legs
of the triangles shall be 20 feet and the driveway legs of the triangles
shall be 16 feet as illustrated in Figure 405.
D. A required sight triangle may be increased by the Director of Traffic
Safety where in his determination the required sight triangle at an
intersection of two streets is insufficient to abate a traffic hazard.
§ 68-404 WATER QUALITY § 68-406
66:971
§ 68-406. Fences and walls. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. No fence or wall, except an existing retaining wall, shall be higher than
six feet above the ground at any point unless such fence is an open
chain-link-type or one which does not restrict light or visibility through
more than 15% of its surface (evenly distributed), but shall not be
higher than eight feet anywhere on the property. This provision
pertaining to the restriction on height or visibility of fences, and walls
shall not apply to junkyards or scrap metal processing facilities for
which special permits have been granted by the Town Board.
[Amended 1-19-1982; 3-10-2009; 5-21-2013]
B. No portion of any fence or wall shall be higher than four feet above the
ground at any point when set back less than 15 feet from a street
property line. For corner lots, no fence, or wall, shall be higher than
four feet above the ground at any point when set back less than 10 feet
from the second front yard property line. This provision shall not apply
to retaining walls, which shall be set back from street and second front
yard property lines in accordance with § 68-406F. For through lots, a
fence up to six feet in height may be located on a through lot front yard
property line, however, it shall be set back at least five feet from a
sidewalk or edge of road pavement. No fence shall be higher than six
feet when set back less than 15 feet from a through lot front yard
property line. [Amended 1-14-2003; 8-12-2003; 12-12-2006;
12-17-2019]
(1) Exception: For single-family and two-family dwellings on corner
lots of 11,250 square feet or less, a fence, no higher than six feet,
may be located up to the second front yard property line, provided
that no fence between the front yard property line and the front
line of the dwelling exceeds four feet in height, and the fence
complies with all other requirements of Article XXX, Sight
Obstructions, Fences, and Walls.
(2) Exception: For commercial properties with frontage along Sunrise
Highway (SR 27), Veterans Memorial Highway (SR 454) or the
Long Island Expressway (Interstate 495), a fence, no higher than
eight feet, may be located on the rear or side property line abutting
a residential use.
C. No fence, wall or obstruction shall be higher than three feet above the
adjacent pavement edge when located within any required sight
triangle or when set back less than eight feet from any street pavement
edge.
D. No gate shall open into any street.
E. The use of fences which deliver an electric shock, charge or current to
any animal or human being, when touched, is prohibited. The
installation or use of barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire or any
other similar wire or device designed to injure persons coming in
§ 68-406 ISLIP CODE § 68-406
66:972
§ 68-407. Roofless deck and patio requirements. [Added 3-24-1992;
amended 7-7-1992; 9-11-2001; 5-20-2003; 12-12-2006; 5-21-2013]
Minimum Setback for Decks and Patios
With Height Above
All Districts (Except
Fire Island)
Grade of 0 to
18 Inches
Over 18
Inches to 48
Inches
Over 48
Inches
Permit required No Yes Yes
Setback from street
property line
0 Permitted
encroach- ment
setback
Main house
contact with the same is also prohibited, unless required by federal,
state, or local law or regulation.
F. All walls greater than 18 inches in height from average, undisturbed
grade shall be set back from any property line a minimum of four feet or
a distance equal to the height of the wall above average, undisturbed
grade, whichever is greater. Walls that are 18 inches or higher, at any
point above average, undisturbed grade, shall obtain a permit prior to
construction. For marine bulkheads, a Town of Islip Wetlands and
Watercourses Permit may constitute the required permit, subject to the
review of the Divisions of Building and Engineering. All walls, as
defined in § 68-3 shall receive a determination of the necessity of site
plan review from the Divisions of Building and Engineering prior to
construction. [Added 8-12-2003]
G. All walls 18 inches in height or less from average, undisturbed grade, as
defined in § 68-3, do not require a setback or permit unless directed by
the Town Engineer after a preliminary site assessment. All walls, as
defined in § 68-3, shall receive a determination of the necessity of site
plan review from the Divisions of Building and Engineering prior to
construction. [Added 8-12-2003]
H. Fences of no higher than eight feet shall be permitted to be located on
the property line on Fire Island, provided that they do not restrict light
or visibility through more than 15% of their surface (evenly distributed)
and are not composed of chain link (unless a decorative chain link fence
design is presented to the Department of Planning and Development for
architectural review). [Added 5-21-2013]
I. If a fence is proposed along any street frontages for mini-storage
warehouses, said fence shall be a wrought-iron-type fence, in
conformance with § 68-406, and shall be designed pursuant to the
direction of the Planning Board. [Added 5-15-2018]
J. No chain link (cyclone) fence shall be permitted in the front yard on all
properties located in all Business and General Service Districts.
[Added 12-17-2019]
§ 68-406 WATER QUALITY § 68-407
66:973
Minimum Setback for Decks and Patios
With Height Above
All Districts (Except
Fire Island)
Grade of 0 to
18 Inches
Over 18
Inches to 48
Inches
Over 48
Inches
Setback from rear
property line (feet)
4 10 M/H
Setback from side
property lines (feet)
4 6 M/H
Fire Island (More Than
4 Feet Wide)
Permit required Yes Yes Yes
Setback from walks
(street) (feet)
15 15 M/H
Setback from rear
property line (feet)
15 15 15
Setback from side
property lines (feet)
5 5 15
Pool Decks or Pool
Patios
Permit and handrail
required
No Yes Yes
Setback from street
property line
M/H M/H M/H
Setback from rear
property line (feet)
6 10 M/H
Setback from side
property lines (feet)
6 10 M/H
NOTES:
M/H: Same as setbacks required for main house.
"Height above grade" means at any point along edge of deck.
All decks with roofs must maintain setbacks required for main house or as
indicated by above, whichever is greater.
A walkway or deck may be permitted along a bulkhead adjacent to a
waterway in any district. The deck or walkway must comply with applicable
side and rear yard setbacks for any of its width in excess of four feet,
except for side or rear yard setbacks where the bulkhead is located.
§ 68-407 ISLIP CODE § 68-407
66:974
NOTES:
The side yard setback for decks in all districts except Fire Island may
be waived for properties developed with a zero side yard setback for the
principal structure, provided that an opaque fence at least six feet high
exists on that portion of the lot line adjoining the deck. This exception shall
apply to decks which may exceed a height of 18 inches, but in no case a
height which exceeds that of the rear entrance of the attached dwelling to
which it is connected.
Guards, including handrails, shall be provided in conformance with the
New York State Building Code.
§ 68-407 WATER QUALITY § 68-407
66:975

ARTICLE XXXI
Minimum Site Improvements; Minimum Development Standards for
Property
[Amended 11-8-1972; 3-22-1973; 6-5-1973; 1-22-1974; 2-26-1974;
10-7-1974; 11-19-1974; 4-15-1975; 2-5-1980; 5-4-1982; 3-1-1983;
8-21-1984]
§ 68-408. Minimum site requirements; conformance to Subdivision
and Land Development Regulations. [Amended 4-8-1997; 4-5-2005]
As set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations (as
approved by the Town Board of the Town of Islip), the following
improvements, at a minimum, shall be installed and maintained on any
property which is improved, or for which the use is changed or for which a
certificate of occupancy or compliance is issued. All requirements shall be
shown on an approved site plan as required by the Regulations. Generally,
all activities on land, including, but not limited to, land clearing, filling,
regrading and site plan improvements, shall be governed by this chapter
and the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
§ 68-409. Minimum development standards for property. [Amended
1-14-2003]
A. On-site parking as required by the Table of Minimum Required Parking
Spaces.351 Parking stalls shall be provided as found in the Table of
Minimum Required Parking Spaces, found within the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations. [Amended 6-8-2010]
B. All other required improvements listed in the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations, including, but not limited to, off-street
parking, landscaping, drainage, screen planting and buffers, lighting,
dumpster enclosures, right-of-way improvements and public
improvements.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating the provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations shall be subject to the
penalties and fines contained in Article XXXV of this chapter.
A. The clearing of any land of trees and brush shall be governed by the
provisions of the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, and a permit shall be obtained prior to land clearing as
such permit is required by said regulations. In the event that a building
permit or site plan application is filed with the Town of Islip, then land
clearing shall be prohibited until such building permit or site plan
approval has been issued. For applications involving both a site plan
and building permit review, no land clearing may occur until the
issuance of the requested final building permit, unless otherwise
authorized by the Commissioner. [Amended 4-5-2005]
351. Editor's Note: The Table of Minimum Required Parking Spaces, formerly included at the
end of this chapter as § 68-409.2, was repealed 5-28-2008.
§ 68-408 WATER QUALITY § 68-409
66:977
B. The regrading, placement of fill, installation of walls, dumping of
material, excavating, mining, or other similar disturbance of land shall
be governed by the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
Any of the above actions may be subject to a site plan review at the
determination of the Town Engineer. Said determination shall be
obtained prior to commencement of the action. The site plan review
shall ensure that the action does not significantly alter the subject
parcel so as to infringe on the health, safety and welfare of all citizens,
does not negatively impact surrounding land uses and properties, and
provides adequate on-site drainage to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer. [Amended 8-12-2003]
C. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating the above provisions
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both. If a violation is not
removed or rectified to the satisfaction of the Town of Islip, then each
day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense under
this section.
§ 68-409 ISLIP CODE § 68-409
66:978
ARTICLE XXXII
Arterial Highway Setbacks
§ 68-410. Need for greater setbacks on certain arterial highways.
Throughout the Town are numerous heavily traveled highways which have
been designated as arterial highways. On such highways, a greater setback
may be required than is indicated in the particular zone in which the
property may be located.
§ 68-411. Enumeration of setbacks on specific highways and
associated service roads. [Amended 4-8-1997; 5-21-2013; 8-5-2014;
12-17-2019]
All buildings or structures erected on any of the arterial highways listed
below shall require a setback of not less than the amount shown herein:
Belmore Avenue 40 feet Sunrise Hwy., northerly to Rosyln
St., Great River
Caleb's Path 40 feet Suffolk Ave., Btwd., north to town
line with Smithtown
Crooked Hill Road (C.R.
No. 13)
30 feet Suffolk Ave., Btwd., north to
Sagtikos Pkwy.
Crooked Hill Road (C.R.
No. 13)
50 feet Sagtikos Pkwy., north to Smithtown
line
Fifth Avenue 25 feet Reil Place, B.S., north to Howell's
Road
Fifth Avenue (C.R. No.
13A)
30 feet Howell's Rd., B.S., north to Suffolk
Ave., Btwd.
Islip Avenue (State Rte.
111)
40 feet Montauk Hwy., Islip, to Union Blvd.,
Islip
Oak Street, Islip, to Pear Street, C.I.
Cocoanut Street, C.I., to Suffolk
Avenue, C.I.
Joshua's Path (State Rte.
111)
40 feet Suffolk Ave., Btwd., north to
Wheeler Rd., Hauppauge
Lakeland/Ocean Ave.
(C.R. No. 93)
40 feet Sunrise Hwy., Bohemia, to LIRR
(main line)
Long Island Avenue
(Pine Aire Drive)
25 feet Babylon town line east to Fifth Ave.,
Btwd.
Long Island Expressway
(L.I.E.) (S.R. 495)
60 feet Huntington town line easterly to
west side of Islandia village line
Long Island Motor
Pkwy. (C.R. No. 67)
45 feet Smithtown town line easterly to
Bridge Rd., Hauppauge
§ 68-410 WATER QUALITY § 68-411
66:979
East side of northwest Islandia
village line to Rosevale Avenue,
Ronkonkoma
Lowell Avenue 40 feet Hackmatac St. and Centre Ave., C.I.,
to its inter. with Connetquot Ave. at
point approx. 100' s/o Amityville St.,
Great River
Spur Drive N.
(Heckscher Parkway
Service Road)
40 feet Manatuck Blvd., B.S., to Sunrise
Hwy., Great River
Spur Drive S.
(Heckscher Parkway
Service Road)
40 feet Ackerson Blvd., B.S., to Sunrise
Hwy., Great River
Sunrise Highway (State
Rte. No. 27)
50 feet East side of Brightwaters village
line east to intersection with
Montauk Hwy., Oakdale
50 feet Babylon town line to west side of
Brightwaters village line
Sunrise Highway (State
Rte. No. 27)
60 feet Montauk Hwy., Oakdale, east to
Brookhaven town line
Sunrise Highway (State
Rte. No 27)
100 feet For all residential uses Townwide
Townline Road (C.R. No.
76)
40 feet Smithtown Bypass (State Rte. 347)
County Rd. easterly to Smithtown
town line
Udall's Road (C.R. No.
82)
25 feet Chris Lane, W.I., north to Bellmore
Street, W.I.
Veterans Memorial
Highway (State Rte.
454)
25 feet Smithtown town line easterly to
Wheeler Road (NYS Rte. 111)
45 feet Wheeler Road (NYS Rte. 111) to
northwest side of Islandia village
line
45 feet LIRR (Main Line) easterly to
terminus at Church Street and
Sunrise Highway, Holbrook
Wheeler Road (C.R. 17,
then State Rte. 111)
25 feet Central Avenue, Hauppauge,
northerly to Grissom Way
§ 68-411 ISLIP CODE § 68-411
66:980
ARTICLE XXXIII
Board of Appeals
§ 68-412. Organization; powers.
There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of five members appointed by
the Town Board. The Board of Appeals shall have the powers granted by
and be controlled by the provisions of the Town Law and any amendments
thereto.
§ 68-413. Rules and procedure.
The Board of Appeals shall, consistent with applicable law, determine its
own rules and procedure governing, among other things, hearings, appeals
and calendars.
§ 68-414. Matters referred.
The Board of Appeals shall investigate and report upon all matters referred
to it by the Town Board.
§ 68-415. Matters of original jurisdiction; special exceptions.
Whenever a use or the location thereof is permitted only upon approval
by the Board of Appeals as a special exception, the Board of Appeals may
authorize such use in a specific case and after notice and public hearing.
In addition, the Board of Appeals shall have authority to hear and decide
applications filed for the following, as special exceptions:
A. Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming
use, or permit the extension of a nonconforming use or building upon
the lot occupied by such use or building at the time of the passage of
this chapter and within the limitations set forth in §§ 68-15 and 68-17.
[Amended 10-13-2010]
B. 352Where a district boundary line divides a property, the Board of
Appeals may permit the uses allowed in the less restricted district to
extend to the entire lot, but not more than 50 feet beyond the boundary
line of the district in which such use is authorized. [Added
12-12-2006; amended 6-8-2010]
C. (Reserved)353
D. (Reserved)354
E. (Reserved)355
352. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the extension of a building or use into a
more restricted district, was repealed 9-11-2001.
353. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding temporary permits granted in undeveloped
sections of the Town, was repealed 4-8-1997.
354. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding modification of these regulations, was
repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-412 WATER QUALITY § 68-415
66:981
§ 68-416. Special exception determination.
Before such approval for such special exception, the Board of Appeals shall
determine that:
F. (Reserved)356
G. (Reserved)357
H. Permit the location in any use district of a camping area for not more
than a five-year period, provided that said area is and remains under
one ownership during the period of the permit, and regulate the
location of structures and streets within the area.
I. (Reserved)358
J. Permit the location of a model house in any residence district for a
period of one year, renewable for additional one-year periods, but in no
event longer than a total of seven years; provided, however, that before
a permit shall be issued, a plot plan shall be filed with the Building
Division, showing the following, and the same shall be installed and
maintained: [Amended 7-25-2017]
(1) Off-street parking for at least four cars pursuant to the direction of
the Town Engineer or his/her designee in a manner that is
consistent with the Town of Islip's Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
K. Permit greater height of fences and any different proportion of open
spaces and solid material of fences than permitted by this ordinance.
L. (Reserved)359
A. The use will not prevent the orderly and reasonable use of adjacent
properties or of properties in adjacent use districts;
B. The use will not prevent the orderly and reasonable use of permitted or
legally established uses in the district wherein the proposed use is to be
located, or of permitted or legally established uses in adjacent use
districts;
C. The safety, health, welfare, comfort, convenience or order of the Town
will not be adversely affected by the proposed use and its location; and
355. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding modifications to the yard or lot area, as
amended 7-7-1981, was repealed 4-8-1997.
356. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the erection of a building or of a portion of
a building, was repealed 4-8-1997.
357. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, permitting offices of professional persons in use
districts, was repealed 4-8-1997.
358. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, permitting the location of outdoor displays when
related to shopping centers or groups of stores in the Business 1 District as a special
exception, was repealed 6-8-2010.
359. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding boat berths, added 5-6-1980, was repealed
4-8-1997.
§ 68-415 ISLIP CODE § 68-416
66:982
§ 68-417. Special exception considerations.
In making such determination for such special exception, the Board of
Appeals shall, among other things, give consideration to the following:
D. The use will be in harmony with and promote the general purposes and
intent of this ordinance.
A. The character of the existing and probable development of uses in the
district and the peculiar suitability of such district for the location of
any of such permissive uses.
B. The conservation of property values and the encouragement of the most
appropriate uses of land.
C. The effect that the location of the proposed use may have upon the
creation of undue increase of vehicular traffic congestion on public
streets, highways or waterways.
D. The availability of adequate and proper public or private facilities for
the treatment, removal or discharge of sewage, refuse or other effluent
(whether liquid, solid, gaseous or otherwise) that may be caused or
created by or as a result of the use.
E. Whether the use or materials incidental thereto or produced thereby
may give off obnoxious gases, odors, smoke or soot.
F. Whether the use will cause disturbing emission of electrical discharges,
dust, light, vibration or noise.
G. Whether the operations in pursuance of the use will cause undue
interference with the orderly enjoyment by the public of parking or of
recreational facilities, if existing or if proposed by the Town or by other
competent governmental agency.
H. To the necessity for bituminous-surfaced space for purposes of offstreet
parking of vehicles incidental to the use, and whether such space
is reasonably adequate and appropriate and can be furnished by the
owner of the plot sought to be used within or adjacent to the plot
wherein the use shall be had.
I. Whether a hazard to life, limb or property because of fire, flood, erosion
or panic may be created by reason or as a result of the use, or by the
structures to be used therefor or by the inaccessibility of the property
or structures thereon for the convenient entry and operation of fire and
other emergency apparatus, or by the undue concentration or
assemblage of persons upon such plot.
J. Whether the use or the structures to be used therefor will cause an
overcrowding of land or undue concentration of population.
K. Whether the plot area is sufficient, appropriate and adequate for the
use and the reasonably anticipated operation and expansion thereof.
§ 68-416 WATER QUALITY § 68-417
66:983
§ 68-418. Conditions and safeguards.
The Board of Appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards
which in its judgment shall be deemed necessary and shall substantially
serve the public convenience and welfare.
§ 68-419. Lapse of permits: abandonment of project for which
variance and/or special exception granted. [Amended 9-20-1988360]
Any variance and/or special exception granted by the Board of Appeals
pursuant to this article or under the provisions of § 267 of the Town Law
shall become null and void if the building permit has not been secured
within one year from the date of such authorization, approval or special
exception and work commenced thereunder and completed within 18
months from the date of the issuance of said permit or the lot or premises
used for the purposes granted by the variance and/or special exception
within one year from the date of order or decision of said Board of Appeals.
§ 68-419.1. Temporary special exception for two-family dwellings.
[Added 9-3-1974]
L. The physical characteristics and topography of the land.
M. Whether the use to be operated is unreasonably near to a church,
school, theater, recreational area or other place of public assembly.
A. Legislative purpose. The Town Board of the Town of Islip, as a matter of
public policy, realizes that there are times within a family when, for the
good of the family, individuals who are within a lineal degree of
consanguinity to the occupier of a single-family house must live under
the same roof. It further realizes that the house may have to be
structurally altered because of this occupancy. The Town Board is
aware that such structural alteration violates the Zoning Code but
considers public policy above such temporary violation and to be in the
best interests of the Town. Therefore, it grants to the Board of Appeals
power to grant, as a temporary special exception, the right of a
homeowner to structurally alter his residence into a two-family
residence. It is not the intent of this section to permit applications to be
granted where the only ground for granting such application would be
that it would be simpler or more economical to live in this manner.
[Amended 4-1-1975]
B. Definition. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TWO-FAMILY, FAMILY-USE-ONLY DWELLING — A single-family
dwelling that has been temporarily converted for occupancy by not
more than two individuals or groups of individuals constituting an
360. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 10-9-1988.
§ 68-417 ISLIP CODE § 68-419.1
66:984
immediate family. Such a dwelling may or may not have an alteration to
permit easier living arrangements.
C. [Repealed 4-1-1975361]
D. The Board of Appeals may only grant such applications in cases where
physical or mental hardship is involved. However, advancing age,
regardless of physical or mental state, may be grounds for granting an
application. [Amended 4-1-1975]
E. The following regulations and criteria must be followed by the Board
when granting such applications:
(1) Such certificates may be granted only for a maximum of three-year
periods. [Amended 5-28-2008]
(2) The application may be granted only to persons who are related in
the first degree of lineal consanguinity. However, the Board may
grant, in cases of extreme hardship, applications involving relatives
of the second degree of lineal consanguinity. [Amended 4-1-1975;
4-6-1976]
(3) Upon the death of the person who is the relationship to the
applicant, upon transfer of title to the property or upon the related
person's moving or marrying or leaving the premises for more than
four consecutive months, the use ceases automatically. In all
certificates or letters granting such use, there must be a statement
to this effect in print not smaller than 3/16 of an inch on such
certificates or letters. [Amended 4-1-1975; 11-18-1975;
8-5-2014]
(4) The individual making the application must be the owner of the
property.
(5) At the time of making such an application and upon each renewal
application, there must be submitted a certified copy of the birth or
baptismal certificate of both the applicant and the relative.
(6) A permit may not be granted to a house which has less than 1,000
square feet and any addition that is granted may not be more than
1/3 of the square footage of the primary house.
F. (Reserved)362
G. There are existing outstanding permits that do not conform to this
ordinance. The Board should approach each of these renewals on a
case-by-case basis; and in those instances where it feels an injustice
361. Editor's Note: The provisions of Subsection C were incorporated into Subsection A by the
ordinance adopted 4-1-1975.
362. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Second degree of lineal consanguinity, was repealed
4-6-1976. See now Subsection E(2) above.
§ 68-419.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-419.1
66:985
would result in not renewing the permit, it may grant the permit to
continue the use.
§ 68-419.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-419.1
66:986
ARTICLE XXXIV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 68-420. Prohibited storage. [Amended 5-5-1981; 4-22-1986;
4-5-2005; 5-21-2013]
It shall be unlawful to allow or maintain the outdoor storage of unregistered
vehicles, refrigerators, washing machines, drying machines, other
household appliances, sinks, toilets, radiators, freezers, tires, stoves and
bathtubs in all use districts, except in the Business 3 District with Town
Board special permission and the Industrial 2 District. In all districts, any
storage, as defined in § 68-3, Definitions, "storage," not identified on the
certificate of occupancy/compliance or either 1) enclosed within a permitted
structure or 2) contained within an approved enclosure shall also be
considered prohibited storage.
§ 68-420.1. Wireless communications facilities; amateur radio
towers and antennas; satellite antennas. [Added 1-14-1969;
amended 4-5-1983; 6-3-1986; 4-8-1997; 9-12-2000; 5-20-2003;
6-8-2010]
A. Wireless communications facilities.
(1) Purpose. In recognition of advancing technology and the increased
demand and need for wireless communications towers and
facilities, the Town Board hereby determines that it is in the public
interest to regulate the siting and installation of such facilities
within the Town in order to protect public safety and welfare. When
deliberating the location of wireless facilities, due consideration
shall be given to the Town's Comprehensive Plan, existing land uses
and development, environmentally sensitive areas, aesthetics and
other appropriate factors in approving sites for the location of
towers and/or facilities. These regulations are not intended to
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal
wireless services.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY WIRELESS FACILITY — Any equipment, shed, fencing
or structure, or combination thereof, containing any electrical
components necessary for the proper operation of primary
antennas.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Any man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of
antennas or towers, subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Board or its designee.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in
§ 68-420 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.1
66:987
communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves,
digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar
signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communications signals.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS — All zoning districts except residential
districts.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any
tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit
has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section,
including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been
completed or constructed, provided that such approved permit(s)
is current and has not expired; or any tower which is constructed
and has a certificate of compliance.
ROOF-MOUNTED COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A wireless
communications facility which is mounted and supported on the
roof or any rooftop appurtenance of a legally existing building or
structure.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed for the
principal purpose of supporting one or more antenna for telephone,
personal communications services, common carrier services, radio
and television transmission, microwave transmission, and similar
communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes the structure
and any support thereto.
WALL-MOUNTED COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A wireless
communications facility which is mounted and supported entirely
on the wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of
architectural features, such as parapets, chimneys and similar
appurtenances.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility that
transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals, including any
tower or antenna, as defined herein.
(3) Applicability. No new wireless communications facility shall be
erected, moved, reconstructed or altered to serve as a
transmission, reception or relay facility except by approval of the
Planning Board, in compliance with the regulations set forth in this
section.
(4) Provisions for location of use.
(a) Residential. Wireless communications facilities located in
residential zoning districts are subject to site plan approval
and special permit approval from the Planning Board, and must
meet the following requirements:
§ 68-420.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.1
66:988
[1] Wireless communications facilities on buildings shall meet
the following criteria:
[a] Any antenna or equipment accessory to a roofmounted
antenna shall be set back a minimum of four
feet for every one foot in height of the accessory
equipment, but in no instance shall protrude more
than 15 feet above the average height of the building
in order to minimize its visibility from adjacent
properties or roadways. Installation of an antenna and
associated equipment shall incorporate a design that
is contextual with the structure on which the antenna
is co-locating.
[b] Any wall-mounted antenna shall not protrude above
the roof parapet or roofline and shall be painted to
match the color of the existing structure. No portion of
the antenna shall extend more than 18 inches from the
facade of the building.
[c] Enclosures designed to conceal rooftop wireless
communications facilities shall not be deemed to
contribute towards building height, floor area ratio,
gross floor area, or parking requirements, provided
that said enclosure does not contain equipment or
materials that are not accessory to the wireless
communication facility and the enclosure is contextual
with the architecture of the structure and is minimized
to the furthest extent practical. All equipment within
the enclosure shall still be subject to the dimensional
requirements set forth in this article. [Added
3-8-2011]
[2] A tower base shall be set back from the property line by a
minimum distance equal to 110% of the height of the
tower. Accessory wireless facilities shall comply with all
other dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
[3] New antennas located on existing towers shall be flush
mounted or internally mounted.
[4] Any new tower shall consist of an alternative tower
structure as defined herein. Guyed (cable-supported) or
truss or lattice antenna support structures are expressly
prohibited.
[5] No new tower shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated
that adequate service cannot be provided within a
coverage gap area by exhausting all other available and
reasonable locations for the proposed tower in a
§ 68-420.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.1
66:989
nonresidential district to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board, except as provided herein.
(b) Commercial. Wireless communications facilities located in
commercial zoning districts are subject to site plan approval
and special permit approval from the Planning Board, except
as otherwise provided herein, and must meet the following
requirements:
[1] Wireless communication facilities on buildings shall
protrude not more than 15 feet above the average height
of the building, as defined in § 68-3, and meet the following
criteria: [Amended 10-13-2010]
[a] Equipment accessory to a roof-mounted antenna shall
be set back a minimum of four feet for every one foot
in height of the accessory equipment, but in no
instance shall protrude more than 15 feet above the
average height of the building in order to minimize its
visibility from adjacent properties or roadways.
Installation of an antenna and associated equipment
shall incorporate a design that is contextual with the
structure on which the antenna is co-locating, and
antennas shall not protrude more than 15 feet above
the average height of the building.
[b] Any wall-mounted antenna shall not protrude above
the roof parapet or roofline and shall be painted to
match the color of the existing structure. No portion of
the antenna shall extend more than 18 inches from the
facade of the building.
[c] Enclosures designed to conceal rooftop wireless
communications facilities shall not be deemed to
contribute towards building height, floor area ratio,
gross floor area, or parking requirements, provided
that said enclosure does not contain equipment or
materials that are not accessory to the wireless
communication facility and the enclosure is minimized
to the furthest extent practical. All equipment within
the enclosure shall still be subject to the dimensional
requirements set forth in this article. [Added
3-8-2011]
[2] A tower base shall be set back from the property line by a
minimum distance equal to 110% of the height of the
tower. Accessory wireless facilities shall comply with all
other dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
§ 68-420.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.1
66:990
[3] Wireless communications facilities located on preexisting
structures or buildings in commercial districts are not
subject to special permit approval, provided that they have
all necessary Building Division permits and are not visible
to any residential use or zone as determined by the
Commissioner of Planning or his/her designee. New
antennas co-locating on an existing tower approved by the
Planning Board shall not be subject to this requirement.
[4] New antennas located on existing towers shall be flush
mounted or internally mounted.
[5] No new tower shall be permitted within 500 feet of a
residential zone unless it is demonstrated that adequate
service cannot be provided within a coverage gap area by
exhausting all other available and reasonable locations for
the proposed tower outside the five-hundred-feet area to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(c) Historic districts. Wireless communications facilities located in
historic districts are subject to site plan approval and special
permit approval from the Planning Board, and must meet the
following requirements: Wireless communications facilities
shall not be located at any designated landmark property or
district listed by federal, state or Town agency, except as
specified by the following:
[1] Any facility located on or within the historic structure shall
not alter the character-defining features, distinct
construction methods or original materials of the building.
[2] Any alteration made to an historic structure to
accommodate a wireless communications facility shall be
fully reversible.
[3] Facilities within an historic district shall be concealed
within or behind existing architectural features, such that
there is no visual impact.
(d) Parks. Wireless communications facilities are subject to site
plan approval and special permit approval from the Planning
Board, except as otherwise provided herein, and must meet the
following requirements: Wireless communications facilities
shall not be located at any designated park listed by any
federal, state or Town agency, except as specified by the
following:
[1] No new tower shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated
that adequate service cannot be provided within a
coverage gap area by exhausting all other available and
reasonable locations for the proposed tower outside of the
park to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Planning or
§ 68-420.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.1
66:991
his/her designee, except as provided in Subsection
A(4)(d)[4] below.
[2] Any facility located in a park shall be located, designed
and screened to minimize the visual and aesthetic impacts.
[3] Any facility located within a park shall not be located in an
area that would interfere with normal, day-to-day
recreational activities or operations.
[4] Any facility located in a park which is co-located on or
which replaces an existing structure (e.g., ball field light
poles) shall not be subject to special permit approval,
provided that the height of the new structure does not
exceed the height of the preexisting structure and is a
minimum of 500 feet from the nearest residence.
(5) Co-location. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates that no existing tower, structure or building can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and unless it is
demonstrated that adequate service cannot be provided with colocation.
(6) Design.
(a) The tower shall be designed in such a manner as to minimize
any visual impacts.
(b) If a wireless communications facility is located on a building, it
shall be neutral in color, or similar in color to the building, and
every effort shall be made to conceal the facility.
(c) Accessory wireless facilities shall be screened, landscaped and
shall maximize use of building materials, colors and textures
designed to blend with the natural or existing surroundings to
minimize any visual impacts.
(d) The base area shall be surrounded by a six-foot-high fence. The
surrounding fence shall be screened by a continuous row of
evergreen trees of at least six feet in height and planted five
foot on center at time of installation.
(e) No signs are permitted on towers except safety instructions or
similar material.
(f) A tower shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or
otherwise required for safety reasons.
(7) Removal. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be deemed abandoned. The
owner of such antenna/tower/site shall remove the same at the
owner's expense within 90 days of notice. The Town reserves the
right, after 90 days' written notice sent certified mail, return
§ 68-420.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.1
66:992
receipt requested, to the owner, to remove the antenna or tower,
and shall bill the owner for any expense incurred. All costs
associated with same shall be assessed to the owner's next tax bill.
(8) Application requirements. Applications shall include the following:
(a) The location, type and height of the wireless communications
facility and whether it is to be located on an existing structure,
co-located or on a telecommunications tower.
(b) Adjacent roadways, rights-of-way, land uses, structures and
zoning on land within 1/2 mile.
(c) Setbacks from property lines.
(d) Environmental assessment.
(e) Scaled drawing of the site, including elevation drawings of the
structure, a visual study showing where, within one mile, the
tower could be seen, the distance between all structures and
proposed means of access.
(f) Landscape plan, including fencing and fence screening.
(g) Analysis of physical need for additional towers or antennas.
(h) Written site location alternative analysis describing the
location of other sites considered, the availability of those
sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
provider's service or engineering needs and the reasons why
the subject site was chosen. Written requests and responses
for site location alternative analysis shall be provided, in
addition to the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
current owner(s) of those sites. If the proposed plan is to locate
in a residential area, the applicant must show a good faith
effort to locate in a nonresidential area and that locating in a
commercial or industrial zone is not feasible.
(i) Evidence of a good faith effort to co-locate or locate on existing
towers, structures or buildings and why it is not feasible.
Written requests and responses for co-location efforts shall be
provided, in addition to the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the current owner(s) of those structures.
(j) The application must provide for any evidence that the
proposed wireless communications facility can accommodate,
at a minimum, three times capacity to allow for future lease
and co-location. Future lease fees shall be at a reasonable
market price. Competing providers are required to negotiate
fairly regarding co-location leases. A future co-location
applicant cannot be denied except for mechanical, structural
or regulatory reasons.
§ 68-420.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.1
66:993
(k) Location and separation distance between all other existing
and proposed facilities within the Town and/or within five
miles.
(l) Coverage map(s) depicting existing and proposed coverage for
each proposed carrier. Said maps shall be submitted in both
paper and electronic form. Paper maps shall be at least 11
inches by 17 inches in size and shall contain coverage areas
superimposed over current aerial photography. Electronic
formats shall be submitted in any industry-standard
geographic information system (GIS) format. In addition, said
maps shall be accompanied by a certified report by a radio
frequency engineer and shall depict any existing and proposed
signal strength levels.
(m) Other information as deemed necessary by the Board.
(n) Visual impact analysis.
[1] Said analysis shall include:
[a] Identification of visually sensitive sites, including
parks, historic sites and residential areas.
[b] Visualization photographs from key viewpoints.
Photographs shall be conducted when leaves are off
trees if trees are in front of the view of a proposed
tower.
[2] In the event a crane or other equipment is utilized to
simulate the proposed tower on the subject property for
the visualization photographs, the owners of surrounding
properties within 200 feet of the site and the Planning
Department shall be notified no less than 10 days prior to
the test by certified letter, return receipt requested. Said
notification shall include two rain dates in the event
inclement weather prevents the visualization study from
taking place.
(9) Considerations.
(a) Priorities.
[1] The Board may give priority to application for location on
an existing structure or building.
[2] The Board may give priority to applications for collocation.
[3] The Board may give priority to a single application for
multiantenna proposals.
(b) Other considerations.
§ 68-420.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.1
66:994
[1] The minimum height necessary to render adequate
service.
[2] Proximity to residential districts and other structures.
[3] Nature of existing or proposed uses of adjacent property.
[4] Site and/or surrounding topography.
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
[6] Design of tower, in particular the characteristics that have
the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
[7] Availability of suitable existing towers and structures.
[8] Proposed ingress and egress.
[9] No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that no existing tower, structure or
building can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna.
[10] Impact on wireless service.
(c) The Board may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of
one or more of these criteria if it concludes that the goals of
this section are better served thereby.
(10) The Town Board authorizes the Planning Board to retain the
services of competent radio frequency engineers, real estate
experts and/or attorneys where reasonably necessary to review an
application or proposal, including, but not limited to, reviewing
expert testimony provided on behalf of the applicant and
supplementing submissions. The consultant(s) may review
coverage maps, alternative site locations, co-location opportunities
or other criteria that may be associated with the application or
proposal. The consultant shall review all submissions in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and
regulations and make recommendations to the Planning Board. The
cost of retaining such competent consultants shall be borne by the
applicant. The costs of any consultant shall be reasonable and the
work and associated billing shall be viewable by the applicant upon
request.
(11) In the event a denial of an application would constitute an unlawful
prohibition or effective prohibition of cellular service under
applicable federal or state law (including the Telecommunications
Act of 1996,363 the "TCA"), the Planning Board shall grant the
special permit and shall have the authority to impose conditions
363. Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 609 et seq.
§ 68-420.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.1
66:995
upon such granting consistent with this chapter and such federal
or state law.
(12) If the Planning Board determines that the interests of this chapter
would otherwise be satisfied, the Planning Board may, in its
discretion, but shall not be required to, deem individual
requirements and conditions satisfied by issuing a waiver or
relaxation in relation thereto. Any waiver or relaxation may only be
made in the event that the requirements and conditions for which a
waiver or relaxation is made are found not to be requisite in the
interest of public safety or general welfare and may only be
exercised in the event that the Planning Board, in issuing a waiver
or relaxation, makes specific findings that the interests of this
chapter would otherwise be satisfied, the waiver or relaxation is
reasonably necessary for the provision of wireless communications
services consistent with the interests of both this chapter and the
TCA and the applicant has taken all reasonably available mitigation
measures. Every special permit shall also conform to all special
findings that are specified herein.
B. Amateur radio antennas and towers. Facilities are subject to site plan
approval and special permit approval from the Planning Board, and
must meet the following requirements:
(1) Any antenna or tower must be located in the rear yard.
(2) A tower base shall be separated from the property line by 110% of
the height of the tower.
C. Satellite antennas.
(1) Satellite antennas shall be permitted as an accessory structure
within any use district, subject to the requirements contained
herein and subject to the issuance of a building permit from the
Town of Islip Building Division.
(2) Standards applying to all use districts.
(a) Satellite antennas shall be designed to withstand winds of up
to 120 miles per hour.
(b) All satellite antennas shall be installed and operated in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
(3) Standards applying to all residential use districts except the AAAB
District and Planned Landmark Preservation District.
(a) Ground-mounted satellite antennas shall not be located in any
front or side yard area, with the exception of a corner or a culde-
sac lot where the side yard is larger than the rear yard.
§ 68-420.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.1
66:996
§ 68-420.2. (Reserved)364
§ 68-420.3. Temporary trailers. [Added 11-20-1973, effective
12-8-1973; amended 10-8-2002]
There shall be permitted the installation of a trailer in which a family or
individuals may live in a residential zone and no other zone under the
following circumstances:
(b) Ground-mounted satellite dishes shall not exceed 10 feet in
diameter or exceed a height of 15 feet above the average grade
level.
(c) Ground-mounted satellite antennas shall be screened at the
base with evergreen plants, shall be finished in a color that
blends with the surrounding environment and shall not be
visible from any street.
(d) Roof-mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed two feet in
diameter or project above the ridgeline of any building on the
property nor shall they be visible from any street.
(4) Standards applying to all General Service, Business and Industrial
Districts.
(a) Ground-mounted satellite antennas shall be placed only in the
rear yard, excluding the rear yard setback areas.
(b) Roof-mounted satellite antennas shall be mounted on the rear
half of the building roof and shall not exceed 10 feet in
diameter.
(c) Satellite antennas shall not be visible from any street. An
architectural screen consisting of material compatible with the
building type and style or landscaping may be utilized, subject
to the review and approval of the Planning Division.
A. The trailer must be for the temporary use and occupation of an
individual or a group of individuals whose residence has been so
damaged by fire or altered by some other circumstances as to render
the residence uninhabitable.
B. The trailer must be placed on the same plot as the house which is being
rebuilt, or a contiguous parcel.
C. There shall be obtained from the Building Division a permit, the fee for
which shall be set by the Commissioner of Planning and Development,
or the Commissioner's designee. [Amended 1-14-2003; 6-8-2010]
364. Editor's Note: Former § 68-420.2, Resubdivision of real property, added 12-5-1972, as
amended, was repealed 10-13-2010.
§ 68-420.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.3
66:997
§ 68-420.4. Outdoor parking of unattached trailers.365 [Added
5-20-2003; amended 4-5-2005]
The outdoor parking of unattached trailers may be permitted in the
Industrial 1 District pursuant to § 68-340.1.
§ 68-420.5. (Reserved)366
§ 68-420.6. Display of first-aid instructions in restaurants. [Added
3-6-1979]
All restaurants shall conspicuously display instructions on first-aid
treatment to choking victims. Said instructions shall include the Heimlich
Maneuver.
§ 68-420.7. Lighting. [Added 8-28-1990]
D. The length of time such trailer shall be permitted to remain shall be
three months with two three-month extensions. No further extensions
are permitted and it shall be mandatory that the trailer be removed at
the end of the time permitted. If the trailer is not removed, the owner of
the trailer shall be fined $100 per day for each day that it remains
beyond the time limit. If the trailer remains in violation for more than
10 days, the Chief Building Inspector or the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Safety Enforcement, or his representative, may,
after notifying the owner of said trailer, in person or by letter, return
receipt requested, cause the trailer to be removed. The expense of such
removal and any storage charges resulting shall be paid by the owner of
the trailer, and if said cost is not paid within 10 days, the Chief Building
Inspector or the Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety
Enforcement may advertise the public sale of the trailer in the official
paper of the Town and sell it to the highest bidder. The moneys realized
from the sale shall be applied to any fines outstanding and to reimburse
the Town for any expense incurred in moving and storing the trailer. If
there shall be any excess, it shall be remitted to the former owner of the
trailer. [Amended 6-8-2010]
A. Floodlighting or strobe or flashing lights shall not be installed or
maintained in any manner that would allow any rays to fall beyond the
property lines. Any lighting which impairs the vision or creates a hazard
or nuisance is prohibited.
B. This section shall not apply to New York State or a public corporation,
as defined by § 66 of the General Construction Law.
365. Editor's Note: Former § 68-420.4, Board of Special Permits; uses permitted by special
permit from the Board of Special Permits after public hearing, as amended, was repealed
4-8-1997.
366. Editor's Note: Former § 68-420.5, Special permits for family care homes, as amended, was
repealed 4-8-1997.
§ 68-420.3 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.8
66:998
§ 68-420.8. Driveways and parking. [Added 12-12-2006; amended
5-28-2008; 6-22-2010]
§ 68-420.9. Accessory wind energy turbines. [Added 12-2-2008]
A. Legislative intent. In order to maintain an appropriate visual quality for
residential properties, preserve property values, protect neighborhood
character and safeguard quality of life, certain standards shall apply as
specified herein.
(1) The amount of front yard area consisting of asphalt, gravel, stone
or dirt or other nonvegetative material, to be used primarily for the
parking of vehicles, shall not exceed 35% of the area of the primary
front yard.
(2) The parking of vehicles in the front yard area is restricted to that
portion consisting of asphalt, gravel, stone or dirt or other
nonvegetative material. The parking of vehicles in the front yard
area is prohibited when all four tires of a vehicle are placed on
grass or other vegetative material. This prohibition shall not apply
if inclement weather conditions (such as flooding or snow
accumulation) render it impracticable or impossible to comply
therewith.
(3) The amount of front yard area to be used for a pedestrian walkway
cannot exceed 12% of the primary front yard.
(4) Where applicable, the portion of the lot comprising a second front
yard cannot be used for the area consisting of asphalt, for the
parking of vehicles, except in those cases where said area is
deducted from the amount allowed in the primary front yard.
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "Accessory Wind Energy
Turbine Ordinance for the Town of Islip."
B. Legislative intent. In order to accommodate alternative and renewable
forms of energy production across the Town, while regulating the visual
impacts of any such form, accessory wind energy turbines, as defined in
§ 68-3 of this ordinance, may be allowed as specified herein.
C. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to all accessory wind energy turbines proposed
to be constructed after the effective date of this section, and is
intended to apply to stand-alone and/or roof-mounted turbines
constructed primarily to supplement the existing power supplies
for individual buildings across the Town.
(2) Accessory wind energy turbines constructed prior to the effective
date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements
contained herein; provided that any physical modification to an
existing accessory wind energy turbine that materially alters the
§ 68-420.8 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.9
66:999
size, type and number of wind turbines or other equipment shall
require a permit under this section.
(3) Any industrial accessory wind energy turbine, as defined in § 68-3,
shall comply with the requirements in § 68-420.10 of this chapter.
[Added 9-29-2009]
D. Administration.
(1) The fee for any accessory wind energy turbine application shall be
limited to $15.
(2) The review of any accessory wind energy turbine application may
be expedited at the discretion of the Building Division.
(3) The Building Division may keep a list, along with specific
preapproved plans, of accessory wind energy turbine models and
manufacturers that meet all structural and electrical requirements
of this ordinance or any applicable New York State code. The
Building Division may accept or use these preapproved plans in
total or in part and may further adjust any submission
requirements accordingly in order to expedite the review of these
applications.
E. Specifications.
(1) The design of any accessory wind energy turbine shall conform to
applicable industry standards. The applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers or from Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
Veritas, Germanishcer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Wind
Energy Association, or other similar certifying organizations.
(2) The design of any accessory wind energy turbine shall conform to
applicable New York State codes.
(3) Any accessory wind energy turbine shall be designed to withstand
winds of up to 120 miles per hour.
(4) Controls and brakes. All wind energy turbines shall be equipped
with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic
overspeed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar
systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be
operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation, used independently of
a mechanical brake, shall not be considered a sufficient braking
system for overspeed protection.
(5) Electrical components. All electrical components of the accessory
wind energy turbine shall conform to relevant and applicable local,
state and national codes.
(6) Visual appearance; power lines.
§ 68-420.9 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.9
66:1000
(a) Accessory wind energy turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color,
such as white, off-white or gray.
(b) Accessory wind energy turbines shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air
safety.
(c) On-site transmission and power lines between accessory wind
energy turbines and the electrical service box within the main
structure shall be placed underground.
(7) Any tower used in connection with an accessory wind energy
turbine shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground surface.
(8) All access doors to any electrical equipment and/or service boxes
attached to a accessory wind energy turbine shall be locked to
prevent entry by nonauthorized persons.
(9) Noise and shadow flicker.
(a) Audible sound from an accessory wind energy turbine shall not
exceed 55 dBA (decibels), as measured at the exterior of any
occupied building on an adjacent property. Methods for
measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from the
accessory wind energy turbine shall be equal to or exceed the
minimum standards for precision described in American Wind
Energy Association (AWEA) Standard 2.1, 1989, titled
Procedures for the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic
Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation Systems Volume I:
First Tier.
(b) The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to minimize
shadow flicker to any occupied building on any adjacent
property,
(10) Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television or
similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the
accessory wind energy turbine.
(11) Decommissioning. The facility owner and operator shall, at its
expense, complete decommissioning of the accessory wind energy
turbine within 12 months after the end of the useful life of said
turbine. The accessory wind energy turbine will presume to be at
the end of its useful life if no electricity is generated for a
continuous period of 12 months. Decommissioning shall include
removal of towers, turbines, buildings, cabling, electrical
components, and any other associated facilities.
(12) Height.
§ 68-420.9 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.9
66:1001
(a) Measurement. The height of an accessory wind energy turbine
shall be measured from the base of any tower supporting said
turbine to the upward limit of the highest component thereof.
For roof-mounted turbines, height shall be measured from the
average grade of the ground at the base of the structure upon
which the turbine is mounted to the upward limit of the highest
component thereof.
(b) Percentage of lot width.
[1] If accessory to a residential, office, general service, or
commercial use, the height of an accessory wind energy
turbine shall not exceed 42% of the lot width but at no time
shall exceed 45 feet.
[2] If accessory to an industrial use, the height of an accessory
wind energy turbine shall not exceed 50% of the lot width
but at no time shall exceed 70 feet.
(c) Maximum effective height. The height of any turbine shall be
minimized to the greatest extent possible. The aforementioned
height limitations may be approved only upon submission of
proof satisfactory to the Building Division and/or the
Commissioner of Planning that such height is necessary in
order to extend a proposed turbine beyond a zone of
turbulence created by surrounding trees, roofs, or structures
which may affect the efficiency or total power output of said
turbine.
(d) Minimum safe height. The lowest moving component of any
accessory wind energy turbine shall not be located less than 15
feet from ground level.
(13) Yard setbacks. Yard setbacks shall be derived from the maximum
effective height of any turbine as stated above.
(a) Front yard. Accessory wind energy turbines mounted to a freestanding
tower shall be prohibited in any front yard. Roofmounted
turbines may be allowed on that portion of a pitched
roof which faces the rear yard or, in the case of a flat roof, said
turbine may be located on the rear half of such roof.
(b) Side yard. Accessory wind energy turbines shall be set back
from any side property line by a distance greater than the
height of the turbine or the highest component thereof.
(c) Rear yard. Accessory wind energy turbines shall be set back
from any rear property line by a distance greater than the
height of the turbine or the highest component thereof.
§ 68-420.9 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.9
66:1002
§ 68-420.10. Industrial accessory wind energy turbines.
F. Certification. The operation of any accessory wind energy turbine shall
not commence until a final inspection and final certification is issued by
the Building Division.
(1) The Building Division may elect to make such inspections and
certifications by any Town employee trained and authorized to
issue such inspections and certifications. Said employees shall have
obtained suitable credentials from any or a combination of the
following agencies or organizations:
(a) Small Wind Certification Council.
(b) Institute for Sustainable Power Quality.
(c) National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
(d) Any additional training agency which provides a comparable
educational scope at the direction of the Commissioner of
Planning.
(2) The Building Division may also certify an accessory wind energy
turbine construction in part by virtue of: an Underwriters
Laboratory certificate or by my authority conferred upon Town
employees by the New York State Department of State Educational
Program (Division of Code Enforcement and Administration).
(3) The Building Division may accept independent certifications from
third-party vendors, includes, but not limited to: Det Norske
Veritas, Germanishcer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Wind
Energy Association, Small Wind Certification Council, Institute for
Sustainable Power Quality, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
or any additional agency or organization which provides a
comparable certifying scope at the direction of the Commissioner
of Planning.
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "Industrial Accessory Wind
Energy Turbine Ordinance" for the Town of Islip.
B. Legislative intent.
(1) The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby recognizes a global
need to explore alternative and renewable sources of energy in
order to help reduce the well-documented impacts of the burning of
fossil fuels on the global environment. The Town Board further
recognizes the economic development benefits associated with the
use of these alternative and renewable sources of energy by certain
industries across the Town. By enacting this section, the Town
Board seeks to achieve these goals in a manner which does not
create significant visual, noise, or other impacts on any residential
district.
§ 68-420.9 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.10
66:1003
(2) It is also the intent of the Town Board to create a distinction
between those industrial properties that may be better suited for
industrial accessory wind energy turbines and all other properties
which may be able to accommodate an accessory wind energy
turbine as described in § 68-420.9.
C. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to all industrial accessory wind energy turbines
proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section
and is intended to apply to stand-alone and/or roof-mounted
turbines constructed primarily to supplement the existing power
supply for individual buildings located within the Industrial 1
District, Industrial 2 District and Industrial Corridor District only.
(2) Industrial accessory wind energy turbines constructed prior to the
effective date of this section, or any other applicable section of this
chapter, and which have been established as a legal nonconforming
use by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required to meet
the requirements contained herein; provided that any physical
modification to an existing industrial accessory wind energy
turbine that materially alters the size, type and/or number of wind
turbines or other equipment shall require a permit under this
section.
(3) Any property that does not meet the criteria specified herein may
continue to be eligible for the construction of an accessory wind
energy turbine pursuant to § 68-420.9.
D. Administration.
(1) The fee for any industrial accessory wind energy turbine shall be
$500.
(2) The review of any industrial accessory wind energy turbine may be
expedited at the discretion of the Building Division.
(3) The Building Division may keep a list, along with specific
preapproved plans, of industrial accessory wind energy turbine
models and manufacturers that meet all structural and electrical
requirements of this section or any applicable New York State code.
The Building Division may accept or use these preapproved plans in
total or in part and may further adjust any submission
requirements accordingly in order to expedite the review of these
applications.
E. Required criteria for approval of turbines in industrial districts as
accessory uses. Permits for the construction of an industrial accessory
wind energy turbine may be issued only upon sufficient proof of
satisfying the following criteria:
§ 68-420.10 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.10
66:1004
(1) The subject property must be within the Industrial 1 District,
Industrial 2 District, or the Industrial Corridor District.
(2) Any property located within 1/4 mile of the Long Island MacArthur
Airport or the Bayport Aerodrome requires any applicable
clearance or certification from the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA).
(3) The base of any proposed turbine and/or tower supporting same is
located a minimum of 500 feet away from any residential district or
use.
(4) The height of any proposed wind turbine does not exceed 156 feet
as measured from the base of any tower supporting said turbine to
the upward limit of the highest component thereof. For roofmounted
turbines, height shall be measured from the average
grade of the ground at the base of the structure upon which the
turbine is mounted to the upward limit of the highest component
thereof.
(5) The subject property is free of any open code violations.
(6) A primary, permitted use exists on the subject property.
(7) The proposed wind turbine will service the primary permitted use
only and may not service any other adjoining property or function
as part of any public utility company unless authorized by the Long
Island Power Authority and appropriate cross-access utility
easements are implemented.
(8) The proposed wind turbine will not cause any significant shadow
flicker on any residential property regardless of the distance of said
residential property from the turbine.
(9) The proposed wind turbine will not produce any noise in excess of
60 decibels as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on
an adjacent property. Methods for measuring and reporting
acoustic emissions from the industrial accessory wind energy
turbine shall be equal to or exceed the minimum standards for
precision described in American Wind Energy Association (AWEA)
Standard 2.1 — 1989 titled "Procedures for the Measurement and
Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation
Systems Volume 1: First Tier."
(10) The proposed wind turbine is certified to withstand a 120 mile per
hour wind by a licensed professional engineer.
F. Specifications.
(1) The design of any accessory wind energy turbine shall conform to
applicable industry standards. The applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers or from Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
§ 68-420.10 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.10
66:1005
Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Wind
Energy Association, or other similar certifying organizations.
(2) The design of any accessory wind energy turbine shall conform to
applicable New York State codes.
(3) Any industrial accessory wind energy turbine shall be designed to
withstand winds of up to 120 miles per hour.
(4) Controls and brakes. All wind energy turbines shall be equipped
with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic
overspeed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar
systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be
operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation, used independently of
a mechanical brake, shall not be considered a sufficient braking
system for overspeed protection. Said controls and brakes shall
also be employed to prevent the release or jettison of any ice
accumulation at any time.
(5) Electrical components. All electrical components of the accessory
wind energy turbine shall conform to relevant and applicable local,
state and national codes.
(6) Visual appearance; power lines.
(a) Accessory wind energy turbines shall be an unobtrusive color
such as white, off-white or gray.
(b) Accessory wind energy turbines shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air
safety.
(c) Any on-site transmission and power lines between industrial
accessory wind energy turbines and the electrical service box
within the main structure shall be placed underground.
(7) Any tower used in connection with an accessory wind energy
turbine shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground surface.
(8) All access doors to any electrical equipment and/or service boxes
attached to an industrial accessory wind energy turbine shall be
locked to prevent entry by unauthorized persons.
(9) Noise and shadow flicker.
(a) Audible sound from an industrial accessory wind energy
turbine shall not exceed 60 dBA (decibels), as measured at the
exterior of any occupied building on an adjacent property.
Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from
the accessory wind energy turbine shall be equal to or exceed
the minimum standards for precision described in American
Wind Energy Association (AWEA) Standard 2.1 — 1989 titled
§ 68-420.10 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.10
66:1006
"Procedures for the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic
Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation Systems Volume I:
First Tier."
(b) The proposed wind turbine will not cause any significant
shadow flicker on any residential property regardless of the
distance of said residential property from the turbine.
(10) Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television or
similar signals and shall mitigate any harm caused by the accessory
wind energy turbine.
(11) Decommissioning. The facility owner and operator shall, at its
expense, complete decommissioning of the industrial accessory
wind energy turbine within 12 months after the end of the useful
life of said turbine. The industrial accessory wind energy turbine
will presume to be at the end of its useful life if no electricity is
generated for a continuous period of 12 months. Decommissioning
shall include removal of towers, turbines, buildings, cabling,
electrical components, and any other associated facilities.
(12) Height.
(a) Measurement. The height of an industrial accessory wind
energy turbine shall be measured from the base of any tower
supporting said turbine to the upward limit of the highest
component thereof. For roof-mounted turbines, height shall be
measured from the average grade of the ground at the base of
the structure upon which the turbine is mounted to the upward
limit of the highest component thereof.
(b) Height limitation. The height of any industrial accessory wind
energy turbine shall not exceed 156 feet.
(c) Minimum safe height. The lowest moving component of any
industrial accessory wind energy turbine shall not be located
less than 15 feet from ground level.
(13) Yard setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Industrial accessory wind energy turbines mounted
to a free-standing tower shall be prohibited in any front yard,
including second front yards. Roof-mounted turbines may be
allowed on that portion of a pitched roof which faces the rear
yard or in the case of a flat roof, said turbine may be located on
the rear half of such roof.
(b) Side yard. The base of any industrial accessory wind energy
turbines shall be set back from any side property line a
distance of 10 feet, but at no time may the turbine blades
encroach upon the air rights of any adjoining property.
§ 68-420.10 WATER QUALITY § 68-420.10
66:1007
(c) Rear yard. The base of any industrial accessory wind energy
turbines shall be set back from any rear property line by a
distance of 10 feet, but at no time may the turbine blades
encroach upon the air rights of any adjoining property.
G. Certification. The permanent operation of any industrial accessory wind
energy turbine shall not commence until a final inspection and final
certification is issued by the Building Division.
(1) The Building Division may elect to make such inspections and
certifications by any Town employee trained and authorized to
issue such inspections and certifications. Said employees shall have
obtained suitable credentials from any or a combination of the
following agencies or organizations:
(a) Small Wind Certification Council;
(b) Institute for Sustainable Power Quality;
(c) National Renewable Energy Laboratory;
(d) Any additional training agency which provides a comparable
educational scope at the direction of the Commissioner of
Planning.
(2) The Building Division may also certify an industrial accessory wind
energy turbine construction in part by virtue of an Underwriters
Laboratories certificate or by any authority conferred upon Town
employees by the New York State Department of State Educational
Program (Division of Code Enforcement and Administration).
(3) The Building Division may accept independent certifications from
third-party vendors including but not limited to: Det Norske
Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Wind
Energy Association, Small Wind Certification Council, Institute for
Sustainable Power Quality, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
or any additional agency or organization which provides a
comparable certifying scope at the direction of the Commissioner
of Planning.
§ 68-420.10 ISLIP CODE § 68-420.10
66:1008
ARTICLE XXXV
Penalties and Fines; Defenses
[Amended 6-3-1969; 9-18-1973 by L.L. No. 4, 1973]
§ 68-421. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-3-1981; 1-5-1988 by
L.L. No. 1-1988; 1-4-1994; 6-20-1995367 ]
A. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of the Town of Islip Zoning Ordinance or the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall build or alter any building,
appurtenance or site in violation of any detailed statement or plan
submitted and approved under such ordinance or regulation shall be
guilty of a violation of such ordinance or regulation, which shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and each day's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. The owner or
owners of any building or premises or part thereof or any person in
possession thereof where anything is in violation of this ordinance shall
be placed or shall exist and any architect, engineer, expediter, supplier,
builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation who may have assisted
in the commission or maintenance of any such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
and/or imprisoned as herein provided. [Amended 4-5-2005;
4-14-2009]
B. Notwithstanding any provision of Subsection A, with respect to a
violation relating to an illegal two-family house or any multiple
dwelling, including boardinghouses, the minimum and maximum fines
shall be: [Amended 4-21-1998; 4-22-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003;
4-14-2009]
(1) For a first conviction: minimum fine, $750; maximum fine, $2,500
or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(2) For any second conviction, after having been convicted within a
period of five years of the first conviction, such violation will be
subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $5,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) For any third or subsequent offense, after having been convicted
two or more times within a period of five years, such violation shall
be prosecuted as an unclassified misdemeanor, with a minimum
fine of $5,000 and a maximum fine of $10,000 and/or a maximum
period of incarceration of one year, or both.
367. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it take effect 7-9-1995.
§ 68-421 WATER QUALITY § 68-421
66:1009
§ 68-422. Affirmative defense. [Amended 4-8-1997]
The defense of legal nonconforming use, as established before and by
the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, which may be interposed
in a prosecution pursuant to the provisions of the Town of Islip Zoning
Ordinance, is deemed to be an affirmative and complete defense.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of the Town of Islip Zoning Ordinance or the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall build or alter any building,
appurtenance or site in violation of any detailed statement or plan
submitted and approved under such ordinance or regulation shall be
subject to the issuance of a stop-work order from the Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or his designee. [Added 4-5-2005]
§ 68-421 ISLIP CODE § 68-422
66:1010
ARTICLE XXXVI
(Reserved)368
§ 68-423. through § 68-424.6. (Reserved)
368. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXXVI, Amendments, as amended, was repealed 9-11-2001. For
current provisions, see Art. IVA.
§ 68-423 WATER QUALITY § 68-423
66:1011

ARTICLE XXXVII
(Reserved)369
§ 68-425. through § 68-426. (Reserved)
369. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXXVII, Validity, Effective Date, was repealed 9-11-2001. For
current provisions, see Art. IVB.
§ 68-425 WATER QUALITY § 68-425
66:1013

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Special Regulations and Standards Dealing with Property in the
Fire Island National Seashore
[Added 6-3-1969]
§ 68-427. Application of article.
This article shall apply only to land situated within the bounds of the
Fire Island National Seashore where the same lies in the Town of Islip,
but excluding any lands which lie within the boundaries of incorporated
villages.
§ 68-428. Regulation of apartments and multiple-unit dwellings.
[Amended 12-19-1978]
The Town Board, being in full agreement with the United States Department
of the Interior's general intent for the preservation of Fire Island as a
unique resource for present and future generations, consistent with the
General Management Plan for the Fire Island National Seashore, hereby
declares that new construction or expansion of apartments or other
multiple-family dwellings on Fire Island be prohibited, and further declares
that the conversion of existing structures to apartments or multiple-family
dwellings be prohibited.
§ 68-429. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Amended 12-19-1978; 4-5-2005]
The following uses shall be permitted in a Business I District on Fire Island
and in no other districts:
§ 68-430. Special permit procedure. [Amended 12-19-1978]
A. Uses permitted in a BAA District, §§ 68-136 and 68-137, when in
conformance with the regulations specified in Article XI of this chapter
entitled "Use District Regulations: Residence BAA District."
B. Stores or offices in which goods or commodities or services are sold at
retail without any outdoor sales, displays or storage and solely in
support of community activities.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit in a business zone,
the Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee shall
follow the procedure set forth in Chapter 13B, Environmental Quality
Review. [Amended 12-17-2019]
B. Within the time span specified in the Environmental Quality Review Act
and after public notice, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing on
the special permit application.
§ 68-427 WATER QUALITY § 68-430
66:1015
§ 68-431. Sign regulations. [Amended 12-19-1978]
§ 68-432. Amendment of article.
No amendments of this article shall be made without the prior
determination and approval of the Secretary of the Interior that they are
consistent with the objectives and purposes of the Public Law 88-587 (78
Stat. 928) authorizing the establishment of the Fire Island National
Seashore.
C. The Fire Island National Seashore shall hereafter be deemed an
interested party to all actions concerning Fire Island and shall be duly
notified of all pending actions and decisions concerning Fire Island.
A. Residential zone. Signs within residential zones shall not be illuminated
and shall be limited in size to one square foot in area, including signs
utilized for advertising the sale or rental of property, which may be
placed only on the property advertised for sale or rental. The maximum
number of signs permitted within residential zones shall be limited to
one per building lot.
B. Business zone or use. Within this zone, advertising or commercial
displays for commercial uses, which are acceptable to the Secretary of
the Interior, may not exceed four square feet in area, may not be selfilluminated
and may be placed only on the property on which such
commercial use occurs. No flashing, blinking or moving signs shall be
permitted. Roof signs are prohibited. Facial signs parallel from the
structure to which they are attached. Signs projecting at a ninetydegree
angle from any structure shall not project more than four feet
from the structure to which they are attached nor be placed lower than
eight feet above the adjacent grade. No sign shall be so constructed or
attached to any building as to obstruct any window, door or other
opening of the same. The maximum number of signs permitted per
business lot shall be one.
C. Noncommercial signs used for public information, orientation or
education purposes may be larger by special permit from the Town
Board. The procedure followed shall be the same as specified in
§ 68-430.
D. Nonconforming signs in any zone which are in existence at the time this
amendment is adopted may continue such nonconformity until they are
destroyed, structurally altered, reconstructed, changed or moved, but
the period of such nonconformity may not exceed two years from the
date of the adoption of this amendment.370
E. Any sign in disrepair or in a hazardous condition shall be repaired or
removed within five working days after notification by the Building
Division.
370. Editor's Note: The adoption date of this amendment is 12-19-1978.
§ 68-430 ISLIP CODE § 68-432
66:1016
ARTICLE XXXIX
Tents371
[Added 12-18-1984]
§ 68-433. Tents in residential use districts.
§ 68-434. Tents in all other use districts. [Amended 5-28-2008;
2-28-2017; 12-17-2019]
A. Tents shall be permitted in residential use districts only as an accessory
use and only in conformity with the regulations set forth herein.
B. No tent or combination of tents totaling an excess of 200 square feet or
canopies in excess of 400 square feet in area shall be erected or
maintained in any residential use district without first obtaining a tent
permit from the Division of Fire Prevention. [Amended 2-28-2017;
12-17-2019]
C. No tent(s) or canopy(ies) for which a permit is required shall be erected
or maintained in any residential use district for a period of time in
excess of 72 hours. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. Tents, canopies and membrane structures having a total area in excess
of 400 square feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any
purpose without first obtaining a tent permit from the Division of Fire
Prevention.
(1) Exception. A tent permit is not required for tents that are open on
all sides and comply with all of the following:
(a) Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet.
(b) The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side
without a fire break clearance of 12 feet, not exceeding 700
square feet total.
(c) A minimum clearance of 12 feet to all structures and other
tents.
B. Tents or canopies located in other than residential use districts shall be
a minimum of 200 feet from the nearest residence.
C. There must be, within a reasonable distance from the tent or canopy,
one off-street parking space for every 50 square feet of area occupied
by the tent or tents.
371. Editor's Note: Former Article XXXIX, Equine Livestock and Pigeons, added 12-21-1971, as
amended, was superseded by an ordinance adopted 11-16-1982. Said ordinance
renumbered §§ 68-433, 68-436 and 68-434 as §§ 12-27, 12-28 and 12-29, respectively. See
Ch. 12, Animals, Article IV, Equine Livestock and Pigeons.
§ 68-433 WATER QUALITY § 68-434
66:1017
§ 68-435. Compliance with codes; public assembly permit.
§ 68-436. Fee. [Amended 5-28-2008; 2-28-2017; 12-17-2019]
The fee for a tent permit shall be $75 for residential parcels and $300 for
commercial parcels.
§ 68-437. (Reserved)
D. No noise emanating from any activity occurring in or at the tents or
canopies shall be audible more than 500 feet into the nearest
residential area.
E. No tent or canopy pursuant to this section shall be erected or
maintained for a period of time in excess of 30 days for a retail use or
180 days for a restaurant use. Only one such permit shall be granted on
a site per calendar year. In the case of three-day events, a maximum of
three events per calendar year may be permitted.
F. Tents erected and in use for longer than 30 days shall require additional
inspections at the discretion of the Chief Fire Marshal to ensure public
safety.
G. Tents, when utilized as an accessory use to a restaurant, shall require
the review and approval of the Planning Board.
H. All tents shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements of the
underlying district it is located in.
A. All tents in excess of 120 square feet must comply with all federal, state
and Town building, fire and electrical codes.
B. If the tent is to be used as a place of public assembly, as defined in
Chapter 19 of this Code, then a public assembly permit shall also be
obtained. [Amended 2-28-2017]
§ 68-434 ISLIP CODE § 68-437
66:1018
ARTICLE XL
Flood Damage Prevention
[Added 3-17-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987372; 2-9-1994; 10-20-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998; 9-15-2009 by L.L. No. 9-2009]
§ 68-438. Statutory authorization and purpose.
A. Findings. The Town Board of the Town of Islip finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to
the residents of the Town of Islip and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public
facilities, both publicly and privately owned and injury to and loss of
human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to
achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this local law
is adopted.
B. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this local law to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages.
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Objectives. The objectives of this local law are to:
(1) Protect human life and health.
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
372. Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. XL, Flood Damage Prevention,
added 11-19-1974, amended 7-5-1983.
§ 68-438 WATER QUALITY § 68-438
66:1019
§ 68-439. Definitions.
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas.
(7) Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this local
law shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this local law its most reasonable
application.
B. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this local law or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the “base floodplain” or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this article, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)"
is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood
hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
§ 68-438 ISLIP CODE § 68-439
66:1020
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as definition of "basement."
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case
of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
§ 68-439 WATER QUALITY § 68-439
66:1021
V1-V30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone
V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk-premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood or Flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
(2)
§ 68-439 ISLIP CODE § 68-439
66:1022
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 68-439 WATER QUALITY § 68-439
66:1023
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this article by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement or cellar. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. This term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to each structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — The same
meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope
to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash
value, excluding land value is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
§ 68-439 ISLIP CODE § 68-439
66:1024
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height, as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 68-441C(2) of this article.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The "actual start of construction"
means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or
a gas- or liquid-storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections:
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 68-439 WATER QUALITY § 68-439
66:1025
§ 68-440. General provisions.
construction of the improvement. Substantial improvement also means
"cumulative substantial improvement." The term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this local law
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this local law.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. Lands to which this local law applies. This local law shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Islip, Suffolk County, New York.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Islip, Community
Number 365337, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36103C0645H,
36103C0655H, 36103C0660H, 36103C0665H, 36103C0670H,
36103C0680H, 36103C0685H, 36103C0689H, 36103C0690H,
36103C0693H, 36103C0695H, 36103C0854H, 36103C0855H,
36103C0858H, 36103C0859H, 36103C0860H, 36103C0862H,
36103C0866H, 36103C0867H, 36103C0869H, 36103C0876H,
36103C0877H, 36103C0878H, 36103C0879H, 36103C0881H,
36103C0882H, 36103C0883H, 36103C0884H, 36103C0886H,
36103C0887H, 36103C0888H, 36103C0889H, 36103C0893H,
36103C0894H, 36103C0895H, 35103C0901H, 36103C0902H,
36103C0905H, 36103C0906H, 36103C0908H, the effective
date of which is September 25, 2009, and any subsequent
revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under
our community’s jurisdiction.
(b) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance
Study, Suffolk County, New York, All Jurisdictions” dated
September 25, 2009.
§ 68-439 ISLIP CODE § 68-440
66:1026
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this article. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file
at: Islip Town Hall, Department of Planning and Development, 655
Main Street, Islip, Suffolk County, New York.
C. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
(1) This local law includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all
previous laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this local
law shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this local law are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher
standards, shall govern.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this local law
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special flood
hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this local law and any other applicable regulations.
Any infraction of the provisions of this local law by failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit,
shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this local law or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15
days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Islip from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this local law for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for the received an approved variance under § 68-443 will
be declared noncompliant, and notification shall be sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this local law is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This local law does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This local law shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Islip, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
§ 68-440 WATER QUALITY § 68-440
66:1027
§ 68-441. Administration.
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this local law or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Designation of the local administrator. The Commissioner of Planning
and Development is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this local law by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
B. Establishment of development permit.
(1) A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of
protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring
that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any
development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 68-440B, without a
valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall
be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may
include, but not be limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
and showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of
the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
(2) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as determined by the Town
Board from time to time. In addition, the applicant shall be
responsible for reimbursing the Town of Islip for any additional
costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project.
The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500
to cover these additional costs.
(3) Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information, as appropriate. Additional information may be
required on the permit application form.
(a) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or
substantially improved structure to be located in Zone A1-A30,
AE or AH, or Zone A if base flood elevation data are available.
Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit
to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
(b) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings and columns) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zone V1-V30 or VE, or
§ 68-440 ISLIP CODE § 68-441
66:1028
Zone V if base flood elevation data are available. Upon
completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to
the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
(c) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which
any new or substantially improved nonresidential structure
will be floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed
portion of the structure, the permittee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a
professional engineer or surveyor.
(d) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
§ 68-442A(3), Utilities.
(e) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 68-442E, Nonresidential structures
(except coastal high-hazard areas).
(f) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be
submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated
segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the
original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps,
computations or other material required by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 68-440B, when notified by the
local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered
or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(g) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if
required by the local administrator, which shows whether
proposed development to be located in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property.
(h) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by
the permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured
home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are
greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
(i) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
are available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in
a proposed structure with design strengths in excess of 20
pounds per square foot.
§ 68-441 WATER QUALITY § 68-441
66:1029
(j) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
are available, for all new and substantial improvements to
structures, floodplain development permit applications shall be
accompanied by design plans and specifications, prepared in
sufficient detail to enable independent review of the foundation
support and connection components. Said plans and
specifications shall be developed or reviewed by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, and shall be accompanied
by a statement, bearing the signature of the architect or
engineer, certifying that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice and with all applicable provisions of this
article.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(a) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 68-441B(3), Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this article.
(b) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If
a proposed building site is located in an area of special flood
hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall meet the applicable standards of § 68-442. Construction
standards, and, in particular, § 68-442A(2), Subdivision
proposals.
(c) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of
special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood
velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant
to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may
result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet
the requirements of § 68-442, Construction standards, no
permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the
adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(d) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required
by state or federal law.
(2) Use of other flood data.
§ 68-441 ISLIP CODE § 68-441
66:1030
(a) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
designated areas of special flood hazard on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced
water surface elevation data (these areas are designated Zone
A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed
pursuant to § 68-441B(3)(g), as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this article.
(b) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the
purposes of this article.
(3) Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(a) Notify to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director, Region
II, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) Determine that the permit holder has provided for
maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(4) Construction stage.
(a) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor
or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially
improved structure, the local administrator shall obtain from
the permit holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the
lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the
permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon
placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains
on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully
licensed and ready for highway use).
(b) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new
or substantially improved structure, the permit holder shall
submit to the local administrator a certificate of elevation, in
§ 68-441 WATER QUALITY § 68-441
66:1031
relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest
structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns). The certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the
permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon
placement of the structure on the site. An elevation certificate
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains
on a site 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully
licensed and ready for highway use).
(c) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval
of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project unless immediately corrected.
(5) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development
permit and/or any variance provisions.
(6) Stop-work orders.
(a) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop-work order for any floodplain development found ongoing
without a development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order
shall subject the violator to the penalties described in
§ 68-440E of this article.
(b) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop-work order for any floodplain development found
noncompliant with the provisions of this article and/or the
conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop-work
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in
§ 68-440E of this article.
(7) Certificate of compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 68-440B, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to
permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or
both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the local administrator stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this article.
§ 68-441 ISLIP CODE § 68-441
66:1032
§ 68-442. Construction standards.
(b) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development
in areas of special flood hazard.
(c) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 68-441C(5), Inspections, and/or
any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing,
anchoring requirements or encroachment analyses which may
have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
(8) Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(a) Floodplain development permits and certificates of
compliance;
(b) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 68-441C(4)(a) and § 68-441C(4)(b), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(c) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to
§ 68-441C(4)(a), and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
(d) Variances issued pursuant to § 68-443, Board of Appeals;
variance; and
(e) Notices required under § 68-441C(3), Alteration of
watercourses.
A. General standards. The following standards apply to new development,
including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of
special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 68-440B:
(1) Coastal high-hazard areas. The following requirements apply
within Zones V1-V30, VE and V:
(a) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the
reach of high tide.
(b) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(c) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase
potential flood damage is prohibited.
§ 68-441 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1033
(2) Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home
and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(a) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(b) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to
minimize flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
(3) Encroachments.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any location; or
[2] The Town of Islip agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Town of Islip for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Town of Islip for all costs related to the final
map revision.
(b) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 68-440B, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in the floodway (including
fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base
flood; or
[2] The Town of Islip agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received
and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-442
66:1034
and mapping and reimburses the Town of Islip for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Town of Islip for all costs related to the final
map revisions.
(c) Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized
fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation
at or adjacent to the development site. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely into the watercourse. No
area below the water line of a pond or other body of water can
be credited as a compensating excavation.
B. Standards for all structures.
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base
flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
(c) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new and substantially improved structures
shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of
two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding; and (ii) the bottom of all such openings no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
§ 68-442 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1035
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
(d) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base
flood elevation are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor
either free from obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls, open wood latticework or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without
causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system. The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be
used only for parking vehicles, building access or storage. Use
of this space for human habitation is expressly prohibited. The
construction of stairs, stairwells and elevator shafts are subject
to the design requirements for breakaway walls.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing connections, and other
service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to
resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses.
Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and
panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation
unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the
electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the
Residential Code of New York State for location of such items
in wet locations;
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system;
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that
have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided
with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing
through a building's exterior wall; and
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
C. Elevation of residential structures (except coastal high-hazard areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in
addition to the requirements in § 68-442A(2), Subdivision proposals,
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-442
66:1036
and § 68-442A(3), Encroachments, and § 68-442B, Standards for all
structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 68-440B (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within all areas of special flood hazard, the elevation of the lowest
floor shall not exceed the minimum required elevation by more
than two feet. [Added 2-28-2017]
D. Residential structures (coastal high-hazard areas). The following
standards, in addition to the standards in § 68-442A(1), Coastal highhazard
areas, and 68-442A(2), Subdivision proposals, and 68-442B,
Standards for all structures, apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard shown as
Zone V1-V30, VE or V on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 68-440B:
(1) Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest
elevated floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached
to the piles or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members
designed to either withstand storm action or break away without
imparting damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above
two feet above base flood elevation so as not to impede the flow of
water.
(2) Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider
the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during
the base flood on all building components.
(a) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces
that would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
§ 68-442 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1037
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves,
current drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm
debris. Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if
bulkheads, walls, or other natural or man-made flow
obstructions could cause wave runup beyond the elevation of
the base flood.
(b) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces
due to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure
include windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift
on the roof, internal forces when openings allow wind to enter
the house, and upward force on the underside of the house
when it is exposed. In the design, the wind should be assumed
to blow potentially from any lateral direction relative to the
house.
(c) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the
building code.
(3) Foundation standards.
(a) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached
thereto shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement due to the effects of wind and
water pressures acting simultaneously on all building
components. Foundations must be designed to transfer safely
to the underlying soil all loads due to wind, water, dead load,
live load and other loads (including uplift due to wind and
water).
(b) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for
structural support of a new building or substantial
improvement of an existing structure.
(4) Pile foundation design.
(a) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be
less than 8:1 for individual piles (this shall not apply to pile
clusters located below the design grade). The maximum
center-to-center spacing of wood piles shall not be more than
12 feet on center under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(b) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity)
to resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with
typical structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include
consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by
erosion of soil strata surrounding the piles. The minimum
penetration for foundation piles is to an elevation of five feet
below mean sea level (msl) datum if the BFE is +10 msl or less,
or to be at least 10 feet below msl if the BFE is greater than
+10 msl.
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-442
66:1038
(c) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of
piles in column action from the bottom of the structure to the
stable soil elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or
diagonally braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(d) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip
diameter of eight inches for round timber piles and eight
inches by eight inches for square timber piles. All wood piles
must be treated in accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3
to minimize decay and damage from fungus.
(e) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a
twenty-eight-day ultimate compressive strength of not less
than 5,000 pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced
with a minimum of four longitudinal steel bars having a
combined area of not less than 1% nor more than 4% of the
gross concrete area. Reinforcing for precast piles shall have a
concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4 inches for No. 5 bars and
smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for No. 6 through No. 11
bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field shall have a
concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(f) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted, or augered into place.
(g) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(h) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in
both directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced
concrete grade beam. These at-grade supports should be
securely attached to the piles to provide support even if
secured from beneath.
(i) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch by
eight-inch (minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be
limited in location to below the lowest supporting structural
member and above the stable soil elevation and aligned in the
vertical plane along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline.
Galvanized steel rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cabletype
bracing is permitted in any plane.
(j) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and
the beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall
be two-lumber-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/
beam, or four-by-four or larger braces framed into the pile/
beam. Bolting shall consist of two 5/8-inch galvanized steel
bolts (each end) for two-members-by-eight members, or one 5/
8-inch lag bolt (each end) for square members. Knee braces
shall not extend more than three feet below the elevation of the
base flood.
§ 68-442 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1039
(5) Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place
concrete piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and
lateral loads, and be connected with a movement-resisting
connection to a pile cap or pile shaft.
(6) Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors, or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure.
Toe nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All
metal connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be
steel, hot-dipped galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in
protected interior locations shall be fabricated from galvanized
sheet.
(7) Beam-to-pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall
span the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential
floodwater and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or
pilings by bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members
shall be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (if precast)
shall be securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams,
or girders are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two
5/8-inch galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps
3/16 inch by four inches by 18 inches each bolted with two half-inch
lag bolts per beam member shall be used. Notching of pile tops
shall be the minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam
members without unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall
not be notched so that the cross section is reduced below 50%.
(8) Floor and deck connections.
(a) Wood two-inch-by-four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal
joist anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/
girders. These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a
minimum. Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided.
Such cross bridging may be one-inch-by-three-inch members,
placed eight feet on-center maximum, or solid bridging of same
depth as joist at same spacing.
(b) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to
provide good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the
structure. The plywood should not be less than 3/4-inch total
thickness, and should be exterior grade and fastened to beams
or joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such
fastening shall be supplemented by the application of
waterproof industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
(9) Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will
be used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to
studs in exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie.
Continuous 15/32-inch or thicker plywood sheathing, overlapping
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-442
66:1040
the top wall plate and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder,
may be used to provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood
are not vertically continuous, then two-by-four-nailer blocking shall
be provided at all horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood,
galvanized steel rods of half-inch diameter or galvanized steel
straps not less than one-inch wide by 1/16 inch thick may be used
to connect from the top wall plate to the sill, beam, or girder.
Washers with a minimum diameter of three inches shall be used
at each end of the half-inch round rods. These anchors shall be
installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more than
four feet on center.
(10) Ceiling/Joist rafter connections.
(a) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner
that the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters.
Ceiling joists and rafters shall be securely fastened at their
intersections. A metal or wood connector shall be used at
alternate ceiling joist/rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(b) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-byfour
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each
gable end. Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet
toward the house interior from each gable end.
(11) Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and
water uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a
maximum of two feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot.
Larger overhangs and porches will be permitted if designed or
reviewed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
(12) Roof sheathing.
(a) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices
for sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of
other suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(b) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six
inches shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any
plywood sheet used in the sheathing of such corner, gable end,
or roof overhang.
(c) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and
other points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
§ 68-442 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1041
(13) Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and
doors shall be designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand
loads due to the design wind speed of 75 miles per hour.
Connections for these elements must be designed to transfer safely
the design loads to the supporting structure. Panel widths of
multiple-panel sliding glass doors shall not exceed three feet.
(14) Breakaway wall design standards.
(a) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance
of not less than 10 pounds per square foot and not more than
20 pounds per square foot, with the criterion that the safety of
the overall structure at the point of wall failure be confirmed
using established procedures. Grade beams shall be installed
in both directions for all piles considered to carry the
breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for front row
piles that support breakaway walls.
(b) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per
square foot shall not be permitted unless a registered
professional engineer or architect has developed or reviewed
the structural design and specifications for the building
foundation and breakaway wall components, and certifies that
(1) the breakaway walls will fail under water loads less than
those that would occur during the base flood; and (2) the
elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system will not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components (structural
and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
E. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high-hazard areas). The
following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in
areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in
§ 68-442A(2), Subdivision proposals, and § 68-442A(3), Encroachments,
and § 68-442B, Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood elevation must be
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-442
66:1042
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 68-442B(3).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 68-442E(1)(a), including the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
F. Nonresidential structures (coastal high-hazard areas). In Zones V1-V30,
VE and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available, new
construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
have the bottom of lowest member of the lowest floor elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of
structures is not an allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor to
two feet above the base flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
G. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards, in addition to the standards in § 68-442A. General standards,
and § 68-442B, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas
of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V, and VE shall either: (i) be on site fewer than 180
consecutive days; (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
or (iii) meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 68-442 WATER QUALITY § 68-442
66:1043
§ 68-443. Board of Appeals; variance.
§ 68-442G(2), (3) and (4). A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices
and has no permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in
Zones A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation and is securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Elevation on piers
consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
(3) Within Zone A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation
on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 68-440B (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified). Elevation on piers
consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
H. Critical facilities. In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain
facilities that would result in serious danger to life and health, or
widespread social or economic dislocation, no new critical facility shall
be located within any area of special flood hazard, or within any fivehundred-
year flood zone shown as a B Zone or a Shaded X Zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Board of Appeals as established by the Town of Islip shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this local law.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this article.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 68-442 ISLIP CODE § 68-443
66:1044
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this article and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use,
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 68-443A(4) and the purposes
of this local law, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this local law.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
§ 68-443 WATER QUALITY § 68-443
66:1045
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood elevation, provided
that items in § 443-A(4)(a) through (l) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as an historic structure; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section
are met.
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on
or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
§ 68-443 ISLIP CODE § 68-443
66:1046
§ 68-444. through § 68-446. (Reserved)
notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
§ 68-443 WATER QUALITY § 68-444
66:1047

ARTICLE XLI
Planned Landmark Preservation Overlay District (PLP)
[Added 3-4-1975]
§ 68-447. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Article 5, § 96-a of the General Municipal Law, this
Planned Landmark Preservation Overlay District (PLP) is designed to
provide regulations, special conditions and restrictions where necessary to
protect, enhance, perpetuate and use places, districts, sites, scenic views,
buildings, structures, works of art and other objects having a special
character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value. More
specifically, the general purpose of this overlay district includes, among
others, the following specific purposes:
§ 68-448. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROPRIATE PROTECTIVE INTEREST — Any right or interest in or title
to a lot, plot or parcel of land or any part thereof, including but not limited
to fee title and scenic or other easements, the acquisition of which the
Planning Board and Town Board determine to be necessary and appropriate
for the effectuation of the purposes of this article.
A. To promote the education, culture, pleasure and economic and general
welfare of the residents of the Town of Islip and of others employed in
or visiting the Town.
B. To safeguard significant features of the Town of Islip's historic,
aesthetic, scenic and cultural heritage so that they may provide
continuity through physical evidence of the Town's evolution and
historic beauty.
C. To foster civic pride in the legacy of achievements and beauty of the
past.
D. To encourage the most desirable use of land and site design in the
vicinity of such significant historic, aesthetic, scenic and cultural
features through the application of appropriate and compatible
standards of development and such other techniques or policies as will
protect and upgrade their character and value.
E. To examine and recommend potential new and compatible uses of
landmarks where they are unused or underused.
F. To strengthen the economy of the Town of Islip.
G. To stabilize and improve property values and thereby protect the
Town's tax revenues.
§ 68-447 WATER QUALITY § 68-448
66:1049
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document evidencing approval
by the Planning Board of a proposal to make a material change of use
or appearance which must be obtained before a permit may be issued by
the Commissioner of Planning or the Commissioner's designee.[Amended
12-17-2019]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — The modification of the Town of Islip Zoning
Ordinance regulations to permit development of a variety of housing types
or housing on lots with lesser dimensional requirements than those set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance, granted in conjunction with the approval of a land
subdivision by the Town Planning Board as provided in § 281 of the Town
Law.
IMPROVEMENT — Includes any building, structure, place, work of art
or other object, and also any modification of the existing landscaping or
any natural feature constituting a physical betterment of real property, or
any part of such betterment. An improvement shall be deemed to include
ordinary repairs and maintenance.
LANDMARK — Any improvement or landscape feature which has a special
character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value as part of
the development, scenic or cultural heritage of the Town, state or nation
and which has been designated as a landmark in connection with the
establishment of a Planned Landmark Preservation Overlay District in
accordance with this article.
LANDSCAPE FEATURE — Any grade, body of water, stream, rock, plant,
shrub, tree, path, walkway, road, plaza, fountain, sculpture or other form of
natural or artificial landscaping.
MATERIAL CHANGE OF USE OR APPEARANCE — Includes:
A. Any change in the type of use of land or of a structure or memorial.
Change or reconstruction or alteration of the size or external
appearance of a structure or memorial.
B.
Change in the intensity of the use of land, such as an increase in
the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or
dwelling units in a structure.
C.
D. Demolition of a structure or memorial.
E. Commencement of excavation.
Deposit of refuse, waste or fill on land not already used for that
purpose, or which increases the height of any existing deposit or the
area covered by the deposit.
F.
Commencement of or change in the location of advertising on the
external part of any structure.
G.
§ 68-448 ISLIP CODE § 68-448
66:1050
ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE — Any work done on any
improvement in the nature of a replacement or reconditioning for which no
permit would customarily be required from the Commissioner of Planning
or the Commissioner's designee or from any other governmental agency,
where the purpose and effect of such replacement or reconditioning is to
correct any deterioration of or damage to the improvement or any part
thereof and to restore same, as nearly as practicable, to its condition
and appearance prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or
damage.[Amended 12-17-2019]
PERSON IN CHARGE — The person or persons possessed of the fee simple
of an improvement or a lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or
any other person directly or indirectly in control of an improvement or
improvement parcel.
REASONABLE ECONOMIC RETURN — A net annual return equal to the
prime rate for bank loans at the time a certificate of appropriateness is filed
as a per centum of the current full valuation of an improvement parcel.
Such valuation shall be established by the Town of Islip based upon the
fair market value of the property in effect at the time a certificate of
appropriateness is filed, except where:
Alteration of a shore, bank or floodplain of the Atlantic Ocean, Great
South Bay, a stream, channel or of any lake, pond or artificial body of
water.
H.
A determination may be made that the valuation of the lot, plot or
parcel is an amount different from such fair market value where there
has been a reduction in the assessed valuation for the year next
preceding the effective date of the current assessed valuation in effect
at the time of the filing of such request.
A.
A determination may be made that the value of the lot, plot or parcel
is an amount different from such fair market value where there has
been a bona fide sale of such lot, plot or parcel subsequent to the
establishment of the current tax roll and prior to the time of the filing
of such request, as the result of a transaction at arms' length, on
normal financing terms, at a readily ascertainable price and unaffected
by special circumstances such as, but not limited to, a forced sale,
exchange of property, package deal, wash sale or sale to a cooperative.
B.
§ 68-448 WATER QUALITY § 68-448
66:1051
TAX ABATEMENT — The application of tax abatement as provided for in
the General Municipal Law, Article 5, § 96-a, as an incentive to assure
the preservation of landmarks in appropriate cases as established in this
ordinance.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The modification, by the Town
Board after public hearing, of the Town of Islip Zoning Ordinance with
reference to lots or plots within an established Planned Landmark
Preservation Overlay District to permit the transfer of permitted
development rights from one lot or plot to another within such overlay
district. The transfer of development rights shall only be approved where
necessary to implement the stated purposes of such overlay district, and
only provided that the impact of such transfer of development rights on
the receiving lot or plot shall not adversely affect the overlay district nor
adjacent lots or plots.
§ 68-449. Establishment of districts.
In order to effect and further the purposes of this article, the following
procedure is provided for establishment of Planned Landmark Preservation
Overlay Districts:
Net annual return shall be the amount by which the earned income,
after real estate taxes, yielded by the lot, plot or parcel and the
improvements thereon during a test year exceeds the operating
expenses of such parcel during such year, excluding mortgage interest
and amortization and excluding allowances for obsolescence and
reserves, but including an allowance for depreciation of 2% of the full
value of the improvement, exclusive of the land, or the amount shown
for depreciation of the improvement in the latest required federal
income tax return, whichever is higher; provided, however, that no
allowance for depreciation of the improvement shall be included where
the improvement has been fully depreciated for federal income tax
purposes or on the books of the owner. The test year shall be the most
recent full calendar year; the owner's most recent fiscal year; or any
12 consecutive months ending not more than 90 days prior to the filing
of the request for a certificate.
A. It shall be the duty of the Planning Board on its own initiative or upon
request of the Town of Islip Historical Landmark Preservation
Committee, which shall serve as an advisory committee to the Planning
Board, to investigate and hold public hearings on any proposed Planned
Landmark Preservation Overlay Districts and recommend to the Town
Board the amendment of the Town of Islip, Suffolk County, New York,
Amended Zoning Map. Such investigation, public hearing and
recommendation shall incorporate as a part of the recommendation a
statement containing the following:
(1) A descriptive finding of the significance of the area, building or
scenic view to be covered by the overlay district.
§ 68-448 ISLIP CODE § 68-449
66:1052
§ 68-450. Application of regulations.
The regulations of the districts upon which this overlay district is
superimposed are in addition to the existing underlying district. However,
the provisions of the overlay district shall apply where there is a conflict.
The following material change of use or appearance provisions of any
overlay district shall always take precedence:
(2) A delineation of the boundaries of the overlay district, either by
metes and bounds or on a drawing of appropriate scale and detail.
(3) A description of the overlay district area including: the historic and/
or unique aesthetic quality of structures, memorials or sites;
landscape features; the nature of the existing land uses; and such
other factors and conditions as either strengthen or tend to blight
the quality of the overlay district's environment.
(4) A statement of the standards of development, including
architectural, landscape and other environmental standards, and
such other techniques or policies to be used for protecting and
upgrading the character and value of the properties in the
proposed overlay district.
(5) Such other findings as the Planning Board may consider significant
guides in the implementation of the purposes of this article as they
pertain to the proposed overlay district.
B. The Town Board shall consider the recommendation of the Planning
Board to establish such an overlay district by amending the Amended
Zoning Map. The amendment shall follow the procedure set out in
Article XXXVI.373
A. Any action which requires the issuance of a building permit or
certificate of occupancy by the Commissioner of Planning or the
Commissioner's designee in accordance with Article IV. [Amended
12-17-2019]
B. Any exterior alteration or repair of an existing building or structure, or
the relocation of an existing building or structure which does not
require a building permit in accordance with Article IV.
C. Any site improvement involving a change in the terrain such as land
contour work, topographic modifications, excavating, filling, dumping,
removal of significant trees or other vegetation, modification of existing
landscaping or any natural features on vacant land or land with minor
improvements for which no permit is required by the Commissioner of
Planning or the Commissioner's designee. [Amended 12-17-2019]
373. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding filing of amendments, which immediately
followed, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-449 WATER QUALITY § 68-450
66:1053
§ 68-451. Application procedure.
Any proposed action in an adopted Planned Landmark Preservation Overlay
District shall be the subject of an application to the appropriate agency in
accordance with the following procedures:
D. Any subdivision or other division of any tax lot, plot or parcel, existing
on the effective date of the establishment of such overlay district into
two or more tax lots, plots or parcels.
A. Application types.
(1) Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Application shall be made to the
Commissioner of Planning and Development for written approval of
the proposed ordinary repairs and maintenance. No work of any
kind shall be undertaken by the applicant prior to obtaining such
written approval. Such written approval shall be available on the
site during the time when such ordinary repairs and maintenance
are being carried out.
(2) Material change of use or appearance. Application shall be made to
the Town of Islip Planning Board for a certificate of
appropriateness indicating that the proposed material change of
use or appearance conforms to both the regulations of the
underlying districts and to the standards of development and such
other techniques or policies, and other regulatory findings as are
contained in the statement incorporated in the subject overlay
district. After a public hearing, such a certification, if approved,
shall authorize the issuance of an appropriate building permit in
conformance with the findings of the Planning Board. No work of
any kind shall be undertaken by the applicant prior to the issuance
of such a permit. [Amended 12-17-2019]
(3) Special permit. Application shall be made to the Town of Islip
Planning Board for a special permit to modify any restriction or
requirement of the underlying district, including but not limited to
use or intensity of use, dimensional regulations, parking or other
similar requirements. The Planning Board shall review such
applications to determine that they are reasonably compatible with
the character of the surrounding land and constitute the minimum
modification necessary; that they are consistent with the intent of
this article; and that they do not impair the health, safety and
general welfare of the surrounding community. The Planning Board
shall transmit its findings and recommendation on such
applications to the Town Board. The Town Board, after public
hearing, may approve or conditionally approve, such applications,
or disapprove such applications.
B. General procedure and standards.
§ 68-450 ISLIP CODE § 68-451
66:1054
§ 68-452. Certificate of appropriateness.
(1) All such applications for either a certificate of appropriateness or a
special permit shall include appropriate survey maps prepared by a
licensed land surveyor showing the existing topography and the
location and dimensions of all existing significant trees and other
vegetation, and site plans of all existing and proposed development
and modification of natural features, proposed easements and such
other information as the Planning Board shall consider necessary
to justify approval of the authorization requested.
(2) In reviewing all such applications, the Planning Board, and Town
Board in the case of special permits, shall act to accomplish the
following:
(a) To eliminate existing incongruous uses or structures or other
blighting factors and to prevent the creation of any new such
conditions.
(b) To preserve significant landscape features.
(c) To strengthen the environmental setting of the overlay district.
(d) To assure architectural compatibility, such as aesthetic,
historical and architectural values, architectural style, design,
arrangement, texture, material and color.
(e) To provide controls for signs, outdoor lighting and utility
services.
(f) To establish appropriate protective interests, such as
easements, covenants or similar agreements.
(g) To employ, where justified, the use of special techniques or
policies such as cluster development, or transfer of
development rights so as to improve the quality of the area; or
where economic assistance is warranted, to provide such aids
as tax abatement or other incentives so that privately owned
projects may realize a reasonable economic return.
(h) To prevent the demolition or destruction of significant
structures, terrain, landscape or scenic views whose
preservation is an objective of the overlay district.
(3) Any determination by the Planning Board or by the Town Board,
under the procedures set forth in this section granting or denying a
certificate of appropriateness or recommending or adopting a
special permit shall set forth the reasons for such determination
and any conditions or restrictions incorporated in such
determination.374
374. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding notice of determinations, which
immediately followed, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-451 WATER QUALITY § 68-452
66:1055
§ 68-453. Administration and enforcement.
A. An applicant who seeks a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition, alteration or reconstruction of property on grounds of
insufficient economic return in accordance with this article shall
establish to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the existing
condition of his property prohibits a reasonable economic return as
defined in this article.
B. Upon determination that the property in its existing condition or any
alternate conforming development does not yield a reasonable
economic return, the Planning Board shall proceed to investigate the
minimum alternate solutions which might be authorized by a special
permit which would modify the zoning regulations of the underlying
district or the overlay district. In addition, the Planning Board may
require special techniques or policies or economic aid or other
incentive which may assure a reasonable economic return. However,
such alternate solutions must be in keeping with the spirit and intent of
the findings in the definitive statement incorporated in the subject
Planned Landmark Preservation Overlay District. The findings of such
investigation and the resulting recommendation shall be promptly
transmitted to the applicant and to the Town Board.
C. When the Town Board has completed its review of the Planning Board's
recommendations and made such modifications as it sees fit, it shall
transmit its determination to the applicant. The applicant may either
accept or reject these recommendations.
D. If the applicant shall reject the recommendations, the Town Board may
deny permission to demolish, alter or reconstruct for a period of 90
days from the date of such notification. During such time the Town
Board may seek further alternate solutions or act to condemn the
subject property. If no resolution of the disagreement over the
determination is reached and no action is taken to condemn the subject
property after 90 days, the applicant may proceed pursuant to the
regulations existing in the underlying zoning district.
A. (Reserved)375
B. Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person in charge of any improvement located in a Planned
Landmark Preservation Overlay District to perform any work thereon or
to cause or permit such work to be performed unless the Planning
Board has issued a certificate of appropriateness or the Town Board has
granted a special permit authorizing such work. It shall also be
unlawful for any person in charge of any such improvement to maintain
the same or cause or permit the same to be maintained in the condition
created by any work done in violation of the provisions of this article.
375. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, regarding administration and enforcement, was
repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-452 ISLIP CODE § 68-453
66:1056
§ 68-454. Violations and penalties.
§ 68-455. Descriptions. [Added 10-5-1976]
C. Every person in charge of an improvement located in a Planned
Landmark Preservation Overlay District shill keep in good repair all
exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof
which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior
portions of such improvement to deteriorate, decay or become
damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision
shall be in addition to all other provisions of the codes, ordinances and
regulations of the Town of Islip requiring any such improvement to be
kept in good repair.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as making it
unlawful for any person in charge of an improvement in an overlay
district, without a prior certificate of appropriateness or special permit
pursuant to this article, to comply with any order of a duly authorized
official directing them to carry out work for the purpose of remedying
conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property by
such duly authorized official.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions for penalties in this ordinance,
any person who violates the provisions of § 68-452 of this article shall
be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of § 68-453B and C shall be
punished, for a first offense, by a fine of not more than $250 nor less
than $25 or by imprisonment for not more than 10 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. For a second or subsequent offense, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 nor less than
$100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
C. Each week during which any such violations of the above provisions
exist shall constitute a separate violation of such provisions.
A. Each of the following parcels of land in the Town are designated by the
Town Board as a Historic District or site, and each has been
appropriately delineated on the Official Building Zone Map of the Town
of Islip:
(1) Sagtikos Manor: property approximately 530 by 870 feet located on
Montauk Highway and bounded on three sides by a filed map
known as "Map of Sagtikos Manor Section 1," and on the fourth
side by Montauk Highway, in Bay Shore.
(2) Artists Colony: property located on that part of the map of Artists
Colony, filed in the County Clerk's office, January 26, 1972, and
§ 68-453 WATER QUALITY § 68-455
66:1057
known as "Map No. 139," and bounded on the north by Hollywood
Drive, on the south by Featherbed Lane, on the west by Lane and
the east by Golden Horn, in Oakdale.
§ 68-455 ISLIP CODE § 68-455
66:1058
ARTICLE XLII
(Reserved)376
§ 68-456. through § 68-463. (Reserved)
376. Editor's Note: Former Article XLII, Accessory Apartment Overlay District (AAOD), added
7-3-1984, was repealed 11-1-1988.
§ 68-456 WATER QUALITY § 68-456
66:1059

ARTICLE XLIII
Use District Regulations: Industrial Corridor District
[Added 8-20-1985; amended in its entirety 11-21-2017]
§ 68-464. Legislative intent.
This district is designated to implement the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Islip along the roadways intended
for quality industrial development but which are threatened by strip
commercial development. These objectives are to:
§ 68-465. Permitted uses.
A. Function as the gateway to the Town of Islip MacArthur Airport.
B. Maximize roadway efficiency while minimizing traffic hazards,
accidents and congestion through the consolidation of building parcels
and curb cuts.
C. Enhance the aesthetics of the roadways by means of landscaping, lot
area, frontage, architectural quality and use requirements.
D. Provide reasonable support services for industrial development which
would be functionally and architecturally integrated into these
developments, or located at service nodes at existing signalized
intersections along Veterans Highway that permit land uses which
provide goods and services to the businesses and employees that work
along the corridor.
E. Prevent the establishment of a strip commercial character along the
corridor.
A. In an Industrial Corridor District, no building, structure or premises
shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be so erected or altered, except for one or more of the
following purposes:
(1) Office, including medical office.
(2) Manufacturing and assembly uses, provided that the operation
does not involve the outdoor storage of vehicles, except those uses
prohibited in an Industrial 1 District or Industrial 2 District.
(3) Laboratories for scientific and industrial research, testing and
development.
(4) Municipal and public facilities, excluding retail off-track betting
and casino facilities.
(5) Freestanding retail bank, subject to the following criteria:
§ 68-464 WATER QUALITY § 68-465
66:1061
(a) Any property or structure used for a freestanding bank shall
meet the specific dimensional requirements contained within
this article.
(b) A deed covenant establishing a permanent vehicular cross
access, formalized by a reciprocal easement, to any adjacent
property shall be filed with the Suffolk County Clerk prior to
the issuance of any building permits for a freestanding bank.
(c) Any separate bank drive-through shall be subject to a Planning
Board special permit pursuant to § 68-466.1.
(d) There shall be no more than one freestanding bank on a single
parcel.
(6) Retail bank, located within an existing multi-unit structure
containing other permitted uses, provided that it does not occupy
more than 30% of the gross floor area of any such structure.
(7) Funeral parlor/home.
(8) Nursing home.
(9) Adult day-care facility.
(10) Veterinarian, provided that all activities take place within the
building.
(11) Child day-care center.
(12) Public school.
(13) Private or parochial school, including preschool programs,
elementary and secondary schools, vocational schools and other
non-degree-granting schools, including self-defense, dance,
swimming, gymnastics and similar instruction/programs, except
those associated with manufacturing or truck driving.
(14) Health club.
(15) Job training (including, but not limited to, those associated with
manufacturing, but not including truck driver schools or schools
with similar associated traffic impacts).
(16) Hotel, provided the development meets the following criteria:
(a) Each hotel unit must have a bathroom with at least a shower
and/or bathtub, toilet, and sink.
(b) Within the building, the hotel must have a lobby from which all
rooms are accessible (via hallways, elevators). No exterior
doors to hotel rooms are permitted.
(c) All hotels shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm
systems.
§ 68-465 ISLIP CODE § 68-465
66:1062
§ 68-466. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
The following uses are permitted by special permit from the Town Board
after a public hearing:
§ 68-466.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing.
(d) Adequate off-street parking and loading space(s) as required.
(e) Off-street parking shall be adequately lit but shall not be
located, installed, or maintained so as to create a traffic hazard
or nuisance for motorists or adjacent properties.
(17) A multiple use incorporating permitted uses in this section with up
to 25% of the floor area utilized by one or more of the following
retail or service uses integrated into the principal building or as a
separate building with pedestrian connections to the principal
building which do not exceed a total of 15,000 square feet as a
single use:
(a) Personal service establishment.
(b) Office equipment and service.
(c) Office supplies.
(d) Dry-cleaning.
(e) Delicatessen (with floor area maximum of 2,000 square feet
and operating hours limited to 15 hours a day or less).
(18) Drive-through bank kiosk, provided any associated exterior lighting
shall comply with the Town of Islip's exterior lighting standards
found in Article LII, and any relevant federal and state statutes.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the erection,
alteration, addition, maintenance or use of any premises which shall
provide outdoor storage, outside service, outside display, or outside
counter or window service, except as provided in § 68-465A(6).
A. (Reserved)
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. Psychiatric clinic, drug treatment center or similar health-related
facility, excluding overnight residential treatment facilities.
A. Showroom.
§ 68-465 WATER QUALITY § 68-466.1
66:1063
B. Warehouse use, provided no overhead doors shall face any street, and
further provided that any overhead doors are properly screened from
view with fencing and/or landscaping pursuant to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board.
C. Industrial/business service use involving office support services,
including printing, document reproduction, storage facilities, provision
of building retail/wholesale/office and business-related supplies, and
similarly related functions.
D. Private or parochial college or university, excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
E. Businesses which involve the outdoor or overnight parking of
registered vehicles as an accessory use to a permitted principal use,
provided that all vehicles shall be properly screened from view
pursuant to the direction of and in the discretion of the Planning Board.
F. Bank drive-through.
G. Outside seating as an accessory use to a permitted bar, tavern,
nightclub, restaurant, minor restaurant, or fast-food restaurant use,
provided the site otherwise complies with all applicable Code
requirements and subject to the following requirements:
(1) Outside seating shall be permitted for dining purposes only. The
service and consumption of alcohol shall only be permitted as
clearly accessory and incidental to the service of food. No outside
bar shall be permitted. In no case shall the service of alcohol be
permitted off site.
(2) Outdoor loudspeakers, exterior live entertainment or dancing of
any kind shall not be permitted.
(3) Outside seating shall only be permitted to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) Outside seating shall be permitted on the subject parcel adjacent to
the building only, provided it does not encroach onto any sidewalk
adjacent to a parking lot by more than 50%, and further provided
there is a minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet. If onstreet
parking is permitted adjacent to the sidewalk, then a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of five feet shall be required.
(5) The outdoor area shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any
single-family residence.
H. Indoor recreational use.
I. Taxi office, when adjacent to a residential use or zone.
J. Animal care center.
§ 68-466.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-466.1
66:1064
K. A multiple use incorporating permitted uses in § 68-465 with up to 25%
of the remaining floor area utilized by one or more of the following
retail or service uses integrated into the principal building or as a
separate building with pedestrian connections to the principal building
and which do not exceed a total of 15,000 square feet as a single use:
(1) Restaurant/minor restaurant (no drive-through).
(2) Pharmacy with drive-through (maximum of 15,000 square feet).
(3) Specialty food shop (maximum of 8,000 square feet).
(4) Bar, tavern, nightclub.
L. The following service and limited retail uses will be considered by the
Planning Board for parcels with frontage on Veterans Memorial
Highway that are located at the signalized intersections along Veterans
Memorial Highway (those established as of the date of adoption of this
section and as referenced in the associated corridor study), subject to
the conditions provided in § 68-466.3 and if in conformance with the
density requirements provided in § 68-470:
(1) Restaurant.
(2) Fast-food restaurant (with drive-through).
(3) Pharmacy (with drive-through).
(4) Specialty food market.
(5) Bars, taverns, nightclubs.
(6) Retail fuel service stations with a convenience market component,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Must be located at least 1/4 mile from an existing fuel station
or former station which continues to have related
improvements in place (i.e., tanks, fuel pump, canopy) that is
located on the same side of Veterans Memorial Highway.
(b) Shall include a food market component which has a minimum
of 50% of the interior floor area dedicated to food service,
including prepared foods/beverages and optional customer
seating.
(c) If an outdoor seating area for dining purposes is proposed,
such area shall be accessible only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. No consumption of alcohol shall be
permitted on the site. If included, the area provided as outdoor
seating with canopy shall not be counted towards floor area in
calculation of maximum floor area ratio.
§ 68-466.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-466.1
66:1065
§ 68-466.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board.
§ 68-466.3. Additional conditions for special permits.
(d) No gasoline service station premises shall be permitted to
locate within 200 feet of a school, playground, recreation
center, public library, or church.
(e) Shall be consistent with the requirements of Article XXVII for
retail fuel service stations.
(f) No vehicle repair or storage shall be permitted.
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses:
(1) Showroom.
(2) Warehouse use, provided no overhead doors shall face any street,
and further provided that any overhead doors are properly
screened from view with fencing and/or landscaping pursuant to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(3) Industrial/business service use involving office support services,
including printing, document reproduction, storage facilities,
provision of building/office and business-related supplies, and
similarly related functions.
(4) Outside seating as an accessory use to a permitted restaurant,
minor restaurant, or fast-food restaurant use, subject to the
requirements of § 68-466.1G.
A. For applications involving a fast-food restaurant, pharmacy with drivethrough,
retail fuel station with convenience market, or when otherwise
deemed necessary by the Planning Board, a traffic and roadway
analysis prepared by a professional engineer specializing in
transportation shall be submitted with the application for review by the
Town and shall include analysis of access and provision of appropriate
§ 68-466.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-466.3
66:1066
§ 68-467. Accessory uses.
The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot as the
uses permitted in §§ 68-465 and 68-466:
deceleration lane and turning lane as well as analysis for need for
modification of signal timing and additional intersection improvements.
B. The subject property shall execute a cross-access agreement to allow
for future cross access between adjoining parcels.
A. Signs as permitted and regulated under § 68-477 and Article XXIX.
B. Other customary accessory uses and structures, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use, do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business and do not require a
separate building.
C. A single accessory retail or showroom use, provided the use is
completely contained within the industrial building and sells only goods
being manufactured, processed, or warehoused in the principal
industrial building. The area devoted to this accessory retail use,
including all storage, stocking, and business space, shall not exceed
10% of the gross floor area of the industrial building or exceed a
maximum of 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, and separate exterior
signage for this use shall be prohibited.
D. Industrial accessory wind energy turbines as defined in § 68-3 of this
chapter.
E. Spray booth, provided the booth has received a permit from the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation or evidence is
submitted demonstrating exemption from said permit.
F. Parking garage as an accessory use to a permitted principal use, unless
adjacent to a residential use or zone, in which case it is prohibited.
G. Hotel accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted
within the hotel building:
(1) One apartment, with or without kitchen facilities, for the use of the
hotel manager or caretaker and his/her family.
(2) Minor restaurant, dining room, and vending area permitted for
hotels with fewer than 60 rooms.
(3) Meeting/conference rooms and banquet facilities.
(4) Laundry facilities for use by hotel guests and staff only.
(5) Business center.
(6) Recreational facilities for the exclusive use of hotel guests.
§ 68-466.3 WATER QUALITY § 68-467
66:1067
§ 68-468. Height restrictions.
§ 68-469. Percentage of lot occupancy.
§ 68-470. Area density.
(7) Dining facility/restaurant within the building for hotels with 60 or
more hotel rooms. Note that a separate entrance is permitted for a
restaurant within the hotel, but that access must also be provided
from within the hotel.
(8) Bar, tavern or nightclub within the building for hotels with 60 or
more hotel rooms.
A. No building or structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 60 feet
or four stories, except under the provisions of § 68-468B, except as
otherwise restricted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
B. Any portion of a building may be erected to a height in excess of 60 feet
if such portion of such building is set back two additional feet for each
one foot of additional height beyond the required setbacks from public
streets, planned public streets or the district boundary lines.
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
A. The total buildable area, including all buildings, shall not exceed a floor
area ratio of 0.35.
B. The installation of covered patios that do not exceed 400 square feet
which provide outdoor seating areas for employees to gather shall not
be included in the floor area calculation for the purpose of calculating
FAR.
C. The floor area of parking structures/garages and subsurface parking is
not to be included in the calculation for maximum floor area ratio.
D. Indoor amenity space (e.g., lobbies, atria, etc.) that occupies more than
1.5% of the building floor space for offices and industrial buildings may
be provided, and this area shall not be counted towards allowable FAR.
A. (Reserved)
B. A hotel room shall have an area of at least 300 square feet, and there
shall be a minimum of 1,250 square feet of site area for each hotel
room. In no case shall a hotel use have a lot area less than 120,000
square feet.
C. Density requirements for permitted uses per § 68-465 are provided in
the table below.
§ 68-467 ISLIP CODE § 68-470
66:1068
§ 68-471. Width of lot.
§ 68-472. Front yard.
Permitted Uses (per § 68-465)
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Freestanding retail bank as a
primary use
40,000
Drive-through bank kiosk 20,000
Other permitted uses per § 68-465 120,000
D. Density requirements for uses permitted only at existing signalized
intersections (per § 68-466 or 68-466.1) are provided in the table below.
Use
Mini- mum
Lot Area
Dedi- cated
to the Use
(square feet)
Maxi- mum
Building
Gross Floor
Area
(square feet)
Mini- mum
Frontage on
Veterans
Memor- ial
Highway
(feet)
Mini- mum
Frontage on
Second- ary
Road
(feet)
Mini- mum
Separa- tion
from Same
Use on Same
Side of
Veterans
Highway
Restaurant (no
drive-through)
40,000 — 100 100 N/A
Fast-food
restaurant (with
drive-through)
60,000 — 150 150 N/A
Pharmacy (with
drive-through)
80,000 15,000 200 200 N/A
Specialty food
market
80,000 8,000 200 100 N/A
Retail fuel
service stations
with a
convenience
market
component
80,000 — 150 150 1/4 mile (see
§ 68-466.1L for
details)
A. The minimum width of lot for uses permitted in this district shall be 300
feet throughout, except as noted below.
B. The minimum width of lot for freestanding banks as a primary use, and
drive-through bank kiosks, in this district shall be 100 feet throughout.
C. The minimum frontage requirements in § 68-470D shall supersede the
lot width requirement in this section for those listed uses.
§ 68-470 WATER QUALITY § 68-472
66:1069
§ 68-473. Side yards.
§ 68-474. Rear yard.
All buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet. Where the rear yard
abuts a residential district, a minimum rear yard of not less than 50 feet
shall be required.
§ 68-475. Off-street loading.
No loading areas shall be located within a front yard or within 100 feet of a
residential district.
§ 68-476. Architectural drawings.
A. All buildings, except those listed below, shall have a primary front yard
setback of 100 feet along Veterans Memorial Highway and a minimum
secondary front yard setback of 50 feet along any other roadways. A
minimum of 40 feet of that portion of said yard bordering Veterans
Memorial Highway shall be landscaped in accordance with Town of Islip
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. A maximum of 10 feet
of this requirement can be located in the Veterans Memorial Highway
right-of-way. A minimum of 25 feet of that portion of the front yard
bordering streets intersecting Veterans Memorial Highway shall be
similarly landscaped. [Amended 12-17-2019]
B. No structure shall be permitted within any front yard.
A. All buildings, except those listed below, shall have a minimum side yard
of 25 feet. Where the side yard abuts a residential district or use, a
minimum side yard of 50 feet shall be required.
A. High-quality architecture proportionate to the property size is required.
Applications for development within the ICD shall include
representative architectural elevation drawings for all proposed
structures to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Division.
Elevations shall include the following information: height, building
design, color, materials, signs and exposed exterior mechanical
equipment. All exterior walls shall be completed with finished quality
building materials that shall provide for architecturally compatible
building design.
(1) Windows and openings shall be provided in each facade of any new
building unless deemed technically or programmatically infeasible.
Where infeasible, spandrel glass (faux windows) shall be utilized.
Windows shall be appropriately sized to the scale of the building.
Utilizing natural light into interior spaces to offset use of artificial
lighting, along with photo sensor control, is encouraged.
(2) Incorporation of a minimum number of architectural features into
building facades visible from roadways. This may include porticos
§ 68-472 ISLIP CODE § 68-476
66:1070
§ 68-477. Signs.
With the exception of the following, all provisions of the Sign Ordinance377
shall be complied with. In addition, in the case of multitenant structures,
a plan shall be submitted for Planning Division approval showing all signs.
They shall be uniformly compatible in terms of design, color and materials
and shall not be distracting to motorists.
over doorways, cornices, decorative ornament appropriate for the
architecture, window wall framing, or an atrium. No building
facade shall exceed 50 feet in length without interruption of the
horizontal plane by one or more of the following architectural
features:
(a) Exterior wall interruption (change in the projection or recess
in the plane of at least two feet in depth);
(b) Change in material, texture, or pattern;
(c) Columns, piers, pilasters or other structural and/or decorative
elements; and/or
(d) Changes in fenestration pattern.
(3) Building materials/finishes. All new buildings, of any building type,
shall be designed and constructed using quality building materials
appropriately applied to create aesthetically pleasing and enduring
structures that contribute positively to the overall character of the
corridor. Efface and decorative concrete block shall be limited to
accent bands not to exceed 10% of all facades. Aluminum siding
shall be prohibited.
(4) Architectural finishes for rooflines. Exposed coping edge shall be
incorporated as a design element proportionate to the facade
material, visually reinforced with a proportionate horizontal
banding of the facade starting at the coping.
B. Screening. Rooftop equipment, mechanical equipment, dumpsters,
loading areas, parking garages etc., shall be screened consistent with
the building style or, for ground-level features, with fencing and/or
landscaping.
C. Franchise architecture shall be modified to achieve the highest
architectural standard for the use.
A. For multitenant properties with a minimum frontage on Veterans
Highway of 300 linear feet or greater, the maximum ground sign area
may be increased to 64 square feet.
377. Editor's Note: See Article XXIX, Signs.
§ 68-476 WATER QUALITY § 68-477
66:1071
§ 68-478. (Reserved)
§ 68-479. (Reserved)
§ 68-480. Relief from requirements.
A permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned prior
to March 5, 1985, and which has not come into common ownership with
adjoining property, and which conforms to the area, density or width of
lot requirement of this chapter prior to this enactment and conforms to all
other minimum requirements of this article.
§ 68-481. Variance procedure for nonconforming lots.
Lots in this district which have legal nonconforming status pursuant to
§ 68-480 shall be subject to all other provisions of this article.
§ 68-482. (Reserved)
§ 68-482.1. Exterior site improvements.
B. Additional facial signs are permitted for multiple-use buildings where
multiple establishments are permitted; maximum of one per
establishment.
C. A second facial sign, installed on the secondary facade, may be
permitted for any buildings with dual street frontage (corner lots)
within the ICD.
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this chapter.
C. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet in width in accordance with Town
standards shall be provided and maintained adjacent to any residential
zone or use. As an alternative, a minimum thirty-foot vegetated buffer
may be provided with a sound-attenuation wall and new evergreen
plantings on both sides of the wall.
D. Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter of buildings to the
greatest extent practicable pursuant to the direction of the Planning
Board.
E. Pedestrian connections shall be made between adjacent sites when
feasible and appropriate. Pedestrian connections are to be placed away
from vehicular drives/aisles and be attractive, adequately lit, and
§ 68-477 ISLIP CODE § 68-482.1
66:1072
constructed of high-quality materials to connect plazas where
appropriate to encourage walking between properties.
F. Vehicular cross-access easements shall be reviewed/approved and
recorded between adjacent sites when feasible and appropriate.
G. At signalized intersections where a restaurant or fast food is proposed
as part of an existing development, a pedestrian connection shall be
provided that is separate from vehicular access between the existing
office/industrial use and the restaurant use.
H. At signalized intersections where a restaurant, fast food or pharmacy is
proposed as a single use, a pedestrian connection to neighboring sites
shall be incorporated into the site design.
I. For multiple-use properties at midblock locations that include a new
restaurant developed apart from the existing office/industrial use, a
solely pedestrian plaza connection shall be provided (with no vehicular
access) to the restaurant building.
§ 68-482.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-482.1
66:1073

ARTICLE XLIV
Use District Regulations: Wetland and Watercourse Management
Area Overlay District
[Added 9-15-1987]
§ 68-483. Legislative intent. [Amended 4-8-1997]
This district is designated to implement the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Islip in those areas identified as
wetlands and watercourses and adjacent buffer areas pursuant to New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation guidelines or as identified
by the Town of Islip based upon inspection. These objectives are as follows:
§ 68-484. Designation of overlay district [Amended 4-4-1989;
4-8-1997]
This district shall comprise all property regulated by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation as wetlands or adjacent buffer
areas. Unless a greater buffer area has been established to the contrary,
a minimum buffer area of 100 feet shall be considered when determining
yield.
§ 68-485. Area density. [Amended 4-4-1989; 4-8-1997]
A. To further the maintenance and improvement of our fresh and salt
water quality;
B. To prevent the destruction of wetlands management lands;
C. To preserve natural drainageways and consequent flooding of adjoining
properties; and
D. To diminish the amount of runoff and other pollution into waterways,
inlets and the Great South Bay.
A. A minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet shall be required for a singlefamily
residence.
B. For parcels located partially within the Overlay District, yield shall be
based upon the following:
(1) Yield for that portion of the property designated as wetlands or
adjacent buffer areas shall be based upon one dwelling unit per
80,000 square feet of area, excluding underwater land.
(2) Yield for that portion of the property not designated as wetlands or
adjacent buffer areas shall be based upon the underlying zoning
district.
(3) The wetland and adjacent buffer yield combined with the
underlying zoning yield shall constitute the total yield for the
property.
§ 68-483 WATER QUALITY § 68-485
66:1075
§ 68-486. Site design. [Amended 4-4-1989; 4-8-1997]
§ 68-486.1. Required permits. [Added 4-8-1997]
§ 68-486.2. (Reserved)378
(4) Application to the Board of Appeals for a lot area variance shall be
required for all parcels that maintain a total yield of less than one
dwelling unit.
A. There shall be no development located within that portion of a site
designated as wetlands. Development within a buffer area shall only be
permitted in accordance with Chapter 67 of the Islip Town Code and
pursuant to the comments of the Planning Department. [Amended
12-9-1997]
B. That portion of a parcel zoned for general service, business or industrial
use located within the Overlay District shall not be utilized in meeting
the minimum landscaping or buffer requirements of the ordinance.
A. All activities within the Overlay District shall be subject to the issuance
of a wetland and watercourse permit from the Planning Department in
accordance with all rules and regulations of this Code, including
Chapter 67, Wetlands and Watercourses.
378. Editor's Note: Former § 68-486.2, Setbacks, added 4-8-1997, was repealed 12-9-1997.
§ 68-485 ISLIP CODE § 68-486.2
66:1076
ARTICLE XLV
Use District Regulations: General Service T District
[Added 1-12-1989]
§ 68-487. Legislative intent.
§ 68-488. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-5-1990; 2-25-1992; 4-8-1997]
In a General Service T District, no building, structure or premises shall be
used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structures shall
be so erected or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. The Town Board in its adoption of the Comprehensive Plan recognized
the importance of enhancing the community identity of the various
hamlets which comprise the Town of Islip. Major elements of this
identity involve the residential uses, architecture and streetscape
which have traditionally developed along the major roadways and
which serve as scenic gateway to the business districts of these
communities.
B. The Town Board also finds that redevelopment of these properties
under the existing business zoning would undermine these elements by
the elimination or significant modification to the residential structure,
replacement of front lawn and vegetation by parking, commercial
driveways and signage, all of which would destroy the present visual
quality of these gateways. The resulting advance of strip commercial
development also undermines the unique functional and visual role
these business districts play in preserving community identity. Such
development would add a significant amount of traffic along roadways
which are already congested, thereby reducing service and safety.
C. It is the intent of the Town Board to create a zoning district which would
be an economically viable alternative to the existing designation, but
which would not result in the adverse effects so described. The
provisions contained in this article are intended to maintain the unique
and historic character of the site through maintenance of the
architecture and streetscape, consolidation of roadway access and
parking and permission of only these uses which are compatible with
said restrictions.
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Two-family dwelling.
C. Offices.
D. Child day-care centers.
E. Adult day-care facility.
F. Public schools. [Amended 6-22-1999]
§ 68-487 WATER QUALITY § 68-488
66:1077
§ 68-489. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing. [Amended 6-5-1990; 4-8-1997]
The following uses are permitted by special permit by the Town Board after
a public hearing:
§ 68-489.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 4-8-1997; amended 7-13-1999;
9-12-2000]
The following uses are permitted by special permit from the Planning Board
after a public hearing:
G. Churches or other similar places of worship, parish houses, libraries or
municipal buildings or uses, provided that a twenty-five-foot buffer is
provided and maintained adjacent to any residential use or zone in
accordance with Town standards and a site plan is submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating compliance
with all applicable land development standards.
H. Agriculture or nursery uses, including the retail sale of products raised
on the premises, provided that a minimum buffer area of 25 feet in
width in accordance with Town standards is provided and maintained
adjacent to all residential uses or zones and site plan is submitted to
and approved by the Planning Board or its designee indicating
compliance with all applicable land development standards. [Added
8-14-2007]
I. Private or parochial schools, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities, vocational and other
non-degree-granting schools. [Added 6-19-2012]
J. Tutor. [Added 8-5-2014]
K. (Reserved)
L. (Reserved)
M. (Reserved)
N. (Reserved)
O. (Reserved)
P. Mixed-use buildings, excluding those associated with retail operations.
Q. Veterinarians and dog or cat grooming, provided that all activities take
place within the building.
A. (Reserved)379
A. Minor restaurant, except as otherwise provided herein.
379. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Restaurants, was repealed 9-12-2000.
§ 68-488 ISLIP CODE § 68-489.1
66:1078
§ 68-489.2. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board. [Added 9-12-2000]
§ 68-490. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. [Amended 4-8-1997]
The following uses are permitted by special exception by the Board of
Appeals after a public hearing: Uses shall be the same as those permitted in
a Residence AAA and CAA District when authorized as a special exception
by the Board of Appeals and no other.
§ 68-491. Accessory uses. [Amended 6-19-2012]
Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a separate business.
B. Personal service establishment including barber, hair salon, beauty
salon and other related uses. Additional personal service uses shall be
permitted only with the review and approval of the Planning Board after
due public hearing.
C. Restaurants.
D. (Reserved)380
E. Museum. [Added 6-8-2010]
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board without complying with the notice requirements of
§ 68-32, subject to compliance with the following criteria: [Amended
12-17-2019]
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use or zone.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
380. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding private or parochial schools, added
4-22-2003, was repealed 2-28-2017.
§ 68-489.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-491.1
66:1079
§ 68-491.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-492. Height restrictions.
§ 68-493. Percentage of lot occupancy. [Amended 7-25-2017;
9-19-2017]
§ 68-494. Area density.
A. The height regulations shall be the same as those in the Residence AAA
District. [Amended 4-5-2005]
B. The height of accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
[Amended 4-5-2005]
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. [Added 9-11-2001]
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed a floor
area ratio (FAR) of 0.25. An unenclosed front porch shall be excluded
from these calculations.
B. A minimum of 75% of the gross floor area of the first floor shall be
comprised of nonretail commercial space for a mixed use building. For
existing structures, this requirement may be reduced by the Planning
Board if it is determined that a parking relaxation would be mitigated
with more dwelling units. In no event shall the commercial space
comprise less than 50% of the first floor. [Added 12-17-2019]
C. The FAR shall not exceed 0.275 when the bonus density set forth in
§ 699-b(a) of the General Municipal Law applies unless authorized by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Added 12-17-2019]
A. The minimum required lot area for a single-family dwelling shall be
7,500 square feet. [Amended 6-5-1990; 4-8-1997]
B. The minimum required lot area for a two-family dwelling shall be
15,000 square feet.
C. The minimum required lot area for nonprofit fraternities or lodges,
elementary and secondary schools, colleges, correspondence and
vocational schools and other non-degree-granting schools, except those
associated with manufacturing and truck driving, churches or other
similar places of worship, parish houses, libraries or municipal
buildings or uses shall be 20,000 square feet. [Amended 6-5-1990]
D. The minimum required lot area for other permitted uses shall be 10,000
square feet. [Added 4-8-1997]
E. The maximum permitted lot area for any permitted use within this
district shall be 40,000 square feet. [Added 6-8-2010]
§ 68-491.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-495
66:1080
§ 68-495. Width of lot. [Amended 4-8-1997]
§ 68-496. Front yard.
All main buildings erected subsequent to the enactment of this article shall
have a minimum front yard from all streets of 25 feet or shall be built in line
with adjoining structures, whichever is greater.
§ 68-497. Side yards.
All buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum side yard of 10 feet.
§ 68-498. Rear yard.
§ 68-498.1. Permitted encroachments. [Added 12-17-2019]
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
A. The minimum required width of lot for a single-family dwelling shall be
75 feet.
B. The minimum required width of lot for other permitted uses shall be
100 feet.
A. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear yard of
35 feet.
B. All accessory structures hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of 10 feet but in no case shall be located within any formal planted
buffer if required pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations unless such buffer is relaxed and/or modified by the
Planning Board. [Added 6-19-2012]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than six
feet in width nor more than three feet in height. The Commissioner of
Planning and Development, or the Commissioner's designee, may vary
this requirement upon a showing of necessity to enter the permitted
building from a greater height or distance. Only that height or distance
that is necessary to enter the dwelling from average grade may be
permitted.
D. Unenclosed porches encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any unenclosed porch have a depth, at any point,
greater than six feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest point
§ 68-495 WATER QUALITY § 68-498.1
66:1081
§ 68-499. Access to site; parking.
§ 68-500. Architectural requirements.
All buildings hereafter erected or altered shall contain the following
architectural components:
of the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line to
the outside face of the porch.
E. Open and unroofed decks encroaching not more than six feet from the
minimum front yard requirement and not more than three feet in height
as measured from the existing grade of property. This exemption shall
not apply to nonconforming front yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses. In no case shall any open or unroofed deck have a depth, at any
point, greater than six feet. Depth shall be measured from the furthest
point of the front line of the main dwelling from the street property line
to the outside face of the deck.
F. Cellar entrance ways, covered or uncovered, may extend up to six feet
into any required side and rear yards, provided that they are connected
to the main building and are no higher than 2.5 feet above grade at any
point. This exemption shall not apply to front yards, secondary front
yards, nonconforming side or rear yard setbacks and nonconforming
uses.
G. Subsurface emergency escape and rescue openings and window wells,
provided that no portion of same is more than six inches above grade.
These shall be permitted up to three feet into any conforming setback.
A. The Planning Department reserves the right to require that access to
the site be relocated and/or shared with the adjoining properties, as a
condition to the granting of a certificate of occupancy or site plan
approval for the site.
B. The Planning Department reserves the right to require a shared
parking arrangement between the site and the adjoining properties as a
condition to approval of the certificate of occupancy or the site plan.
C. There shall be no more than one access point per roadway.
A. For new structures, including additions to existing structure or those
undergoing rehabilitation of greater than 50% of their assessed value, a
roof or gable design or an alternative acceptable to the Planning
Department with a minimum slope of five inches over 12 inches, shall
be required.
B. Building materials of a residential character, such as brick, wood frame,
cedar or vinyl siding, of less than six inches revealed, shall be used on
all exteriors.
§ 68-498.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-500
66:1082
§ 68-501. Site requirements.
C. The Planning Department reserves the right to require additional
architectural elements, such as front porches and windows. The design
and materials of all elements of the building shall be subject to Planning
Division approval.
D. Existing structures on the site cannot be removed or modified without
the approval of the Planning Division.
A. Yard area. All yard area shall be planted in conformance with an
approved detailed landscaping plan and shall be maintained in a neat
and attractive manner. Use of the front yard for purposes other than a
driveway and landscaping is prohibited.
B. Parking. All parking shall be located to the greatest possible extent in
the rear yard area.
C. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board. [Added
4-8-1997]
D. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Added 4-8-1997;
amended 8-12-2003]
E. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in accordance with Town standards
shall be maintained adjacent to any residential zone or use. [Added
4-8-1997]
§ 68-500 WATER QUALITY § 68-501
66:1083

ARTICLE XLVI
Use District Regulations: Residential Redevelopment District
[Added 6-6-1989381]
§ 68-502. Legislative intent.
The purpose of the Residential Redevelopment District is to promote the
redevelopment of residential areas within the Town of Islip which are
characterized by a high degree of deteriorated and dilapidated housing and
associated blighted conditions. The district provides for a range of housing
types and densities designed to promote the construction of new housing,
as well as the rehabilitation of existing housing, to a greater degree than
could be achieved under other residential zoning districts. Any and all
development within this district shall be in accordance with a Master Plan
approved by the Town Board.
§ 68-503. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-16-1990; 7-14-1993]
Application for Residential Redevelopment District shall be subject to a
determination by the Planning Board that a property is blighted and that
redevelopment through a use or uses permitted in said District is
appropriate. No building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied
and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected or altered
except for one or more of the following purposes:
§ 68-504. Accessory uses.
A. Single-family detached or semiattached or attached dwellings.
Conversion of a garage for any other purpose other than for the parking
of a vehicle is prohibited. [Amended 6-8-2010]
B. Church or other similar place of worship or parish house, provided that
a twenty-five-foot buffer is provided and maintained adjacent to any
residential use or zone in accordance with Town standards and a site
plan is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board or its designee
indicating compliance with all applicable land development standards.
[Amended 4-8-1997]
C. Municipal park, playground or recreation building or use.
D. Child day-care center. [Amended 4-8-1997]
E. Garden apartments.
F. Apartments designed for senior citizens.
A. The following shall be permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garages where attached to the main dwellings.
381. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally designated as Article XLV, §§ 68-487 through
68-500, but was redesignated as Article XLVI, §§ 68-502 through 68-515, by the editor at
the instruction of the Town due to the previous addition of an Article XLV on 1-12-1989.
§ 68-502 WATER QUALITY § 68-504
66:1085
§ 68-504.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-8-1997]
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
§ 68-505. Height restrictions.
§ 68-506. Percentage of lot occupancy.
(2) Decks.
(3) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
B. (Reserved)382
C. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot with the
principal building, and no accessory building shall be constructed on a
lot until the construction of the main building has actually been
commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is completed and used.
D. Whenever a use has been authorized by special permit pursuant to
§ 68-46 or by special exception pursuant to § 68-47, no accessory use
shall be permitted unless the same shall have been specifically
authorized by that Board which authorized the use.
A. A principal building or residence shall be erected to a height in excess
of 28 feet or two stories.
B. No accessory building or structure shall be erected to a height in excess
of 18 feet.
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed or
occupy more than 30% of the total lot area. The floor area ratio (FAR)
shall not exceed 0.30.
B. Dwellings on lots reserved for single-family detached dwellings shall
not occupy more than 20% of the total lot area. The floor area ratio
(FAR) shall not exceed 0.25 of said lots.
C. Dwellings on lots reserved for single-family semiattached dwellings
shall not occupy more than 20% of the total lot area. The floor area ratio
(FAR) shall not exceed 0.35. [Amended 1-16-1990; 3-24-1992]
D. Dwellings on lots reserved for single-family attached dwellings shall not
occupy more than 45% of the lot area. The floor area ratio (FAR) shall
not exceed 0.62. Exception: Said dwellings located on any corner lot
shall not occupy more than 20% of the lot area and not exceed a floor
area ratio of 0.35. [Amended 1-16-1990; 3-24-1992]
382. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding authorization to establish reasonable rules
and regulations, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-504 ISLIP CODE § 68-506
66:1086
§ 68-507. Area density.
§ 68-508. Living area. [Amended 1-16-1990]
The minimum living area for a single-family dwelling shall be 1,100 square
feet.
§ 68-509. Width of lot.
E. Other permitted uses shall not occupy more than 25% of the total lot
area. The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.25.
F. Accessory buildings shall be located only in the rear yard and shall
occupy no more than 25% of the rear yard area. The floor area ratio
(FAR) shall not exceed 0.25.
G. Decks on lots reserved for detached or semiattached dwellings shall
occupy no more than 10% of the rear yard area. Decks on lots reserved
for multiattached dwellings shall occupy no more than 20% of the rear
yard area. [Added 1-16-1990]
H. The floor area ratio (FAR) for garden apartments or apartments
designed for senior citizens shall not exceed 0.50. [Added 7-14-1993]
A. The minimum required lot area for single-family detached dwellings
shall be 7,300 square feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
B. The minimum required lot area for single-family semiattached
dwellings shall be 4,600 square feet. [Amended 1-16-1991]
C. The minimum required lot area for single-family attached dwellings
shall be 2,400 square feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
D. The minimum required lot area for attached rental dwellings shall be
9,200 square feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
E. The minimum required lot area for other permitted uses shall be 20,000
square feet.
F. The density of garden apartments shall be within a range of 12 to 16
units per acre. The density of senior citizen apartment shall be within a
range of seventeen and 27 units per acre. Determination of precise
density shall be based on the following criteria: size of apartment,
number of bedrooms, quality of design and site plan and obstacles to
acquiring the property and/or removing blighted conditions. [Added
7-14-1993]
A. The minimum width of lot for a single-family detached dwelling shall be
75 feet.
B. The minimum width of lot for a single-family semiattached dwelling
shall be 48 feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
§ 68-506 WATER QUALITY § 68-509
66:1087
§ 68-510. Front yard.
§ 68-511. Rear yard.
§ 68-512. Side yards.
C. The minimum width of lot for a single-family attached dwelling shall be
25 feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
D. The minimum width of lot for an attached rental dwelling shall be 96
feet.
E. The minimum width of lot for other permitted uses shall be 100 feet.
F. Exception. A lot need not have the required width throughout, so long
as:
(1) Said lot is 75 feet in width as measured parallel to and 25 feet back
from the front property line;
(2) Said lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac or curvilinear road where the
side lines of the lot are straight but not parallel and has a minimum
width of 50 feet at the front property line; and
(3) Said lot otherwise complies with all requirements of this ordinance.
A. The minimum front yard for all single-family dwellings shall be twentyfive
25) feet. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards. In
the case of attached dwellings, the minimum corner front yard shall be
35 feet. [Amended 1-16-1990; 7-14-1993]
B. An accessory building shall observe the same setback behind the front
line of the main building as required in the Residence AAA District, and
if located on a corner lot shall be set back at least 25 feet from the side
street property line. [Amended 2-28-2017]
C. The minimum front yard for garden apartments or senior citizen
apartments shall be 35 feet. [Added 7-14-1993]
A. Dwellings. The minimum rear yard for all dwellings shall be a minimum
of 25 feet.
B. Rear yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-55. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. The minimum side yard for single-family detached dwellings shall be 10
feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
B. The minimum side yard requirement for single-family semiattached
dwellings shall be 18 feet for that yard facing the detached side of the
house. Garages attached to said dwellings shall have a minimum side
yard of eight feet. [Amended 1-16-1990]
§ 68-509 ISLIP CODE § 68-512
66:1088
§ 68-513. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 68-514. Fencing. [Amended 7-2-1991]
Fencing shall be permitted as per Article XXX, with the following
exceptions:
§ 68-515. Property maintenance standards.
C. The minimum side yard for a single-family attached dwelling, garden
apartment or senior citizens apartment shall be 15 feet. [Amended
1-16-1990; 7-14-1993]
D. Side yard regulations for accessory buildings shall be the same as those
in the Residence AAA District, § 68-56. [Amended 2-28-2017]
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and projecting more
than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not wider or deeper
than six feet nor more than three feet in height.
A. Fences in that portion of the second front yard of corner lots shall be
located a minimum of eight feet from the property line and a minimum
of 10 feet behind the front building line. [Amended 7-14-1993]
B. No fence shall be permitted in any other front yard setback area.
A. Driveways shall not exceed a width of 18 feet. In the case of
semiattached dwelling lots or corner multiattached lots, expansion from
the original driveway is only permitted in a direction away from the
house. On all other multifamily lots, the extent of the driveway is limited
to that area designated on the final site plan. Parking of vehicles on any
area beside the driveway is prohibited. [Amended 7-14-1993]
B. There shall be no garbage dumpsters on site, and each unit shall have
individual garbage cans which shall not be stored in the front or side
yard when garbage pickup is not scheduled.
C. There shall be no unregistered vehicles or vehicles offered for sale
within the right-of-way of any of the streets or within the front yard
setback area at any time.
D. There will be no changes to the exterior components of the approved
dwellings, including but not limited to the siding, roofing, windows and
primary doors without a letter of determination by the Planning
Division that the changes are consistent with the Master Plan.
§ 68-512 WATER QUALITY § 68-515
66:1089
§ 68-516. Exterior site improvements and land clearing. [Added
4-8-1997]
§ 68-517. through § 68-599. (Reserved)
E. All exterior elements, including but not limited to siding, roofing, eaves,
windows, doors, shutters, steps, railings and lights, shall be maintained
by the owners in a good condition, and nothing herein contained shall
preclude such property maintenance.383
A. Parking, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, screen planting, buffers, street
trees, dumpster enclosures, lighting, public improvements and all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code and the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations shall be maintained unless otherwise
modified or waived by the Planning Board or Town Board.
B. The exterior site improvements and improvement of property shall be
regulated under Article XXXI of this ordinance. [Amended 8-12-2003]
383. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, requiring a homeowner's association to provide
maintenance of common areas, and Subsection G, added 1-16-1990, which required
landscaped areas on individual lots, both of which followed this subsection, were repealed
7-14-1993.
§ 68-515 ISLIP CODE § 68-517
66:1090
ARTICLE XLVII
Accessory Apartments
[Added 7-7-1992]
§ 68-600. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide an opportunity, in locations
where adverse impacts do not result and in a manner consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan, for the creation of small apartments within the
existing structure of owner-occupied single-family detached dwellings. It
is the intent of the ordinance to meet the special housing needs of small
households and to allow for the efficient use of the Town's existing stock
of single-family dwellings. It is also the intent of this ordinance to increase
compliance with building and fire codes, preserve neighborhood stability
and reduce the impact of foreclosure and deferred property maintenance,
thereby preserving property values and the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 68-601. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit which is subordinate to a
permitted principal one-family residence use in terms of size, location and
appearance, and is located within the principal structure.[Amended
1-4-1994; 4-5-2005; 5-22-2007]
§ 68-602. Permit and certificate of occupancy required. [Amended
1-4-1994; 5-21-2013]
No person shall create, construct, alter or occupy an accessory apartment
or allow or maintain an accessory apartment without obtaining an accessory
apartment permit from the Board of Zoning Appeals and a certificate of
occupancy for said use from the Department of Building. In no case shall
floor area which is located more than 50% below grade, as defined in the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, be used for
accessory apartment purposes.
§ 68-603. Owner occupancy required. [Amended 4-21-1998;
4-5-2005; 2-28-2017]
No accessory apartment permit shall be granted nor shall any said permit
remain valid unless an owner of the lot upon which the accessory apartment
is located resides within the principal dwelling unit. Tenants shall be limited
in occupancy to the accessory apartment unit. For the purpose of this
ordinance, an owner is defined as a title holder with no less than a 50%
interest in the property.
§ 68-600 WATER QUALITY § 68-604
66:1091
§ 68-604. Code compliance required.
No occupancy of the accessory apartment shall be permitted prior to
compliance with all the requirements for two-family dwellings as per the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and/or the
laws and housing regulations of the State of New York, County of Suffolk
and Town of Islip, as well as any conditions pertaining to the accessory
apartment permit. The applicant will be required to meet these standards
within six months from the issuance of the building and zoning permit or
the special permit will become null and void.
§ 68-605. Expressly prohibited uses.
An accessory apartment shall not be located within an accessory structure.
§ 68-606. Minimum required lot area.
The minimum required lot area for an accessory apartment within a singlefamily
dwelling shall be 7,500 square feet.
§ 68-607. Minimum required lot width. [Amended 1-4-1994]
The minimum width of lot for an accessory apartment within a single-family
dwelling shall be 75 feet. In the case of lots located on curvilinear roads or
culs-de-sac, said width shall be measured at the front building line of the
principal dwelling.
§ 68-608. Limitation of bedrooms, occupants and floor area.
[Amended 1-4-1994; 4-21-1998; 9-11-2007; 5-28-2008; 6-8-2010]
There shall be permitted a maximum of two bedrooms for each accessory
apartment. Occupancy of the accessory apartment shall not exceed one per
150 feet of gross floor area. The gross floor area of the accessory apartment
shall be at least 300 square feet and shall not exceed 50% or 800 square
feet, whichever is less, of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling,
including the area of the accessory apartment in which it is located.
§ 68-609. Number of apartments permitted.
There shall be no more than one accessory apartment permitted per lot.
Accessory apartments shall only be permitted within structures with a
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance for a single-family
dwelling.
§ 68-610. Expansion and alteration of main dwelling. [Amended
1-4-1994]
A. (Reserved)384
384. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, regarding structures with an accessory apartment,
was repealed 2-28-2017.
§ 68-604 ISLIP CODE § 68-610
66:1092
§ 68-611. Compliance with health requirements. [Amended
1-4-1994]
Occupancy of an accessory apartment shall be contingent upon compliance
with all appropriate health code requirements.
§ 68-612. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 9-12-2000]
There shall be located on-site not fewer than four off-street parking spaces.
Parking shall be provided pursuant to the direction of the Town Engineer in
a manner that is consistent with the residential appearance of the dwelling.
The maximum width of the driveway shall not exceed 18 feet or 24% of the
lot frontage. Required driveway improvements must be completed prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance for
the accessory apartment unit.
§ 68-613. Permit issuance restricted by age of structure. [Amended
1-4-1994; 4-21-1998; 8-5-2014]
Any dwelling which receives a certificate of occupancy after September 1,
1992, must be at least seven years old, as stated from said certificate of
occupancy, in order to have an accessory apartment.
§ 68-614. Maintenance of structure and property.
All structures, landscaping and paving on a lot on which an accessory
apartment is located shall be maintained in a neat and clean manner,
including but not limited to driveways, walkways, sidewalks adjoining the
subject parcel, exterior shingles, paint, shutters and trim, as well as
landscaping, lawns and shrubbery. The Town or its designee reserves the
right to enter onto the subject property after 15 days' written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the then owner to its address as
it appears on the assessment roll, to remove littered debris or to maintain
or replace any fencing or planting if found that the improvements are not
being maintained, and shall bill the owner for any expense incurred.
§ 68-615. Permit applications.
B. No changes shall be made to the exterior design of a structure in which
an accessory apartment is created that would alter the single-family
appearance of the dwelling. Only one visible front entrance shall be
permitted, except that a second front entrance may be permitted upon a
finding by the Board of Appeals that the additional door existed on or
before July 7, 1992 and the subject premises benefitted from a permit
for two-family, family use only pursuant to this chapter. Any electrical
and water meters installed to service an accessory apartment shall not
be visible from any roadway. [Amended 4-21-1998]
A. No change of any kind shall be made to the structure until the Board of
Appeals grants an accessory apartment permit and the Building
Department issues a permit to construct said apartment. Subsequent to
§ 68-610 WATER QUALITY § 68-615
66:1093
§ 68-616. Renewal of permits.
§ 68-617. Revocation of permits. [Amended 1-4-1994]
The Board of Appeals reserves the right to revoke any accessory apartment
permit issued hereunder should the applicant or applicant's tenant violate
any provision or any condition imposed upon the issuance of the special
permit. Said revocation shall be after a hearing held by the Board of
Appeals. The standard notification requirements for a hearing on a new
the granting of the permit by the Board of Appeals, an application shall
be submitted to the Department of Building for all necessary building
permits.
B. All applications must be supplied by owner(s) of the property, and the
applicant shall be required to file a notarized document with the Board
of Appeals. This document shall state that the accessory apartment use
and permit shall terminate upon the death of the applicant or the
survivor of the applicant, upon the transfer of title to said premises,
upon the applicant no longer occupying the premises as their principal
residence or upon conviction for a violation of this section.
C. The applicant will be required to file a form stating that the subject
dwelling shall meet all New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code requirements and all Town of Islip requirements
pertaining to temporary special permits for accessory apartments.
D. A public hearing before the Town of Islip Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be required for all applications for an accessory apartment permit,
including transfers of said permits, except for renewals by the same
owner.
E. Every accessory apartment permit granted by the Board of Appeals
shall become null and void and of no further force and effect unless the
applicant obtains a building and change of use permit to create an
accessory apartment no later than 90 days after approval is granted by
the Board of Appeals.
A. All accessory apartment permits must be renewed every three years or
upon transfer of title. The owner of an accessory apartment is required
to apply to the Board of Appeals to renew this permit, in accordance
with adopted Department procedures. The applicant is required to
submit an affidavit of residency and to notify the owners of all dwellings
on the same street as the subject parcel, which dwellings are within 200
feet of the application.
B. The Board of Appeals reserves the right to require a public hearing
prior to the renewal of the permit if, on the basis of responses from the
neighboring residences or by an inspection of municipal officials,
reason exists to believe that the conditions of the permit are not being
met.
§ 68-615 ISLIP CODE § 68-617
66:1094
accessory apartment applicant shall apply. Refusal to permit entry by
authorized Town officials for the purpose of determining compliance with
all regulations relating to this ordinance between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. within 24 hours after receipt of said request may result in
automatic revocation of the accessory apartment permit.
§ 68-618. Transfer of apartment permit.
An application for a transfer of an accessory apartment permit to a
subsequent property owner shall be on such forms and in such a manner
as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals. A public hearing shall be
required for such applications.
§ 68-619. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-22-2007]
All penalties for violations of this article are delineated in § 68-666 of the
Town Code.
§ 68-620. Fees; reassessments. [Amended 1-4-1994; 9-12-2000]
The creation of the accessory apartment which results in an expansion of
the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be subject to a reassessment of
the property, the amount of which shall be determined by the Islip Town
Assessor.
§ 68-621. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
Discriminatory practices in the rental or lease of an accessory apartment
shall be prohibited in accordance with Chapter 26, Housing: Discriminatory
Practices, of the Code of the Town of Islip.
§ 68-621.1. Completion of improvements. [Added 4-21-1998]
Improvements required in accordance with the issuance of an accessory
apartment permit shall not be required prior to the date of the grant of the
Board of Appeals but shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy or in no case later than six months after the date of the grant
of the Board.
§ 68-621.2. Variances. [Added 4-21-1998; amended 2-28-2017]
Any variance required in connection with the issuance of an accessory
apartment permit shall be heard by the Board of Appeals in accordance with
§ 68-412 of the Islip Town Code.
§ 68-621.3. (Reserved)385
385. Editor’s Note: Former § 68-21.3, Minimum width of road, added 6-12-2007, was repealed
2-28-2017.
§ 68-617 WATER QUALITY § 68-621.3
66:1095

ARTICLE XLVIII
Use District Regulations: Industrial Business District
[Added 10-6-1992]
§ 68-622. Legislative intent.
§ 68-623. Permitted uses.
In an Industrial Business District, no building, structure or premises shall
be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall
be so erected or altered except for one or more of the following purposes:
A. The Industrial Business District is intended to allow many of the uses
typically found in a light industrial district, including offices and
manufacturing. In addition, the district is also intended to allow singleuser
bulk retail establishments commonly identified as "warehouse
clubs." These uses are identified as nontraditional retail establishments
that share characteristics of both industrial and retail facilities. It is not
the intention of this ordinance to allow shopping centers or uses that
would typically locate within a shopping center.
B. This district shall be applied to those locations that are serviced by an
adequate arterial highway system, that do not interfere with
neighborhoods and residential properties and are otherwise consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
A. Offices.
B. Manufacturing and assembly, except those uses prohibited in Industrial
1 and Industrial 2 Districts.
C. Laboratories for scientific and industrial research, testing and
development.
D. (Reserved)386
E. Municipal and public facilities.
F. Single-user bulk retail establishments.
G. Gymnasiums or health clubs.
H. Public school. [Added 3-23-1999]
I. Private or parochial school, including preschool programs, elementary
and secondary schools, vocational schools and other non-degreegranting
schools including self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics
and similar instruction/programs, except those associated with
manufacturing or truck driving. [Added 3-23-1999]
386. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Educational institutions, was repealed 3-23-1999.
§ 68-622 WATER QUALITY § 68-624
66:1097
§ 68-624. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after public hearing
shall be as follows:
§ 68-624.1. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing. [Added 3-23-1999]
§ 68-625. Accessory uses.
The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot with a
principal use:
§ 68-626. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 60 feet.
§ 68-627. Percentage of lot occupancy.
§ 68-628. Area density.
The minimum lot area for uses permitted in this district shall be 10 acres.
§ 68-629. Width of lot.
The minimum width of a lot for uses permitted in this district shall be 300
feet throughout.
A. Food service establishment, restaurant, cafeteria or any other
establishment for the service of food or beverages, whether such
service is intended for on-premises or off-premises or indoor or outdoor
consumption.
B. University or college dormitory or similar residential use. [Added
3-23-1999]
A. Private or parochial college or university excluding dormitories and
other college or university residential uses.
A. Signs as permitted and regulated under Article XXIX.
B. Other customary accessory uses and structures, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the principal use, do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business and do not require a
separate building.
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed a floor
area ratio of 0.35.
B. A food service establishment shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.035,
nor shall a food service establishment constitute more than 35% of the
total floor area at any time.
§ 68-624 ISLIP CODE § 68-630
66:1098
§ 68-630. Front yard.
All buildings shall have a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet. In the case
of lots having frontage on more than one road, a minimum setback of 50
feet shall also be provided from these roads.
§ 68-631. Side yards.
All buildings shall have a minimum side yard of 25 feet. Where the side
yard abuts a residential district, a minimum side yard of 100 feet shall be
required.
§ 68-632. Rear yard.
All buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet. Where the rear yard
abuts a residential district, a minimum rear yard of not less than 100 feet
shall be required.
§ 68-633. Off-street loading.
No loading areas shall be located within a front yard or within 100 feet of
a residential district, nor shall any loading area be readily visible from a
public street.
§ 68-634. Architectural review.
Representative architectural elevation drawings for all proposed structures
shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval of the Planning
Department and shall include height, building design, color, materials, signs
and exterior mechanical equipment. All exterior walls shall be completed
with finished building materials that shall provide for architecturally
compatible building design. The design of all buildings within this district
shall conform to a high-quality industrial/office building design and shall not
feature retail design elements. A building permit shall not be issued until
said plans are approved by the Planning Department.
§ 68-635. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted as regulated in Chapter 68, Article XXIX.
§ 68-636. Landscaping.
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations and as further provided herein:
A. A minimum landscape area of 50 feet shall be maintained along all road
frontages. The landscape design shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Planning Department prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Where possible, existing natural vegetation shall be retained.
B. All parking areas shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Planning
Department and shall provide at a minimum that all double-loaded
§ 68-630 WATER QUALITY § 68-636
66:1099
parking designs shall be separated by a minimum landscape division of
six feet. Said areas shall be planted with trees at a minimum average
spacing of one tree for every 30 feet.
§ 68-636 ISLIP CODE § 68-636
66:1100
ARTICLE XLIX
Cluster Development
[Added 12-12-2006]
§ 68-637. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to permit cluster development in accordance
with the provisions of New York State Town Law § 278 in order to allow for
maximum flexibility in achieving well-planned and environmentally sensitive
developments, with special consideration given to preserving the natural
and scenic qualities of lands within the Town of Islip.
§ 68-638. Adoption of statutory provisions; grant of authority.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby elects to adopt the provisions
of Town Law § 278 and to exercise the powers granted by Town Law § 278,
and hereby grants to the Planning Board of the Town of Islip appropriate
authority to modify the Zoning Code as hereinafter detailed.
§ 68-639. Applicability of article.
This article shall be applicable to all land zoned for residential purposes
within the Town of Islip.
§ 68-640. Yield plan and cluster plan; requirements and procedure
for approval by Planning Board.
A. In order to accomplish the clustering of residential lots, an applicant for
a subdivision shall provide a standard yield plan and a cluster plan.
B. In its review of a cluster subdivision plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the following:
(1) Environmentally unique or sensitive features, including, but not
limited to, fresh- or saltwater wetlands, scenic views, forests or
wooded areas, ponds, rivers or streams, or other natural features
which the Planning Board determines need to be preserved and/or
protected;
(2) The general topography and the location and extent of sloped
areas;
(3) Whether the subject property contains historic sites and/or
structures of
(4) Whether the subject property contains a significant archaeological
field(s);
(5) Reconfiguration of old, filed subdivision maps, based on single and
separate lots;
§ 68-637 WATER QUALITY § 68-640
66:1101
§ 68-641. Yield.
Unit yield shall be determined as follows:
§ 68-642. Dedication and maintenance of open space.
(6) Enhancement of buffers between the development and
incompatible uses, such as highways or commercial development;
(7) The creation of medians or other distinctive features to enhance
the development;
(8) Any other factors which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
warrant consideration.
C. The cluster subdivision plat must locate and arrange the residential lots
so as to accomplish the following:
(1) Demonstrate the ways in which scenic vistas are being considered
or enhanced and shall depict a lot arrangement which has
considered the visual impact of residential development upon such
vistas or upon adjacent development.
(2) Remain harmonious with and protect during construction, to the
maximum extent practicable, the natural environment, minimizing
the clearing of treed areas, the grading of earth, removal of soils,
and precluding the disturbance of surface waters and wetlands and
other similar disturbances of the natural environment.
A. The unit yield shall in no case exceed the unit yield which could be
permitted, in the Planning Board's judgment, were the land to be
subdivided into a conventional plat conforming with the applicable bulk
requirements of the Town Code, including requirements for right-ofway,
drainage, access and conservation areas;
B. In the event the subject property is located in two or more zoning
districts, the unit yield shall be limited to the cumulative density as
derived from the more restrictive district in each proposed lot;
C. In the case of residential plats subject to cluster development as set
forth in this section, the dwelling units permitted may be at the
discretion of the Planning Board, detached, semidetached, attached, or
located within multistory districts.
A. The application of the procedure prescribed by this article may result in
a plat showing lands available for a park, recreation, open space or
municipal purposes directly related to the plat. The Planning Board, as
a condition of plat approval, may establish such conditions on the
ownership, use and maintenance of such lands as it deems necessary to
assure the preservation of such lands for their intended purposes. The
open space created by the use of the provisions of this article must be
clearly labeled on the subdivision map as to its use and the rights of the
§ 68-640 ISLIP CODE § 68-642
66:1102
§ 68-643. Screening and landscaping.
In addition to any screening and landscaping requirements contained in
existing rules and regulations of the Planning Board, the Planning Board
may require additional screening and planting in order to lessen the impact
of the open space zone on adjacent properties.
§ 68-644. Applications.
Applications for cluster development shall be made simultaneously with
subdivision and/or resubdivision plat applications and shall contain such
information as the Planning Board shall determine necessary and in such
format as the Board shall adopt.
§ 68-645. Notice and public hearing.
Cluster development shall be subject to review at a public hearing held in
accordance with the provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law.
§ 68-646. Filing of subdivision map.
In addition to the other Planning Board requirements for final maps, upon
final approval of a change of zone by the Town Board and final approval
of the subdivision application by the Planning Board, the applicant shall
file the subdivision map in the office of the County Clerk, which map
shall contain thereon a statement that the subdivision has been approved
owners in the subdivision, as well as whether it is to be dedicated
ultimately to the Town or other governmental body or to an approved
private or conservation corporation or to a property owners' association
or otherwise under conditions meeting with Planning Board approval.
The details as to use and ownership of such open space are further to
be set out in a declaration recorded by the owner or other appropriate
instrument. Such open space is to be preserved in perpetuity, and the
Planning Board may require an open space easement running to the
Town as a condition of approval.
B. If said lands are to be offered for dedication to the Town, the Town
Board may require that such conditions shall be approved by the Town
Board before said plan shall be approved for filing. All or portions of
open space may be dedicated to the Town or some other municipal
corporation.
C. If the open space is not to be dedicated to the Town or other
governmental authority or to an approved private or conservation
corporation, the applicant, simultaneously with the filing of the map,
must either create a property owners' association or neighborhood
corporation embracing all property owners within the map and
providing for adequate annual contributions for maintenance of said
open space or otherwise satisfy the Planning Board with regard to the
maintenance of said open space.
§ 68-642 WATER QUALITY § 68-646
66:1103
pursuant to the provisions of this article, the number and type of units
which can be erected thereon, the areas in which said units may be
constructed and the areas which are to remain open space and under what
conditions.
§ 68-646 ISLIP CODE § 68-646
66:1104
ARTICLE L
Rental Dwelling Units
[Added 5-22-2007]
§ 68-647. Purpose and intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip has determined that serious conditions
exist in the Town of Islip arising from the rental of dwelling units that
are substandard or in violation of the New York State Building Code, New
York State Fire Code, New York State Fuel-Gas Code, New York State
Residential Code, New York State Property Maintenance Code, New York
State Plumbing Code, New York State Electrical Code, Multiple Residence
Law, Building Rehabilitation Code, and other codes and ordinances of the
Town, are inadequate in size and overcrowded, that such dwelling units
pose hazards to the safety, well-being and property of residents of the Town
and others, create blight and tend to promote and encourage deterioration
of the housing stock of the Town, exacerbate vehicle traffic and parking
problems and overburden municipal services. The Board finds that current
Code provisions are inadequate to halt the proliferation of such conditions
and that the public health, safety, welfare and good order and governance
of the Town will be enhanced by the enactment of the regulations set forth
in this article, which regulations are remedial in nature and effect.
§ 68-648. Scope; applicability.
§ 68-649. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
A. Scope. This article shall apply to all rental dwelling units located within
the Town of Islip, whether or not the use and occupancy thereof shall be
permitted under the applicable use regulations for the zoning district in
which such rental dwelling unit is located, as provided in this article.
Any dwelling unit or any other premises subject to this article shall be
presumed to be rented for a fee and a charge made if said premises are
not occupied by the legal owner thereof.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall be deemed to
supplement applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes and
regulations. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish, impair,
supersede or replace existing remedies of the Town, county or state or
existing requirements of any other provision of local laws or ordinances
of the Town or county or state laws and regulations. In case of conflict
between any provisions of this article and any applicable state or local
law, ordinance, code or regulation, the more restrictive or stringent
provision or requirement shall prevail. The issuance of any permit or
the filing of any form under this article does not make legal any action
or state of facts that is otherwise illegal under any other applicable
legislation.
§ 68-647 WATER QUALITY § 68-649
66:1105
ABANDONED HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS — Furniture, furnishings,
housewares, appliances and other personal property customarily found in
and used in residential dwellings, which are deposited at or along said
dwelling's street frontage, in part or in whole, pursuant to a duly executed
warrant of eviction by legally authorized law enforcement officers and/or
personnel.
APARTMENT — An entirely self-contained dwelling unit containing
complete housekeeping facilities, including cooking facilities, for only one
family. An apartment shall have no enclosed space in common with any
other dwelling or apartment other than vestibules, entrances, hallways or
porches.
APARTMENT HOUSE OR GARDEN APARTMENT — A building or buildings
arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two or more individuals
or families living independently of each other in apartments.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Any person, organization, partnership,
association, corporation or other legally recognized entity having actual or
apparent authority to act on behalf of an owner regarding this article and all
state and local rules, regulations and ordinances referenced herein. It shall
be a rebuttable presumption that any person, organization, partnership,
association, corporation or other legally recognized entity that accepts or
receives rent or any other consideration from the occupant of a dwelling
unit is an authorized agent.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
When separated by a party wall without openings, it shall be deemed a
separate building.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized
representative of such person, including but not limited to the Building
Inspector, Chief Building Inspector, Principal Building Inspectors, Senior
Building Inspector, Building Permits Coordinator, Zoning Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Fire Marshal, Fire Marshal I, Fire Marshal II, Chief
Fire Marshal, Town Investigator. Senior Town Investigator or Ordinance
Inspector of the Town of Islip, and such person(s) shall be certified as a New
York State Code Enforcement Official.
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively for residential purposes and
arranged or intended to be occupied by one individual or one family only.
A dwelling shall not have a separate entrance leading to a separated living
space which contains a stove, kitchen and/or attached plumbing fixtures.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof arranged, designed
for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other
with separate cooking facilities. A boardinghouse, furnished-room house,
dormitory, rooming house, tourist house or fraternity house is a building
in which there are fewer than 30 sleeping rooms occupied primarily by
transients who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are
provided such services as are incidental to its use as a temporary residence,
and is a multiple dwelling; a dwelling occupied by one or two families
§ 68-649 ISLIP CODE § 68-649
66:1106
with five or more transient boarders, roomer or lodgers in one or both
households.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building arranged, designed for or occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for not more than two families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or building, one-, two- or three-family
dwelling, apartments, multiunit apartments, apartment houses,
condominiums, cooperatives, garden apartments or townhouses, occupied
or to be occupied by one or more persons as a home or residence.
FAMILY — One or more persons, whether or not related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption, all occupying a single, whole, legal single- or
one-family dwelling unit as a traditional family or the functional equivalent
of a traditional family, having access to and utilizing the whole of such
dwelling unit, including but not limited to all rooms and housekeeping
facilities, in common.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in structure and function resembles a
traditional family unit; and
(1)
The occupants must share the entire single- or one-family dwelling
unit and live and cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A
unit in which the various occupants act as separate roomers may
not be deemed to be occupied by the functional equivalent of a
traditional family; and
(2)
The occupants share expenses for food, rent, ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses; and
(3)
The occupancy is permanent and stable. Evidence of such
permanence and stability includes, but is not limited to:
The presence of minor children regularly residing in the
household who are enrolled in local schools;
(a)
Members of the household have the same address for purposes
of voter registration, drivers' licenses, motor vehicle
registration, filing of taxes and delivery of mail;
(b)
(c) Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more whether in the current dwelling unit or in other dwelling
units.
(d)
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the
members of the household; and
(e)
(4)
A.
§ 68-649 WATER QUALITY § 68-649
66:1107
KITCHEN — An area within a building which contains a sink, a refrigerator
and an element utilized for heating or cooking of consumable goods.
MANAGING AGENT — Any individual, business, partnership, firm,
corporation, enterprise, trust, company, industry, association, public utility
or other legal entity responsible for the maintenance or operation of any
rental property as defined within this article.
NEW PERMIT — A permit which is to be issued to the owner of an intended
rental premises where such premises have not been the subject of a rental
occupancy permit continuously prior to the date of application for the
permit.
OCCUPANT — A natural person who leases, uses or occupies a dwelling
unit.
OWNER — Any person or entity in whose name the real property upon
which the dwelling unit is situated is recorded in the office of the Suffolk
County Clerk. The person or entity in whose name the real property is
recorded in the Office of the Suffolk County Clerk shall be presumed to be
the owner thereof.
RENEWAL RENTAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit which is to be issued
to the owner of a rental dwelling unit where such premises have been
the subject of a rental occupancy permit continuously prior to the date of
application for the permit.
RENT — A return in money, property or other valuable consideration
(including payment in kind or for services or other thing of value) for the
use and occupancy or the right to the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit,
whether or not a legal relationship of landlord and tenant exists between
the owner and the occupant or occupants thereof.
RENTAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit established, occupied, used or
maintained for rental occupancy.
RENTAL OCCUPANCY — The occupancy or use of a dwelling unit by one or
more persons as a home or residence under an arrangement whereby the
occupant or occupants thereof pay rent for such occupancy and use.
RENTAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit which is issued upon application
to the Code Enforcement Official and shall be valid for two years from the
date of issuance.
TRANSIENT RENTAL PROPERTY — [Added 12-15-2015]
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the
occupants are the functional equivalent of a family.
(f)
A rental dwelling occupied as a home or residence by persons other
than the owner or a family member of the owner and for which rent is
received by the owner, directly or indirectly, in exchange for such rental
occupation for a period of less than 14 nights. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term "transient rental property" shall mean all non-owneroccupied
dwelling units rented for a period of less than 14 nights and
shall not include:
A.
§ 68-649 ISLIP CODE § 68-649
66:1108
§ 68-650. Rental occupancy permit required.
A dwelling unit lawfully and validly permitted as an accessory
apartment in accordance with § 68-602 of the Code of the Town of
Islip; or
(1)
Properties used exclusively for nonresidential commercial
purposes in any zoning district; or
(2)
Any legally operating hotel/motel business or bed-and-breakfast
establishment operating exclusively and catering to transient
clientele; that is, customers who customarily reside at these
establishments for short durations for the purpose of vacationing,
travel, business, recreational activities, conventions, emergencies
and other activities that are customary to a commercial hotel/motel
business.
(3)
(4) A dwelling unit located on Fire Island.
Presumption of dwelling unit as transient rental property.
The presence of the following shall create a presumption that a
dwelling unit is being used as a transient rental property:
The dwelling unit is offered for lease on a short-term rental
website, including Airbnb, Home Away, VRBO and the like for
a period of less than 14 days; or
(a)
The dwelling is offered for lease in any medium for a period of
less than 14 nights.
(b)
(1)
The foregoing presumption may be rebutted by evidence presented
to the Code Enforcement Official that the dwelling unit is not a
transient rental property.
(2)
B.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or entity
who or which owns a dwelling unit in the Town to use, establish,
maintain, operate, let, lease, rent or suffer or permit or allow the
occupancy and use thereof as a rental occupancy by someone other
than the owner without first having obtained a valid rental occupancy
permit therefor. Failure or refusal to procure a rental occupancy permit
hereunder shall be deemed a violation. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. A rental occupancy permit issued under this article shall only be issued
to the owner(s) of the real property at issue.
C. As a rental occupancy permit issued under this article is not
transferable, in the event that the ownership of a rental dwelling is
transferred, the new owner shall register the property within 30 days of
the closing of title pursuant to the requirements set forth in this article.
If the rental dwelling is not registered as required by this article, there
will be a presumption that said property is being utilized as rental
property by the new owner(s) in violation of this article.
§ 68-649 WATER QUALITY § 68-650
66:1109
§ 68-651. Application for rental occupancy permit.
D. Exception: Rental units established pursuant to § 68-419.1 and 68-602
do not require a rental occupancy permit as defined in Article XLX.
[Added 5-28-2008]
E. No rental occupancy permit shall be granted to a transient rental
property. [Added 12-15-2015]
A. An application for a rental occupancy permit for a rental dwelling unit
shall be made in writing to the Code Enforcement Official on a form
provided therefor. Such application shall be filed and shall include the
following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
dwelling unit intended for rental occupancy. In the event that said
dwelling unit is owned by more than one individual or entity, each
owner's name, address and telephone number shall be provided. In
the event that the owner of the dwelling unit intended for rental
occupancy is a corporation, partnership, limited-liability company
or other business entity, the name, address and telephone number
of each owner, officer, principal, shareholder, partner and/or
member of such business entity shall be provided. In the event that
the owner has an authorized agent acting on his behalf, that
person's name, address and telephone number shall also be
provided.
(2) Proof of residency of each owner.
(3) The street address and Suffolk County Tax Map designation
(section, block and lot or lots) of the premises intended for rental
occupancy or the premises in which the rental dwelling units
intended for occupancy are located.
(4) A description of the structure, including the number of rental
dwelling units in the structure.
(5) A floor plan depicting the location, use and dimension of each room
situated within the dwelling unit.
(6) The number of persons intended to be accommodated by, and to
reside in, each such rental dwelling unit.
(7) The name of each person that is and/or will be occupying the
premises intended for rental occupancy. The name of each person
that is and/or will be occupying the premises intended for rental
occupancy shall not be required if:
(a) The rental dwelling unit only operates during a one-hundredfifty-
day period in the months of May, June, July, August and
September and the person that is or will be occupying said
§ 68-650 ISLIP CODE § 68-651
66:1110
rental dwelling unit shall not be occupying such rental
dwelling unit for more than 30 consecutive days; or
(b) Said rental dwelling unit is a commercial hotel/motel business
operating exclusively and catering to transient clientele; that
is, customers who customarily reside at these establishments
for short durations for the purpose of vacationing, travel,
business, recreational activities, conventions, emergencies and
other activities that are customary to a commercial hotel/motel
operation. For the purposes of this article, a "short duration"
shall be defined as not more than 21 consecutive days.
(8) A copy of the most recent deed and real property tax bill,
confirming the ownership of record of the dwelling unit.
(9) A copy of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
for the dwelling unit.
(10) A property survey of the premises drawn to scale not greater than
40 feet to one inch or, if not shown on the survey, a site plan, drawn
to scale, showing all buildings, structures, walks, driveways and
other physical features of the premises and the number, location
and access of existing and proposed on-site vehicle parking
facilities.
(11) A building permit application, properly prepared, for all proposed
buildings, improvements and alterations to existing buildings on
the premises, if any.
(12) Each application shall be executed by and sworn to under oath by
the owner of the dwelling unit.
(13) If the owner or authorized agent of a dwelling unit resides or has
his principal place of business located outside the County of
Suffolk, he is required to designate an agent who resides in the
County of Suffolk for the service of process of any notices set forth
in this article or for the service of process of a violation of this
article. The failure to provide the name and address of an agent for
service of process shall be deemed a violation of this article.
B. A new application for a rental occupancy permit shall be filed whenever
a dwelling unit or portion thereof has become vacant and the owner
intends to permit a new tenant or other person to take up residence. No
additional fee will be required if the owner is registering a change in
tenancy only under an existing valid rental occupancy permit.
C. Each application for a rental occupancy permit shall be accompanied by
an affidavit, signed by each owner and tenant named in the application,
confirming that they have received copies of all Town laws and
ordinances affecting rentals, noise, vehicle parking restrictions on
residential lots and refuse disposal and agree to abide by the same.
§ 68-651 WATER QUALITY § 68-651
66:1111
§ 68-652. Compliance with Town, county and state laws required.
No rental occupancy permit or renewal thereof shall be issued under any
application unless the property shall be in compliance with all the
provisions of the Code of the Town of Islip, the laws and sanitary and
housing regulations of the County of Suffolk and the laws of the State of
New York.
§ 68-653. Review of application; issuance of permit.
§ 68-653.1. Carbon Monoxide Alarms. [Added 1-26-2010]
D. Notwithstanding the above, no rental occupancy registration or permit
shall be required for a residential care facility established under
federal, New York State or Suffolk County guidelines or for units where
occupants are in an established care program.
A. The Code Enforcement Official shall review each rental permit
application for completeness and accuracy and shall make an on-site
inspection of the proposed rental dwelling unit or units.
B. If satisfied that the proposed rental dwelling unit or units, as well as the
premises in which the same are located, comply fully with all applicable
state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the county
and town, and that such rental dwelling unit or units would not create
an unsafe or dangerous condition or create an unsafe and substandard
structure as defined in the Islip Town Code or create a nuisance to
nearby properties, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue the rental
occupancy permit or permits.
A. Board intent and purpose. The Town Board hereby finds that carbon
monoxide. a colorless, odorless, poisonous gas produced by incomplete
burning of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels used to heat homes or to
operate motor vehicles, cook and produce heated water, presents a
danger to the health of Town of Islip residents. The Town Board further
finds that the loss of life caused by carbon monoxide poisoning is
preventable by the proper installation and use of carbon monoxide
alarms in rental dwellings.
B. Carbon monoxide alarms required in rental dwellings.
(1) Every rental dwelling, which contains a fuel-burning appliance or
equipment, which shall be defined as any appliance capable of
burning organic materials in accordance with this provision, shall
have installed and shall maintain, in good working condition, the
required number of carbon monoxide alarms, which shall have a
battery backup if electrically operated. Such carbon monoxide
alarm may be combined with a smoke-detecting device which
complies with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
§ 68-651 ISLIP CODE § 68-653.1
66:1112
(2) Installation location:
(a) In every rental dwelling, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be
installed adjacent to any bedroom maintained in such rental
dwelling, as per manufacturer's specifications.
(b) In any additional area the Code Enforcement Official deems
necessary.
(3) Compliance with other standards. Each approved carbon monoxide
alarm shall comply with all applicable state, county and Town
regulations, shall bear the label of a nationally recognized standard
testing laboratory, and shall meet the standard of UL 2034 or its
equivalent.
(4) Rendering alarm inoperable prohibited. Except as herein provided,
it shall be prohibited to render an installed carbon monoxide alarm
inoperable by breaking such alarm, painting the exterior, taping
over the alarm, disabling the alarm, removing the battery or using
any other method which prevents such carbon monoxide alarm
from operating in the manner for which it was intended. This
provision shall not apply to the normal procedure of replacing
batteries in such carbon monoxide alarm.
C. Duty of owner.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner of a rental dwelling to:
(a) Provide and install operational carbon monoxide alarm(s) in
each rental dwelling as required that shall have a battery
backup if electrically operated.
(b) As part of the rental permit application process, and in order to
receive or renew a rental permit, complete a Town of Islip
carbon monoxide detector certificate of installation and deliver
the completed certificate to the Town of Islip Code
Enforcement Official, depending upon the number of rental
units prior to receiving or renewing a rental permit.
(c) Unless the owner submits to a physical inspection of the rental
dwelling(s), the owner must provide the Code Enforcement
Official with a completed and signed affidavit attesting to the
installation of the required carbon monoxide alarm(s).
(d) The Code Enforcement Official may request to inspect a rental
dwelling for compliance at his discretion. Refusal to allow such
an inspection by the owner of such dwelling may form the basis
to make an application to a court of competent jurisdiction for
a search warrant.
(e) Provide the tenant(s) with a copy of the completed carbon
monoxide detector certificate of installation and/or the signed
§ 68-653.1 WATER QUALITY § 68-653.1
66:1113
§ 68-654. Term and renewal.
affidavit attesting to the installation of the required carbon
monoxide alarm(s).
(f) Replace any carbon monoxide alarm that has been stolen,
removed, found missing or rendered inoperable within five
days of receiving notification from the occupant, as described
in § 68-653D(1), that said alarm has been stolen, removed,
found missing or rendered inoperable.
(g) Any carbon monoxide alarm(s) must be replaced as per
manufacturer's specifications.
D. Duty of occupant. It shall be the duty of the occupant of a rental
dwelling to:
(1) Notify the owner of the rental dwelling in writing if any carbon
monoxide alarm has been stolen, removed, found missing or
rendered inoperable.
(2) Test, maintain and replace required batteries for carbon monoxide
alarms located in the rental dwelling at least every six months.
E. Severability.
(1) If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this local law
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its
operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part
thereof directly involved in the controversy and in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
A. All rental occupancy permits issued pursuant to this article shall be
valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance.
B. Renewals.
(1) A renewal rental occupancy permit application signed by the owner
on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Official shall be
completed and filed with the Code Enforcement Official no later
than 60 days before the expiration of any prior valid rental
occupancy permit. A renewal rental occupancy permit application
shall contain a copy of the prior valid rental occupancy permit
issued by the Code Enforcement Official.
(2) A renewal rental occupancy permit application shall contain a
signed sworn statement setting forth the following:
(a) That there are no existing or outstanding violations of any
federal, state or county laws, rules or regulations or of any
§ 68-653.1 ISLIP CODE § 68-654
66:1114
§ 68-655. Register of permits.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official to maintain a register
of the rental occupancy permits issued pursuant to this article. Such
register shall be kept by Tax Map number, license number, receipt number
and street address showing the name and address of the permittee, the
number of rental dwelling units at such street address, the number of rooms
in each such rental dwelling unit and the date that said rental occupancy
permit expires for such unit.
§ 68-656. Authorization for inspections.
The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to make, or cause to be made,
inspections to determine the condition of rental dwelling units to safeguard
the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Code Enforcement Official
is authorized to enter, upon consent of the owner if the unit is unoccupied,
or upon consent of the occupant if the unit is occupied, any rental dwelling
unit and the premises in which the same is located, at any reasonable time,
or at such other time as may be necessary in an emergency, without consent
of the owner, authorized agent and/or tenant for the purpose of performing
his duties under this article.
§ 68-657. Application for search warrant.
The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to make application to any
court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search warrant in order
to conduct an inspection of any premises covered by this article where the
owner refuses or fails to allow an inspection of its rental premises and
where there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article has
occurred. The application for a search warrant shall in all respects comply
with the applicable laws of the State of New York.
§ 68-658. Search without warrant restricted.
Nothing in this article, except for provisions concerning emergency
inspections, shall be deemed to authorize the Code Enforcement Official to
conduct an inspection of any premises subject to this article without the
consent of the owner of the premises and without a warrant duly issued by
an appropriate court.
§ 68-659. Change of occupancy prohibited.
No change of occupancy or use shall be made in a building hereafter
erected or altered that is not consistent with the last-issued certificate of
Town of Islip local laws or ordinances pertaining to the
property; and
(b) That there are no changes to any information as provided on
the prior valid rental occupancy permit registration and
application.
§ 68-654 WATER QUALITY § 68-659
66:1115
occupancy for such building unless a permit is secured. In the case of an
existing building, no change of occupancy that would bring it under some
special provision of this chapter shall be made unless the Code Enforcement
Official, or his designee, upon inspection, finds that such building conforms
substantially to the provisions of this chapter with respect to the proposed
new occupancy and use, and issues a certificate of occupancy therefor.
§ 68-660. Abandoned household contents.
A. Duty to keep frontage of dwelling unit property free and clear of
abandoned household contents and Town's authority to remove. The
owner, authorized agent, managing agent and/or occupant of a dwelling
unit which is or was being used as a rental dwelling shall maintain such
property frontage, including but not limited to the front yard and/or the
contiguous right-of-way, free of abandoned household contents as
defined in this article. In the event that abandoned household contents
as defined in this article are located upon or contiguous with the
frontage and/or abutting right-of-way of a lot or parcel of land, for a
period in excess of 48 hours, the Town is hereby authorized, as provided
for herein, to enter upon such property, if necessary, to remove said
abandoned household contents so located, to assess the cost and
expense of such undertaking against the property and to establish a lien
as herein provided.
B. Inspection and report. Upon notification that abandoned household
contents are located on or along the property frontage of a rental
dwelling unit and/or the right-of-way contiguous thereto, the Code
Enforcement Official, the Commissioner of Public Works and/or their
agent may make an inspection thereof and report his findings
concerning the same to the Town Board. [Amended 1-24-2017]
C. Notice. If the Code Enforcement Official, the Commissioner of Public
Works and/or their agent shall find that abandoned household contents
are located on or contiguous to the frontage of rental dwelling unit
property, he may make an order, directing notice to be served upon the
owner of said property as appears in the records of the Receiver of
Taxes of the Town. [Amended 1-24-2017]
D. Contents of notice. The notice shall contain a general description of the
property, a statement of the particulars with regard to the violative
condition(s) existing at the rental dwelling unit property and an order
requiring that the abandoned household contents existing on or
contiguous with the property, and/or its frontage, be removed. The
notice shall specify a time, not less than 48 hours after the service
thereof, within which the owner served with such notice shall complete
the removal of the abandoned household contents from the property or
along the frontage or the contiguous right-of-way as specified in the
notice. The notice shall further state that, in the event that the cited
condition is not eliminated within the time specified in the notice, the
Town shall undertake to enter upon the property, if necessary, to
§ 68-659 ISLIP CODE § 68-660
66:1116
§ 68-661. Confidentiality of rental registration.
Under New York State Public Officers Law § 87(2)(b), rental registration
forms, and that portion of the rental occupancy permit application required,
shall be exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Law on
the grounds that such disclosure would constitute an unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy. The Code Enforcement Official will institute strict
policies to ensure that such information is available only to Town personnel
who are engaged in the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 68-662. Broker's responsibility prior to listing. [Amended
8-14-2007]
remove the abandoned household contents and assess the cost of such
removal against said property.
E. Service of notice. The notice may be served either personally or by
certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner
as the same may appear on the records of the Receiver of Taxes of the
Town; provided, however, that if such service is made by certified mail,
a copy thereof shall also be posted on the property where the
abandoned household contents are located. Service of the notice by
mail and posting shall be deemed completed on the day on which both
the mailing and the posting will have been accomplished.
F. Failure to comply. Upon failure of the owner of the rental dwelling unit
to comply with the notice within the time provided therein, the Town
shall provide such labor and materials as are necessary for removing
the abandoned household contents from said property or its frontage or
contiguous right-of-way and shall cause such work to be performed as
will remove the abandoned household contents from the property.
G. Assessment of costs and expenses. All costs and expenses incurred by
the Town in connection with the removal of the abandoned household
contents from said property or its frontage or contiguous right-of-way
shall be assessed against the subject land or lot. An itemization of such
costs shall be provided to the Town Board by the Code Enforcement
Official, the Commissioner of Public Works and/or their agent. The total
costs and expenses shall then be determined by the Town Board and
shall be reported to the Assessor of the Town as the amount to be liened
and assessed against the property, and the expense so assessed shall
constitute a lien and charge on the property on which it is levied until
paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the
same manner and at the same time as other Town charges. [Amended
1-24-2017]
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, broker
or agent to list, repeatedly and/or knowingly show or otherwise offer for
lease, rent or sale on behalf of the owner or authorized agent any
dwelling unit which is, itself, a rental dwelling or which contains a
rental dwelling, for which a current rental occupancy permit has not
§ 68-660 WATER QUALITY § 68-662
66:1117
§ 68-663. Presumptive evidence of violations of article.
been issued by the Code Enforcement Official. It shall be the person's,
broker's or agent's duty to verify the existence of a valid rental
occupancy permit before listing, repeatedly and/or knowingly showing
or otherwise offering for lease, rent or sale any such dwelling unit in
the Town of Islip.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, broker
or agent to cause an advertisement or solicitation for a rental dwelling
to be listed, placed, posted or submitted for inclusion on any website, in
the mass media, or in printed materials, including flyers, without such
person, broker or agent first verifying the existence of a valid rental
occupancy permit.
A. It shall be presumed that a single- or one-family dwelling unit is
occupied by more than one family if it contains more than one kitchen
or if two or more of the following features are found to exist on the
premises by the Code Enforcement Official authorized to enforce or
investigate violations of Chapter 68 of the Code of the Town of Islip or
any laws, codes, rules and regulations of the State of New York:
(1) More than one mailbox, mail slot or post office address;
(2) More than one doorbell or doorway on the same side of the
dwelling unit;
(3) More than one gas meter;
(4) More than one electric meter;
(5) More than one connecting line for cable television service;
(6) More than one antenna, dish antenna or related receiving
equipment;
(7) Separate entrances for segregated parts of the dwelling unit,
including but not limited to bedrooms;
(8) Partitions or internal doors with locks which may serve to bar
access between segregated portions of the dwelling unit, including
but not limited to bedrooms;
(9) Separate written or oral leases or rental arrangements, payments
or agreements for portions of the dwelling unit among its owners
and occupants;
(10) The inability of any occupant to have lawful access to all parts of
the dwelling unit; or
(11) A separate entrance leading directly to a separated living space
containing a bathroom.
§ 68-662 ISLIP CODE § 68-663
66:1118
§ 68-664. Presumptive evidence dwelling unit is rented.
§ 68-665. Presumptive evidence of owner's residence.
§ 68-666. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-14-2009]
Any person, association, firm or corporation who or which violates any
provision of this article or assists in the violation of any provision of this
article shall be guilty of a violation, punishable:
B. All of the foregoing may be rebutted by evidence presented to the Code
Enforcement Official or any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The presence or existence of any of the following shall create a
presumption that a dwelling unit is rented:
(1) The dwelling unit is occupied by someone other than the owner and
the owner of the dwelling unit represents, in writing or otherwise,
to any person, establishment, business, institution or government
agency, that he resides at an address other than the dwelling unit in
question.
(2) Persons residing in the dwelling unit represent that they pay rent to
the owner of the premises.
(3) Utilities, cable, telephone or other services are in place or are
requested to be installed or used at the dwelling unit in the name of
someone other than the owner.
(4) Testimony by a witness that it is common knowledge in the
community that a person other than the owner resides in the
dwelling unit.
B. All of the foregoing may be rebutted by evidence presented to the Code
Enforcement Official or any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. It shall be presumed that an owner of a dwelling unit does not reside
within said dwelling unit if one or more of the following sets forth an
address which is different than that of the dwelling unit:
(1) Voter registration;
(2) Motor vehicle registration;
(3) Driver's license; or
(4) Any other document filed with a public agency.
B. All of the foregoing may be rebutted by evidence presented to the Code
Enforcement Official or any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 68-663 WATER QUALITY § 68-666
66:1119
§ 68-667. Administration.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Official as defined
by this article.
§ 68-668. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in said judgment.§
A. By a fine of not less than $750 and not exceeding $2,500 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction
of a first offense.
B. For any second conviction, committed within a period of five years of
the first conviction, such violation will be subject to a fine of not less
than $2,500 nor more than $5,000 or by imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both.
C. For any third or subsequent offense, after having been convicted two or
more times within a period of five years, such violation shall be
prosecuted as an unclassified misdemeanor, with a minimum fine of
$5,000 and a maximum fine of $10,000 and/or a maximum period of
incarceration of one year.
§ 68-666 ISLIP CODE § 68-668
66:1120
ARTICLE LI
Use District Regulations: Great River Planned Development District
[Added 5-27-2009]
§ 68-669. Legislative intent.
§ 68-670. Designation of subdistricts.
The following subdistricts shall be spatially defined on the concept plan and
shall be so designated on the Official Map of the Town of Islip:
Office-Industrial (PDD-GR:OI)
Residential (PDD GR:RES)
A. The intent of this district is to encourage superior mixed-use
development in accordance with a concept plan for the Great River
Planned Development District (hereinafter the "concept plan"),
approved by the Town Board, which shall specify the location of land
uses and the ultimate scale and density of development. Development
in this district shall be in accordance with the approved concept plan,
which shall contain specific guidelines in terms of height, architecture,
landscaping, streetscape, traffic mitigation and drainage.
B. To the extent that this article is inconsistent with Town Law § 267,
Subdivision 2, 280a, Subdivision 4, and 274-a, and the Islip Town Code
§ 68-415 or Chapter 47B, Local Law No. 4 of 1974, it shall supersede
such provisions.
A. Office and industrial.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Office buildings.
(b) Laboratories for scientific and industrial research, testing and
development.
(c) Manufacturing and assembly, with all activities entirely
contained within enclosed buildings, excluding any use
prohibited in an Industrial 2 District.
(d) Medical centers and dental clinics, excluding psychiatric or
drug treatment clinics.
(e) Child day-care centers.
(f) Health clubs. [Added 2-28-2017]
(2) Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after public
hearing.
(a) Public utilities where no repair or storage facilities are
maintained.
§ 68-669 WATER QUALITY § 68-670
66:1121
(b) Facilities for cogeneration of electricity and/or steam as a
principal use.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted
within a building:
(a) Power plants or facilities for the cogeneration of electricity
and/or steam.
(b) Signs as permitted in Article XXIX as approved by the Planning
Board.
(c) Cafeteria and other restaurant uses, provided they are located
within a permitted building.
(d) Banks provided they are located within a permitted building.
(e) Drug stores or pharmacies, provided they are located within a
permitted building.
(f) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal
use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a
business.
(g) Parking structures, subject to Planning Board approval.
(4) Height.
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
(b) Exceptions. Permitted buildings may be erected to a height of
60 feet, provided that any portion of any building in excess of
35 feet is set back one additional foot for each one foot of
additional height beyond the required setbacks from public
streets, planned public streets or district boundary lines.
(5) Percentage of lot occupancy.
(a) The total lot occupancy of any building on a lot in this
subdistrict shall not exceed 35%.
(b) The total floor area ratio of all buildings on any lot in this
subdistrict shall not exceed 0.35.
(c) The Planning Board may modify the lot area and FAR for
individual sites, provided that the aggregate lot area and FAR
for the entire subdistrict do not exceed the limits set forth in
Subsection A(5)(a) and (b) of this section, and provided that
such modifications are consistent with the concept plan.
(6) Lot area.
(a) All lots have a minimum lot area of one acre.
§ 68-670 ISLIP CODE § 68-670
66:1122
(b) The location of all lots within this subdistrict shall be
consistent with the concept plan and approved by the Planning
Board.
(c) The requirements set forth above may be modified by the
Planning Board by up to 25%, provided that such modifications
are consistent with the concept plan and reasonably necessary
to permit appropriate development in the PDD.
(7) Width of lot.
(a) The minimum width of lot shall be 150 feet.
(b) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the width of the lot
up to 25% for all lots, provided that the same is consistent with
the concept plan and reasonably necessary permit appropriate
development in this subdistrict.
(8) Setbacks.
(a) Front yard setbacks from Sunrise Highway shall be 125 feet,
the entire extent of which shall be landscaped, except for
driveways, parking areas and sidewalks.
(b) A setback of 25 feet shall be maintained along all common
boundary lines with adjacent parcels to the east of the PDD.
(c) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
(d) All buildings shall have a minimum twenty-five-foot setback
from Wheeler Road.
(e) All buildings located adjacent to the western lot line abutting
single-family residentially zoned property shall have a
minimum setback of 125 feet from said lot line.
(f) A minimum distance of 15 feet shall be provided between
adjoining unconnected buildings or as approved by the
Planning Board and consistent with the concept plan.
(g) The Planning Board may reduce or modify the setback
requirements by up to 25%, provided that the same is
consistent with the concept plan and reasonably necessary to
permit appropriate development in this subdistrict.
B. Residential.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings (MF): attached one- and-two-family
and multiple townhouse or condominium-type dwelling units
maintained by associations of owners approved by the Attorney
General of the State of New York or apartments. Some of said
units may be especially designed for senior citizens and their
§ 68-670 WATER QUALITY § 68-670
66:1123
immediate families or caregivers. A "senior citizen" is defined
as a person 55 years of age or older. The senior citizen's
immediate family is limited to the senior citizen's spouse,
children and grandchildren 19 years of age or older and
caregivers.
(b) Congregate care facilities, assisted living facilities, or nursing
homes. [Amended 2-28-2017]
(c) Athletic fields.
(d) Fire substations.
(2) Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
subdistrict but must be clearly incidental to the principal use:
(a) Recreation uses, including but not limited to community
buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities.
(b) Maintenance buildings.
(c) Signs as permitted in Article XXIX and as approved by the
Planning Board.
(d) Other customary accessory uses.
(3) Density. The maximum density shall not exceed 360 residential
units. [Amended 7-25-2017]
(4) Height. No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of three
stories.
(5) Floor area ratio and percentage of lot occupancy shall be
calculated based upon the area of the subject property prior to any
dedications and noninclusive of the fire substation.
(a) The percentage of lot occupancy for all structures shall not
exceed 25%, and combined floor area ratio for all structures in
this subdistrict shall not exceed 0.40.
(b) The percentage of lot occupancy for residential structures
shall not exceed 20%, and floor area ratio shall not exceed
0.35. [Amended 9-19-2017]
(6) Subdivision of property. Authorization is granted to the Planning
Board to approve subdivisions of property in this district pursuant
to a cluster plan. Said cluster shall be in conformance with the
provisions of the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations as modified by the Planning Board.
(7) Setbacks.
(a) All buildings located in the subdistrict shall have the following
setbacks:
§ 68-670 ISLIP CODE § 68-670
66:1124
§ 68-671. Architecture.
Prior to the issuance of any building permits or the commencement of the
construction of any building or exterior building renovations, representative
exterior architectural drawings shall be submitted to the Planning
Commissioner. The Planning Commissioner shall review the plans for
architectural consistency with the concept plan in terms of overall building
design, materials, colors, encroachments and other architectural
considerations. No building permit shall be issued until written
architectural approval has been granted by the Planning Commissioner. A
denial of architectural approval by the Commissioner of Planning may be
appealed to the Planning Board within 30 days.
§ 68-672. Parking.
§ 68-673. Landscaping.
All landscaping shall be in conformance with the recommendations of the
concept plan and the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a new building,
a landscape plan for each subdivision or site plan shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Division. The Planning Board shall have the power
[1] A minimum of 40 feet on the north side of the property.
[2] A minimum of 125 feet on the west side of the property,
except that a fire substation may encroach on the buffer
area in accordance with an approved site plan.
[3] A minimum of 30 feet on the south side of the property.
[4] A minimum of 30 feet on the east side of the property.
[5] A minimum of 15 feet from private roads.
(b) The Planning Board may modify or reduce the setback
requirements of Subsection B(7)(a) above up to 25%, provided
that the same is consistent with the concept plan and
reasonably necessary to permit appropriate development in
this subdistrict.
A. A minimum of 2.2 parking stalls per residential unit shall be provided.
Driveway spaces and on-street parking may count towards this
requirement. Garage space shall not be counted towards this
requirement.
B. Parking for office uses shall be provided at a ratio of 3.5 stalls per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
C. Parking for all other uses shall be provided pursuant to the
requirements of the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations as modified by the Commissioner of Planning.
§ 68-670 WATER QUALITY § 68-673
66:1125
to modify landscaping, provided such modifications are consistent with the
concept plan.
§ 68-674. Buffers and screening.
§ 68-675. Exterior lighting.
§ 68-676. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
A. All properties located within the Office-Industrial Subdistrict shall be
buffered from adjacent residentially used property, except that no
buffer shall be required for any adjacent parcel that is located east of
the PDD. The buffer shall be a minimum of 125 feet in width along the
western boundary line of the Office-Industrial Subdistrict and 25 feet in
width along the southern property line of the Office-Industrial
Subdistrict.
B. Buffers shall be constructed pursuant to the Islip Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations with such additional planting as may be
determined by the Planning Division and a six-foot chain link fence with
stockade attached along residentially used property lines. Said fencing
may be waived by the Planning Commissioner if the installation of such
fencing would adversely alter naturally wooded areas.
C. The location of new loading and unloading areas shall be subject to the
review of the Planning Division. There shall be no loading docks or new
truck loading areas within 25 feet of a buffer area, except by approval
from the Planning Board upon a finding of practical difficulty or
hardship that precludes said loading area from being located in another
area of the site and with such other mitigating measures as may be
determined by the Planning Board. Nothing contained herein shall
operate to prohibit utility deliveries to any existing buildings.
D. Doors located adjacent to a buffer area shall be designed and
constructed solely for pedestrian use, except by approval from the
Planning Board upon a finding of practical difficulty or hardship that
precludes said door from being located in another area of the site and
with such other mitigating measures as may be determined by the
Planning Board.
E. Exterior public address systems or loudspeakers shall be prohibited
within the Office-Industrial Subdistrict.
A. All lighting shall be positioned or shielded to illuminate the subject
parcel only.
B. All lighting adjacent to a buffer zone shall be positioned in such a
manner as to minimize glare on adjoining properties.
§ 68-673 ISLIP CODE § 68-676
66:1126
§ 68-677. Public hearing notification.
All uses regulated by special permit from the Planning Board after a public
hearing shall provide the following form of notification:
§ 68-678. Amendment to concept plan.
§ 68-679. Determination by Planning Board.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all matters referred to the Planning
Board in this Article LI may be determined without a public hearing,
pursuant to Town Law § 274-a, Subdivision 2. In making such
determinations, the Planning Board shall give consideration to the
following: the effect and compatibility of the proposed modification on the
overall concept plan and planned development district design, criteria and
standards.
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys or bay windows projecting not more
than 48 inches.
B. One-story open porches and terraces not exceeding five feet in height
and projecting not more than 10 feet.
C. One-story enclosed vestibules not greater than 12 feet wide.
D. Guard booths, flagpoles, identification signs, sculptures, seatings, bus
shelters or gazebos.
E. Shielded mechanical systems.
F. Antennas as part of a permitted use, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
G. All encroachments existing on the date of the adoption of this article.
A. Advertisement of public notice in the official newspaper of the Town of
Islip at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
B. Posting of public notice signs every 200 feet on that portion of any
public or private road contiguous to the subject parcel at least 10 days
prior to the public hearing.
A. The Planning Board may amend the road layouts and location of any
structures or other improvements in all subdistricts of the concept plan
without a public hearing, provided that the same is reasonably
consistent with the concept plan and reasonably necessary to permit
appropriate development.
B. This PDD Ordinance may be amended by the Town Board after a public
hearing and upon a report of the Planning Board or the Commissioner
of Planning. For the purposes of this subsection, notice of such public
hearing shall be published at least once in the official Town newspaper
no fewer than 10 days prior to the public hearing.
§ 68-676 WATER QUALITY § 68-680
66:1127
§ 68-680. Open development areas.
Pursuant to § 280-a of the Town Law, the Town Board hereby declares this
zoning district an open development area within the Town, wherein building
permits may be issued for the erection of structures to which access is given
by right-of-way or easement, upon such conditions or regulations as may be
prescribed by the Planning Board or its designee.
§ 68-681. Affordable housing. [Amended 7-25-2017]
All residential development within the PDD shall provide that a minimum
of 10% of the total dwellings in the approved plan be deemed affordable
housing. The schedule of affordable housing provision shall be approved
by the Town of Islip Department of Planning and Development prior to the
issuance any certificate of occupancy.
§ 68-680 ISLIP CODE § 68-681
66:1128
ARTICLE LII
Exterior Lighting Standards
[Added 10-13-2010]
§ 68-682. Purpose.
§ 68-683. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AREA LIGHT — A luminaire designed for illumination of a broad area. Area
lights include, but are not limited to, streetlights, parking lot lights and yard
lights over 1,800 (100 watts incandescent) lumens.
AVERAGE HORIZONTAL FOOTCANDLE — The average level of illuminance
for a given situation measured at ground level with the light meter placed
parallel to the ground.
ESSENTIAL LIGHTING — Lighting that is used for a specified period of
time, which is necessary for a specific task or purpose while said task or
purpose is actively being performed. This includes lighting that is necessary
to promote public safety or facilitate public circulation.
A. The general purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare, the quality of life and the ability to view the
night sky by establishing provisions and a process for review of exterior
lighting.
B. This article establishes provisions for exterior lighting in order to
accomplish the following:
(1) To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians.
(2) To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting.
(3) To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to
promote safety and security.
(4) To prevent light trespass in all areas of the Town.
(5) To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky.
(6) To allow flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures.
(7) To provide lighting guidelines.
(8) To discourage the wasting of energy used to produce excessive
lighting.
(9) To provide assistance to property owners and occupants in bringing
nonconforming lighting into conformance with this article.
(10) To minimize the impact of stray lighting on human health, habitat
and environment.
§ 68-682 WATER QUALITY § 68-683
66:1129
EXCESSIVE LIGHTING — Illuminance levels beyond that which is required
for safety, as is indicated on the Tables of Limits of Illumination Levels. (See
Attachment 2 at the end of this chapter.)
EXTERIOR LIGHTING — Temporary or permanent lighting equipment that
is installed, located or used in such a manner with the intention to cause
light rays to shine outdoors. Luminaires located indoors that are intended
to light something outside are considered exterior lighting for the purposes
of this article.
FIXTURE (also called "luminaire") — The bulb, the assembly that holds the
bulb (or lamp) in a lighting system and the mounting apparatus, including
reflecting elements, shielding elements, cover glass or lenses, the ballast
and the housing.
FLOODLIGHT — A fixture rated to produce over 1,800 lumens (100 watts
incandescent), regardless of the number of bulbs, and is designed to flood
an area with light.
FOOTCANDLE (fc) — The American unit of illuminance (the amount of
light falling on a surface). One footcandle is approximately equal to the
illuminance produced by a light source of one candle, measured on a
surface one foot away from the source. Horizontal footcandles measure the
illumination striking a horizontal plane. Footcandle values can be measured
directly with certain handheld incident light meters.
FULL CUTOFF (FCO) — A classification for a luminaire designed and
installed where no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the luminaire. In addition, the luminous
intensity (as measured in candelas) emitted at any angle from 80° up to
90° cannot exceed a numerical value equal to 10% of the lumen rating of
the lamp, as reported in a photometric report from the manufacturer as
produced by an independent lab. A cutoff, or semi-cutoff, design allows a
restricted amount of light emitted above the horizontal, and a noncutoff
provides no restriction against light emitted above the horizontal.
FULLY SHIELDED — A luminaire constructed, lamped and installed in such
a manner that all light emitted by it, either directly from the lamp or a
diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of
the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal. A full cutoff fixture is also
fully shielded, but without any restrictions on light distribution below the
horizontal plane, and it can be identified without a manufacturer's report.
GLARE — Stray, unshielded light striking the eye that may result in:
A. Nuisance or annoyance, such as light falling across property lines;
B. Discomfort, such as bright light causing squinting of the eyes;
C. Disability, such as bright light reducing the ability of the eyes to see into
shadows and visual performance; or
D. Distracting light which diverts the eye from a visual task.
§ 68-683 ISLIP CODE § 68-683
66:1130
HID LIGHTING — A family of bulb types known as "high intensity
discharge," including high-pressure sodium, mercury vapor and metal
halide. These types require a warm-up time, usually require a ballast
and have a higher lumen output per watt than incandescent or halogen
lamps.
HOLIDAY LIGHTING — Temporary lights used to celebrate holidays.
Holiday lighting includes, but is not limited to, strings of small
individual lights, illuminated menorahs, illuminated nativity scenes,
illuminated candles, and various yard decorations seasonal in nature.
IESNA — Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES or
IESNA), an organization that establishes updated standards and
illumination guidelines for the lighting industry.
IESNA RECOMMENDED PRACTICES — The publications of the IESNA
setting forth illuminance levels for different task areas, e.g., walkways,
streets, sportslights, etc.
ILLUMINANCE — The density of light falling on any point of a surface,
usually measured in footcandles in the United States. See "footcandle."
LAMP — The generic term for an artificial light source, to be
distinguished from the whole assembly (See "fixture."); commonly
referred to as the "light bulb."
LIGHT — The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye to
make sight possible.
LIGHTING ASSEMBLY — Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to
produce light, including the bulb, assembly, ballast, mounting features
and/or pole.
LIGHT POLLUTION — Any adverse effect of man-made light, including
but not limited to glare, light trespass, skyglow, visual clutter, wasted
energy due to excessive or unnecessary lighting, or any man-made light
that unnecessarily diminishes the ability to view the night sky or is
disruptive to flora and fauna.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light projected onto the property of another or
into the public right-of-way when it is not required or permitted to do
so.
LUMEN — A unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is
produced by a bulb. The lumen quantifies the amount of light energy
produced by a lamp at the lamp, not by the energy input, which is
indicated by the wattage. For example, a seventy-five-watt
incandescent lamp can produce 1,000 lumens while a seventy-watt
high-pressure sodium lamp produces 6,000 lumens. Lumen output is
listed by the manufacturer on the light bulb packaging.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting assembly (including the lamp,
housing, ballasts, photocells, reflectors, lenses and shields), including
the support assembly (pole or mounting bracket); a light fixture. For
purposes of determining total light output from a luminaire or light
§ 68-683 WATER QUALITY § 68-683
66:1131
fixture, lighting assemblies which include multiple unshielded or
partially shielded lamps on a single pole or standard shall be considered
as a single unit.
LUMINANCE — The brightness of a source of light.
MOUNTING HEIGHT — The distance from natural grade to the lowest
light-emitting part of the luminaire.
NONCONFORMING — As used in this article only, lighting which does
not meet the requirements and specifications contained herein.
NONESSENTIAL LIGHTING — Lighting which is unnecessary and not
generally useful (e.g., decorative and landscape lighting). This includes
lighting intended for a specific task or purpose when said task or
purpose is not being actively performed (e.g., parking lot illumination
and wall-mounted perimeter lights after business hours).
PARTIALLY SHIELDED — A luminaire which is not fully shielded but
incorporates a partial shield around the lamp.
PHOTOMETRICS — Technical test reports that indicate light
distribution and performance from a luminaire. Photometric reports
may include candlepower distribution data, cutoff classifications,
footcandle charts, etc. These are generally available from the luminaire
manufacturers.
REPAIR OF A LUMINAIRE OR SIGN — Any service normally provided
by a licensed electrician upon a luminaire or sign. Repair shall be
considered to include replacement or modification of any of the
following: poles, mounting arms, housings, hardware, wiring, ballasts,
lenses, reflectors, diffusers, baffles, shields, sensors, switches, relays,
power supplies, and lamp replacement modules which contain any of
the items listed above. Replacement of a user-serviceable lamp will not
by itself be considered a repair.
SKYGLOW — The overhead glow from light emitted sideways and
upwards, including light reflected upward from the ground or other
surfaces. Skyglow is caused by the reflection and scattering of various
forms of light by dust, water and other particles suspended in the
atmosphere. Among other effects, skyglow reduces one's ability to
view the night sky. Different sources of light, in equal quantities, can
contribute differently to sky glow.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING — Lighting that is intended to be used for a
specific event and removed within seven days thereafter.
UNIFORMITY RATIO (U RATIO) — A ratio that describes uniformity
of illuminance across an area. The uniformity ratio may be a ratio
of the maximum-to-minimum illuminance or the average-to-minimum
illuminance. For example, if the Illuminating Engineering Society
recommends an average-to-minimum ratio of 4:1 for a parking lot,
the minimum illuminance should be no less than 1/4 of the average
illuminance across the parking lot.
§ 68-683 ISLIP CODE § 68-683
66:1132
§ 68-684. Applicability; nonconforming lighting; exceptions.
UNSHIELDED FIXTURE — A fixture which, as designed or installed,
emits all or part of the light emissions above the lowest light-emitting
part of the fixture.
A. All exterior lighting installed, replaced, altered, changed, repaired or
relocated after the effective date of this article shall conform to the
provisions established by this article, except as provided hereto.
B. Existing exterior lighting in conflict with this article shall be classified
as "nonconforming." Except as provided elsewhere in this article, all
exterior lighting existing or installed prior to the date of the adoption
herein, which does not conform with the provisions of the article, shall
be exempt, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) Upon adoption of this article, with any installation, replacement,
alteration, change, repair or relocation of any nonconforming
luminaire, such luminaire shall be brought in compliance with the
terms of this article.
(2) To the extent that preexisting residential exterior floodlights can
accommodate lamps of a total of less than 1,800 lumens (100 watts
incandescent), said exterior lighting shall be equipped with a lamp
or lamps of a total of less than 1,800 lumens (100 watts
incandescent) per fixture and, to the extent possible, be angled
downward, such that the center beam is not directed above a fortyfive-
degree angle measured from the vertical line drawn from the
center of the lamp to the ground and so as not to cause glare, light
trespass or beam spread beyond the intended target or across
property lines. Operable photocells, motion sensors, timers that
allow a light to go on at dusk and off by 11:00 p.m., as well as
retrofit shields are encouraged to alleviate nuisance and disability
glare.
(3) Lighting that is determined by municipal law enforcement to
contribute to a condition of disabling or distracting glare into a
public roadway may be ordered to be changed or removed at any
time.
(4) Nonessential lighting can be ordered extinguished, including
mobile or ground-mounted searchlights, laser light shows, or
decorative flashing, blinking or tracing lights, exclusive of exempt
holiday lighting.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Unshielded residential luminaires equal to one sixty-watt
incandescent lamp per fixture, regardless of number of lamps, are
allowed, provided light trespass limitations are met.
§ 68-683 WATER QUALITY § 68-684
66:1133
(2) Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting needed by
the fire, ambulance or police departments or other emergency
services are exempt.
(3) Holiday exterior lighting lit between October 15 and January 15 of
the following year.
(4) Residential sensor-activated luminaires, provided:
(a) The luminaire is operational and located in such a manner, or
shielded, to prevent glare and light trespass.
(b) The luminaire is set to only go on when activated and to go off
within five minutes after activation has ceased.
(c) The sensor shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
(d) The luminaire output, regardless of the number of lamps, does
not exceed 1,800 lumens (100 watts incandescent).
(5) Illumination of signs permitted pursuant to Article XXIX, Signs, of
this chapter, and any amendments made hereto.
(6) In situations of lighted flags which are not illuminated with
downward lighting, upward lighting may be used in the form of a
single ground-mounted narrow cone spotlight which confines the
illumination to the flag, provided the lumen output is no more than
1,300 lumens, regardless of the number of lamps. The Town
encourages the tradition of lowering flags at sunset to avoid the
need for lighting.
(7) Lighting of radio, communication and navigation towers is allowed,
provided the owner or occupant demonstrates that the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations can only be met through
the use of lighting that does not comply with this article and that
the provisions of this article are otherwise met to the fullest extent
possible. Tower lighting shall not be permitted unless required by
the FAA, in which case required lighting shall be of the lowest
allowed intensity and red, unless specifically forbidden under FAA
requirements. Towers which are constructed no higher than 199
feet are preferable to avoid the need for FAA lighting.
(8) Runway lighting. Lighting on any approved landing strip or runway,
provided that the owner or occupant demonstrates that FAA
regulations can only be met through the use of lighting that does
not comply with this article.
(9) Street lighting and traffic signals. Notwithstanding any provisions
herein to the contrary, street lighting and/or traffic signal lighting
shall be exempt from the standards herein for the purpose of
allowing traffic safety to take precedence over light trespass.
§ 68-684 ISLIP CODE § 68-685
66:1134
§ 68-685. Placement and height of fixtures for residential and
nonresidential exterior lighting.
§ 68-686. Illumination levels and prohibited effects for residential
and nonresidential exterior lighting.
§ 68-687. Illuminance and type of lamp for all nonresidential
exterior lighting.
A. No residential or nonresidential luminaires shall be taller than 20 feet
from the natural grade to the lowest light-emitting part of the fixture.
Parking area lights are encouraged to be greater in number, lower in
height and lower in light level, as opposed to fewer in number, higher in
height and higher in light level.
B. Luminaires for municipal playing fields and new municipal streetlights
shall be exempt from the height restriction, provided all other
provisions of this article are met.
C. (Reserved)387
D. All exterior lighting rated to be lamped at 1,800 lumens (100 watts
incandescent) and greater shall use full cutoff luminaires, as
determined by photometry test or certified by the manufacturer, and
installed as designed with the light source directed downward. All
exterior lighting 1,800 lumens (100 watts incandescent) and less shall
use fully shielded fixtures and shall be installed as designed.
A. All residential and nonresidential exterior lighting shall not cause light
trespass and shall protect adjacent properties from glare and excessive
lighting.
B. All lighting in the Town of Islip shall not exceed recommended light
levels as listed in the Tables of Limits of Illumination Levels,
Attachment 2.388
A. Permissible luminaire location and effects.
(1) No luminaire shall be located or concentrated so as to produce
glare or direct illumination across the boundary property line, nor
shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or
detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. (See
Attachment 2, Exterior Lighting Figures and Tables of Limits of
Illumination Levels, at the end of this chapter.)
(2) The maximum illuminance at or beyond the property line that
adjoins a residential parcel or public right-of-way may not exceed
0.05 fc horizontal on the ground or 0.05 fc vertical measured at a
387. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding privately owned or leased light fixtures,
was repealed 12-17-2019.
388. Editor's Note: Attachment 2, Guidelines for Exterior Lighting, is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 68-685 WATER QUALITY § 68-687
66:1135
§ 68-688. General standards for nonresidential exterior lighting.
five-foot height above the ground, unless another applicable law
supersedes. Maximum horizontal or vertical illuminance allowed
between adjacent commercial properties is 0.1 fc.
B. Permissible levels of illuminance.
(1) The average illuminance levels listed in the illumination levels for
various common tasks, as provided in Attachment 2 Tables of Limits
of Illumination Levels, at the end of this chapter, shall not be
exceeded for nonresidential exterior lighting unless otherwise
specified or approved by the reviewing board, department, division
or agency of the Town of Islip.
(2) The Town of Islip recognizes that not every situation will require
lighting, including situations which may utilize the installation of
reflectorized markers, lines, signs or other passive means, and
excessive or unnecessary light shall be avoided.
(3) Illuminance level measurements for parking lots, sidewalks and
other walkways shall include light contributions from nearby sidemounted
building lights, freestanding sidewalk lights affected by
side-mounted building lights, and streetlights.
(4) In no instance may any lighted surface, as installed, except for
municipal athletic fields, exceed the maximum values listed in
Table 3389 for the appropriate task, as measured horizontally or
vertically by a light meter.
C. Light emitting diodes rated at 4,000K or less shall be used for all light
sources rated over 1,800 lumens (100 watts incandescent). Metal
halide (MH) rated over 3,000K, light emitting diodes rated over 4,000K,
and mercury vapor (MV) light sources are not permitted. [Amended
12-17-2019]
A. All exterior lighting shall be designed, located and lamped in order to
prevent:
(1) Overlighting;
(2) Energy waste;
(3) Glare;
(4) Light trespass; and
(5) Unnecessary skyglow.
B. All conforming and nonconforming exterior lighting shall be turned off
within 1/2 hour after the close of business and no later than 11:00 p.m.
389. Editor's Note: Table 3, Limits of Illumination for Roadways, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 68-687 ISLIP CODE § 68-688
66:1136
§ 68-689. Procedures for review of nonresidential exterior lighting.
for those businesses that are closed to the public on or before 9:00 p.m.
Lights that are controlled by photocells and timers are encouraged, as
is the use of sensor-activated lights to replace existing lighting which
may be needed for safety or emergency purposes.
C. Under-canopy lights, such as service station lighting, shall be full cutoff
and fully recessed to prevent glare and light trespass. Illuminance
levels at gas stations shall not exceed those established in Attachment
2, Tables of Limits of Illumination Levels, at the end of this chapter.
D. Area exterior lights. All area exterior lights shall be full cutoff
luminaries.
E. After the adoption of this article, no person, firm, owner, tenant, person
in possession, partnership, corporation or other business entity shall
install, replace, relamp or repair any luminaire that lights a public
right-of-way within the Town of Islip, under the Town's jurisdiction,
without first receiving prior written approval for such installation from
the applicable board, department, division or agency of the Town of
Islip.
F. Automatic teller machine (ATM) and other bank lighting shall be full
cutoff and shall not cause glare or light trespass. Light levels shall not
exceed those established by the New York State ATM Lighting Law390 as
enacted in 2006.
G. Unshielded wall packs and floodlights are prohibited.
A. Any application submitted to any board, department, division or agency
of the Town of Islip shall include exterior lighting plans, luminaire and
controls specifications and additional documentation if any exterior
lighting is to be used, regardless of whether the exterior lighting is
preexisting or proposed, showing the following, in order to verify that
exterior lighting conforms to the provisions of this article:
(1) Location of each current and proposed outdoor exterior lighting
fixture indicated on a site plan.
(2) Type of luminaire equipment, including cutoff characteristics,
indicating manufacturer and model number.
(3) Lamp source type, lumen output and wattage.
(4) Mounting height indicated, with distance noted to nearest property
line, for each proposed and existing luminaire.
(5) Shielding and all mounting details, including pole foundation
description.
390. Editor's Note: See Banking Law § 75-a et seq.
§ 68-688 WATER QUALITY § 68-689
66:1137
(6) Initial illuminance levels as expressed in footcandle measurements
on a grid of the site showing footcandle readings in every five-foot
square. The grid shall include light contributions from all sources
(i.e., pole-mounted lights, wall-mounted lights, and signs, including
streetlights).
(7) Statement of the proposed hours when each luminaire will be
operated.
(8) Total exterior lighting lamp lumens for proposed property.
(9) Lighting manufacturer specifications ("cut sheets") with
photographs of the fixtures, indicating the cutoff characteristics of
the luminaire.
(10) Detailed IES formatted photometric data for each fixture at
mounting height and lumens proposed. (Note: This is computergenerated
data which is supplied by all manufacturers, describing
the light output of a fixture, upon which lighting plans are based.
This will allow the Planning Department to fully assess the
suitability of a fixture in a lighting plan, should it wish to double
check the submission.)
(11) Types of timing devices used to control on/off.
(12) If necessary, documentation by a licensed lighting engineer
showing that the provisions can only be met with a design that does
not comply with this article.
B. Appropriate exterior lighting levels are dependent upon the general
nature of the surroundings, and the reviewing board, department,
division or agency of the Town of Islip may require more or less than
those listed in Attachment 3, Tables of Limits of Illumination Levels, at
the end of this chapter, which are based on the IESNA recommended
Practices Guidelines, RP 33 Lighting for Exterior Environments and RP
20 Lighting for Parking Lots.
C. No exterior lighting shall be installed, replaced, altered, changed,
repaired, relocated, enlarged, moved, improved or converted unless it
conforms to a lighting plan approved by the applicable reviewing board,
department, division or agency of the Town of Islip.
D. The following guidelines will be made available to applicants to
facilitate compliance:
(1) Illustrations of full cutoff and full shielded fixtures.
(2) Diagrams of generally acceptable and generally unacceptable light
fixtures.
(3) Diagrams of recommended fixture placement in relation to the
property line to control light trespass.
§ 68-689 ISLIP CODE § 68-689
66:1138
§ 68-690. Guidelines for Exterior Lighting.
The Guidelines for Exterior Lighting, as set forth at the end of this chapter,
and any amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated and made part of
this article.
§ 68-691. Notice of violation; compliance required.
§ 68-692. Prohibited acts. [Amended 2-28-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, owner, tenant, person in
possession, partnership, corporation or other business entity to install,
alter, repair, move, equip, use or maintain any exterior lighting in violation
of any of the provisions of this article, or to fail in any manner to comply
with a notice, directive or order of the Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement
Officer of the Town of Islip.
(4) Table for mounting height and maximum light output
recommendations.
(5) Table of limits of illumination targets for various common tasks,
including parking lots, gas stations, walkways and signs.
A. The Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a notice of
such violation to be served on the owner or person in possession of the
building, structure or lot where said exterior lighting is located or the
lessee or tenant of the part of or of the entire building, structure or lot
where said exterior lighting is located requiring such owner, person in
possession, lessee or tenant to remove such illegal exterior lighting
within 30 days. Such notice may be served personally or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and shall notify the owner, lessee or
tenant that the failure to remove said exterior lighting may result in the
issuance of an appearance ticket and/or an action in Supreme Court
seeking the removal of said exterior lighting. [Amended 2-28-2017]
B. Any person, firm, owner, tenant, person in possession, partnership,
corporation or other business entity who fails to comply with a written
order of the Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Islip within 30 days from the date of notice or fails to comply with any
lawful order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Fire Marshal
or Code Enforcement Officer made hereunder shall be deemed in
violation of this article. Failure to comply may result in actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin, restrain or abate any
violation of this article. [Amended 2-28-2017]
C. All exterior lighting under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip that does
not conform to these regulations shall be brought into compliance
within 10 years of the effective date of the adoption of these regulations
or when the light fixtures are removed or replaced, whichever occurs
first.
§ 68-689 WATER QUALITY § 68-693
66:1139
§ 68-693. Penalties for offenses.
§ 68-694. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not impair or invalidate the remainder hereof, but such
adjudication shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or section directly involved in the controversy in which judgment
shall have been rendered.
A. Residential exterior lighting. Violation of any of the provisions of this
article by any person, firm, owner, tenant, person in possession,
partnership, corporation or other business entity related to residential
exterior lighting shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both; a
person, firm, owner, tenant, person in possession, partnership,
corporation or other business entity who violates this article, after
being convicted of a violation of this article within the preceding year,
shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; a person,
firm, owner, tenant, person in possession, partnership, corporation or
other business entity who violates this article, after being convicted two
or more times of a violation of this article within the proceeding threeyear
period, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
B. Nonresidential exterior lighting. Violation of any of the provisions of
this article by any person, firm, owner, tenant, person in possession,
partnership, corporation or other business entity related to
nonresidential exterior lighting shall be guilty of a violation, punishable
by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or
both; a person, firm, owner, tenant, person in possession, partnership,
corporation or other business entity who violates this article, after
being convicted of a violation of this article within the preceding year,
shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; a person,
firm, owner, tenant, person in possession, partnership, corporation or
other business entity who violates this article, after being convicted two
or more times of a violation of this article within the proceeding threeyear
period, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $3,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
§ 68-693 ISLIP CODE § 68-694
66:1140
ARTICLE LIII
Use District Regulations: Industrial Transition District
[Added 6-19-2012]
§ 68-695. Legislative intent.
It is hereby recognized by the Town Board that the changing nature of
industrial uses warrants the need for additional opportunities for outdoor
storage and/or parking of vehicles. As such, certain industrial properties
across the Town may be regulated using an industrial transitional zone
to increase opportunities for economic development without causing
significant negative impacts on adjoining properties. This district is
designed for a wide range of industrial and related activities which can
meet a reasonable level of performance standards as set forth in the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations and this article. No new
residences are permitted except as herein specified.
§ 68-696. Permitted uses.
In the Industrial Transition District, the following uses shall be permitted:
A. Office, including, but not limited to: [Amended 8-5-2014]
(1) Taxi station or ambulette office.
B. Manufacturing and warehouse uses, including but not limited to:
[Amended 8-5-2014]
(1) Printing plants.
(2) (Reserved)391
(3) Taxidermy.
C. Rental car/truck agencies.
D. Collateral loan broker.
E. Health clubs.
F. Research and development uses involving laboratories for scientific or
industrial research, testing and development.
G. Psychiatric clinic, drug treatment center or similar health-related
facility, excluding overnight residential treatment facilities.
H. Nonprofit fraternity or lodge.
I. Church or other similar place of worship, provided that a minimum
buffer area of 25 feet in width is provided and maintained adjacent to
any residential use or zone and a site plan is submitted to and approved
391. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2), Mini-storage warehouse, was repealed 5-15-2018.
§ 68-695 WATER QUALITY § 68-696
66:1141
by the Planning Board, or its designee, indicating compliance with all
applicable land development standards.
J. Historical or memorial monument.
K. A single accessory retail use within an industrial building or that shares
a common wall with it and sells only goods being manufactured in the
principal industrial building. The area devoted to this accessory retail
use, including all storage, stocking and business space, shall not exceed
2% of the gross floor area of the industrial building, and separate
exterior signage for this use shall be prohibited.
L. Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards or freight stations.
M. Domestic animal care facility, including veterinarians, kennels and
animal training facilities.
N. Agriculture or nursery, including the retail sale of products raised on
the premises.
O. Park, municipal playground or municipal recreation building or private
indoor recreational use.
P. 392Vehicle repair shop.
Q. Public, private or parochial schools, including child day-care centers,
preschool programs, elementary and secondary schools, vocational
schools and other non-degree-granting schools, including self-defense,
dance, swimming, gymnastics and similar instruction/programs, except
those associated with manufacturing or truck driving. [Amended
8-5-2014]
R. Overnight parking of registered vehicles as an accessory use to a
manufacturing, warehouse, agricultural, commercial laundry, vehicle
repair shop or office use, provided that the subject site has a building
with a minimum FAR of 0.25, all vehicles are set back a minimum
distance of 50 feet from any street and provided that such vehicles are
properly screened from view with fencing and/or landscaping pursuant
to an approved site plan.
S. Sale or lease of construction vehicles, emergency vehicles, storage
trailers and office trailers, provided that the subject site has a building
with a minimum FAR of 0.10, such vehicles or trailers are located
completely within the rear yard and are set back a minimum of 200 feet
from any residential use, and further provided such vehicles or trailers
are properly screened from view with fencing and/or landscaping
pursuant to an approved site plan.
392. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection P, Mini storage warehouse, was repealed 8-5-2014. This
resolution also redesignated former Subsection Q as Subsection P; repealed former
Subsection R, Printing plants; redesignated former Subsections S, T and U as Subsections
Q, R, and S, respectively; repealed former Subsection V, Taxi station or ambulette office;
and redesignated former Subsection W as Subsection T.
§ 68-696 ISLIP CODE § 68-696
66:1142
§ 68-697. Use permitted with administrative approval of Town
Clerk.
Use permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk shall be as
follows:
§ 68-698. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to permit the erection, alteration, addition, maintenance
or use of any premises of either a business or industrial operation which
shall provide outside service, outside display, outside counter or window
service, carhopping service or drive-in or drive-up counter or window
service in an Industrial Transitional District.
§ 68-699. Uses permitted by special permit from Town Board after
public hearing.
§ 68-700. Uses permitted by special permit from Planning Board
after public hearing.
T. Commercial laundry establishment.
A. By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the outdoor sale
and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es) and/or plant(s) used as
a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or religiously significant season,
including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other
holiday and/or religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to
the provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
A. University or college dormitory or similar residential use.
B. Off-track betting facility.
A. Minor restaurants, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Bar, tavern or nightclub.
C. Transfer station/recycling center, subject to compliance with Chapter
21 of the Islip Town Code, all necessary permits required by New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation.
D. Private parking garage as an accessory use to an office use.
E. Accommodations for a single security guard not to exceed 500 square
feet in gross floor area as an accessory use to a permitted principal use.
F. Automobile parking field and/or vehicle fleet storage yards, including
but not limited to ambulettes, buses, taxis, ice cream trucks, provided
that all such vehicle parking or storage areas are completely screened
from view with fencing, landscaping, and berms at the direction of the
Planning Board.
§ 68-696 WATER QUALITY § 68-700
66:1143
§ 68-701. Uses permitted after review and approval of Planning
Board.
§ 68-702. Uses permitted as special exception by Board of Appeals
after public hearing. (Note: See also § 68-341.1, Adult uses.)
§ 68-703. Adult uses.
Adult uses shall be allowable in this district pursuant to the criteria in
§ 68-341.1.
G. Showrooms, when operated as accessory to a primary permitted use.
H. Child or adult day-care facility.
I. Private or parochial college or university, excluding dormitories and
other college- or university-residential uses.
J. Non-degree-granting schools associated with manufacturing or driver
training.
A. The following uses are permitted after the review and approval of the
Planning Board, subject to compliance with the following criteria:
(1) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(2) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%.
(3) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(4) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town Code
and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The site is not adjacent to any residential use.
B. Uses.
(1) Minor restaurant.
A. Brewing or distilling of beverages.
B. Flour or feed mill.
C. Poultry slaughterhouse.
D. Gas manufacture from coal, coke or petroleum, or the storage thereof.
E. Railway roundhouse or shop.
F. Commercial poultry farm.
G. Sheep or goat farm.
H. Fox, mink, chinchilla, rabbit farm.
§ 68-700 ISLIP CODE § 68-704
66:1144
§ 68-704. Accessory uses.
§ 68-705. Height.
A. The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot as
the authorized use:
(1) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or
accessory to the authorized use.
(2) Signs as permitted and regulated under Article XXIX.
(3) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(4) Game center.
(5) Accommodations for a single security guard not to exceed 500
square feet in gross floor area, subject to the issuance of a special
permit from the Planning Board after due public hearing.
(6) Private parking garage after special permit by the Planning Board.
(7) Spray booth when operated as an accessory to a primary permitted
use, provided the booth has received a permit from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or evidence is
submitted demonstrating exemption for said permit.
(8) Industrial accessory wind energy turbines as defined in § 68-3 of
this chapter.
(9) Loading bay or dock. Such use shall have its distance maximized
from a residential use or zone as per the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
B. Except with regard to construction on property principally used for
agriculture, any accessory building shall be located on the same lot
with the principal building, and no accessory building shall be
constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
C. Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit pursuant to
§ 68-699 or § 68-700, or by special exception pursuant to § 68-702, no
accessory use shall be permitted unless the same shall have been
specifically authorized by that board that authorized the use.
A. In the Industrial Transitional District, no building or structure shall be
erected or altered to a height in excess of 60 feet or four stories.
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
§ 68-704 WATER QUALITY § 68-705
66:1145
§ 68-706. Percentage of lot occupancy and floor area ratio.
§ 68-707. Area density.
§ 68-708. Width of lot.
§ 68-709. Front yard.
C. Exceptions. The provision hereof shall not apply to the height of a
church or similar place of worship, tower, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water tank or
elevator. In the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation Agency shall
be secured and any and all conditions imposed met.
D. Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
A. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed a FAR
of 0.30 except as otherwise provided herein. An additional FAR of 0.10
is permitted for mezzanines used for storage purposes only, complying
with the codes of New York State. Parking for said mezzanines shall be
calculated at one space per 600 square feet.393
A. The minimum required plot area for any use authorized in this district
shall be 40,000 square feet.
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this article and which has not come into common
ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the area density
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this article.
A. The minimum width of a lot for any use permitted in this district shall be
100 feet throughout.
B. Separate ownership. A permitted building may be erected on or a
permitted use may occupy any lot which was separately owned at the
time of the passage of this article and which has not come into common
ownership with adjoining property and conforms to the width of lot
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance prior to such codification and
conforms to all other minimum requirements of this article.
A. Main buildings. All permitted buildings, including accessory buildings,
hereafter erected shall have a required front yard of 50 feet. A building
may be permitted to have a front yard setback of 25 feet, provided the
following criteria are met:
(1) The building is no taller than 35 feet.
393. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding mini storage warehouses, which
immediately followed, was repealed 12-17-2019.
§ 68-705 ISLIP CODE § 68-709
66:1146
§ 68-710. Side yards.
All buildings, including accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall have a
side yard along each lot line other than a street or a rear line. Each side yard
shall be not less than 10 feet, except where 50 feet is required adjoining
residential uses or districts. If the side yard adjoins the tracks or right-ofway
of the Long Island Rail Road, then the setback may be 25 feet.
§ 68-711. Rear yard.
§ 68-712. Permitted encroachments.
No encroachments are permitted.
§ 68-713. Exterior site improvements.
Exterior site and road improvements shall be installed pursuant to the
requirements of Article XXIII.
(2) The entire front yard between the building and front property line
is landscaped.
B. Corner lots. All main buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall
also have a front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at
least 25 feet, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See Article
XXXII.)
C. Through lots. A minimum front yard setback of 50 feet shall be required
from both streets, unless arterial highway setback is greater. (See
Article XXXII.) A setback of 25 feet shall be permitted from one side of a
street, provided the following criteria are met:
(1) The building is no taller than 35 feet.
(2) The subject yard area between the building and the respective
property line is landscaped.
A. Main buildings. All main buildings hereafter erected shall have a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet, except where 50 feet is required for
adjoining residential uses or districts. If the rear yard adjoins the tracks
or right-of-way of the Long Island Rail Road, then the setback may be 25
feet.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear
yard of not less than 10 feet, except where a greater depth shall be
required to accomplish rear yard transition.
(2) Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear
yard area.
§ 68-709 WATER QUALITY § 68-714
66:1147
§ 68-714. Fences.
See Article XXX.
§ 68-715. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not impair or invalidate the remainder hereof, but such
adjudication shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or section directly involved in the controversy in which judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 68-714 ISLIP CODE § 68-715
66:1148
ARTICLE LIV
Use District Regulations: Islip Mixed-Use Planned Development
District (IMUPDD)
[Added 3-27-2014]
§ 68-716. Legislative intent.
A. The intent of the Islip Mixed-Use Planned Development District
(IMUPDD) is primarily to enable the development of a mixed-use
community which incorporates modern planning principals and
encourages the productive use of a suitable property to create
conditions where the next-generation workforce can leverage
industrial, commercial, office, retail, dining and entertainment,
recreational, cultural, civic, and workforce residential opportunities in
a walkable community which also provides benefits for the larger Islip
community. These IMUPDD regulations are intended to establish
development parameters within which the property will be developed in
a manner consistent with the Islip Pines Revised Conceptual Master
Plan and the Islip Pines Revised Conceptual Site Layout Plan
(collectively, the "Islip Pines Revised Conceptual Master Plan"), both
adopted by the Town Board simultaneously with this article.
B. The IMUPDD will provide for the following subdistricts, each intended
to integrate with one another and provide for the flexibility of design
integral to a mixed-use community:
(1) Industrial, research and development, and office uses in an
industrial subdistrict;
(2) Commercial service, business and business services in a services
subdistrict;
(3) Workforce and full-market-value housing in a residential
subdistrict;
(4) Ground-floor retail and flexible-use space in a retail subdistrict;
(5) Civic, recreation, athletic, and community/public assembly uses in
a civic subdistrict; and
(6) Entertainment, cultural, dining and food service, and hospitality
uses in an entertainment subdistrict.
C. Development in this district shall be in accordance with an approved
conceptual Master Plan, which shall contain parameters relating to
locations of subdistricts, density, open space, and associated
improvements and utilities.
D. Unless provided to the contrary in this Code section, the definition of
words used in this Code section shall be the same as provided in this
chapter (Zoning).
§ 68-716 WATER QUALITY § 68-716
66:1149
§ 68-717. Designation of subdistricts.
The following subdistricts shall be spatially defined, and their uses
identified, on an IMUPDD Conceptual Master Plan and shall be so
designated on the Official Map of the Town of Islip:
E. Unless provided for otherwise in the IMUPDD, all aspects of the
development of the Islip Pines Revised Conceptual Master Plan shall be
in conformance with the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
F. Due to the mixed-use nature of development permitted hereunder, total
development pursuant to the Islip Pines Conceptual Master Plan shall
not exceed .45 FAR.
A. IMU Industrial (IMU-I): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits light
industrial, research and development, and office uses. The total
developable square footage in this subdistrict shall not exceed
1,500,000 square feet.
B. IMU Services (IMU-S): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits
commercial services, business and business service uses. The total
developable square footage in this subdistrict shall not exceed 100,000
square feet.
C. IMU Residential (IMU-RES): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits
workforce and full-market-value housing, and associated residential
amenities, to address the need identified on Long Island for quality
workforce housing and full-market-value housing within walking
distance to business, recreation, entertainment, civic, and retail
opportunities on Long Island. The total number of residential units in
this subdistrict shall not exceed 350 units.
D. IMU Entertainment (IMU-E): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits
entertainment, cultural, dining and food service, and hospitality uses.
The total developable square footage in this subdistrict shall not exceed
250,000 square feet.
E. IMU Civic (IMU-C): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits civic,
recreation, athletic, and community/public assembly uses within
buildings and structures or in open-space or open-air areas. The total
developable square footage in this subdistrict shall not exceed 60,000
square feet of building area, exclusive of open-space or open-air
amenities.
F. IMU Retail (IMU-RET): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits buildings
to be used for the retail or wholesale sale of goods on multiple floors
and which also provides space for commercial uses above the ground
floor. The total developable square footage in this subdistrict shall not
exceed 350,000 square feet.
§ 68-716 ISLIP CODE § 68-717
66:1150
§ 68-718. Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically defined herein, the terms used in this article
shall have the same meaning as defined in § 68-3.
FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT VENUE — A business that offers games, small
rides, and playground areas and does not offer activities that would exclude
any minor by reason of age. Such facilities may offer party rooms and food
service as accessory uses.
SPECIALTY FOOD SHOP — A business that specializes in a particular genre
of food, where a minimum of 50% of the floor space is utilized for tastings,
demonstrations, classes or other nonretail activity.
§ 68-719. Subdistrict regulations.
G. IMU Flex (IMU-FLEX): a mixed-use subdistrict which permits buildings
to be used for IMU Retail, IMU Services and IMU Entertainment uses
on the ground floor and IMU Industrial, IMU Retail, IMU Services, or
IMU Residential on floors above the ground floor.
A. IMU-I Industrial.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Office, including medical.
(b) Research and development uses, including laboratories for
scientific or industrial research, testing, and development.
(c) Electronic storage facilities, such as data centers, and facilities
for computer server hosting.
(d) Uses commonly referred to as "back office," including
information technology, mail and package sorting, and
telephone call centers and support.
(e) Manufacturing.
(f) Bank (except freestanding).
(g) Warehouse and distribution (including storage and ministorage
warehouse facilities).
(h) Child day-care center.
(i) Veterinarian.
(j) Public school.
(k) Private or parochial school, including preschool programs,
elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities,
vocational schools and other non-degree-granting schools,
including self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics and
similar instruction/programs.
§ 68-717 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1151
(l) Supply house and wholesale establishment/showroom.
(m) Commercial laundry/dry-cleaning establishment.
(n) Printing plant/copy facility.
(o) Fitness/health club.
(p) Indoor storage and sale or repair of vehicles.
(q) Assembly and social recreation hall, excluding those uses
which qualify as bar/tavern or nightclubs.
(r) House of worship.
(s) Minor restaurant or restaurant, with the area devoted to such
use to be subtracted from the total square footage allowable in
the IMU-RET or IMU-E Subdistricts.
(t) Pharmacy, up to a maximum of 10% of the building's floor area
ratio, subtracted from total square footage of the allowable
IMU-RET Subdistrict.
(u) Dry cleaner.
(2) Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk
shall be as follows:
(a) By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the
outdoor sale and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es)
and/or plant(s) used as a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or
religiously significant season, including, but not limited to,
Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other holiday and/or
religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
(3) Uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a
public hearing:
(a) A single accessory retail use within an industrial building, or
that shares a common wall with it, and sells only goods being
manufactured in the principal industrial building. The area
devoted to this accessory retail use shall not exceed 5% of the
gross floor area of the industrial building, and separate
exterior signage for this use shall be prohibited.
(b) Indoor and/or outdoor recreational use.
(c) Agricultural or nursery use, including the retail sale of
products produced on the premises.
(d) Businesses which involve the outdoor or overnight parking of
registered vehicles as an accessory use to a permitted
principal use, including rental car/truck agencies as a principal
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1152
use, provided that all vehicles are properly screened from view
from a residential use or zone.
(e) The location of a bank drive-in window as accessory to a bank
facility or pharmacy.
(f) Car wash.
(4) Uses permitted by special exception from the Zoning Board of
Appeals after a public hearing:
(a) Brewing and distilling of beverages, including brew pubs.
(5) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) The following uses shall be permitted within a building devoted
to a permitted principal use, provided the cumulative square
footage of each accessory use does not exceed 10% of the
square footage of the total structure:
[1] Gym, exercise studio, physical fitness center, dance studio,
game/recreation center.
[2] One convenience market per building, up to a maximum of
2,500 square feet, with no exterior signage or entryway.
[3] Cafeteria.
[4] Parking structures, garages, and lots.
[5] Spray booth when operated as an accessory to a primary
permitted use, provided the booth has received a permit
from the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or evidence is submitted demonstrating
exemption from same.
[6] Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles
incidental or accessory to the authorized use.
(b) Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal
use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a
stand-alone business.
(6) Prohibited uses:
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
(b) Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit
pursuant to § 68-719A(3), no accessory use to that special
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1153
permit use shall be permitted unless same has been specifically
authorized by the board that authorized the special permit use.
(7) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 60 feet.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
(c) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, or parapet walls. In
the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be secured and any and all conditions
imposed met.
(8) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings.
B. IMU-S Services.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Business services involving office support services, including
printing, document reproduction and similarly related
functions.
(b) Office and medical.
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1154
(c) Bank, including freestanding, and financial services, including
tax preparation.
(d) Child day-care center.
(e) Restaurant and minor restaurant.
(f) Public school.
(g) Private or parochial school, including preschool programs,
elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities,
vocational schools and other non-degree-granting schools,
including self-defense, dance, swimming, gymnastics and
similar instruction/programs.
(h) Fitness/health and personal service establishment.
(i) House of worship.
(2) Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk
shall be as follows:
(a) By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the
outdoor sale and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es)
and/or plant(s) used as a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or
religiously significant season, including, but not limited to,
Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other holiday and/or
religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
(3) Uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a
public hearing:
(a) Parcel post companies, provided that all vehicles are set back a
minimum distance of 50 feet from any internal roadway and
200 feet from any residential use or zone, and further provided
that such vehicles are properly screened from view from such
residential use or zone.
(4) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided
that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do
not include any activity conducted as a stand-alone business.
(b) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles
incidental or accessory to the authorized use.
(c) Accommodations for security guards not to exceed 500 square
feet in gross floor area per security guard.
(5) Prohibited uses:
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1155
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
(b) Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit
pursuant to § 68-719B(3), no accessory use to that special
permit use shall be permitted unless same has been specifically
authorized by the board that authorized the special permit use.
(6) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
(c) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, or parapet walls. In
the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be secured and any and all conditions
imposed met.
(7) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side,
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings. This required minimum may
be waived by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon application.
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1156
C. IMU-RES Residential.
(1) Workforce housing. All residential development within the Planned
Development District shall provide that 20% of the total dwelling
units on the approved plan be deemed affordable housing pursuant
to the definition in § 68-3. The schedule of affordable housing
provision shall be approved by the Town of Islip Department of
Planning and Development in consultation with the Community
Development Agency prior to the issuance of building permits for
the units.
(2) Permitted uses:
(a) One- and two-bedroom residential attached units contained in
one or more buildings or as attached townhouses and flats in
multiple buildings. Residential units may also be contained in
the IMU-FLEX Subdistrict.
(3) Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
IMU-RES Residential Subdistrict but must be clearly incidental to
the principal use:
(a) Recreational uses, including but not limited to multifunction
buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities.
(b) Parks, playgrounds or similar uses.
(c) Maintenance buildings.
(d) Off-street parking.
(e) Other customary accessory uses.
(4) Height. No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 60
feet.
(5) Density. The maximum density shall not exceed 350 total
residential units.
(6) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1157
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings. This required minimum may
be waived by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon application.
(7) Prohibited uses:
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
D. IMU-E Entertainment.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Restaurant and minor restaurant, including outside seating.
(b) Specialty food shop.
(c) Hotel with or without conference, meeting, and event facilities.
(d) Multiplex motion picture theater and other public assembly
entertainment uses.
(e) Indoor and/or outdoor recreational or fitness/health and
beauty use.
(f) House of worship.
(g) Bar, tavern, or nightclub.
(h) Billiard hall.
(i) Museum.
(2) Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk
shall be as follows:
(a) By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the
outdoor sale and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es)
and/or plant(s) used as a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or
religiously significant season, including, but not limited to,
Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other holiday and/or
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1158
religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
(3) Uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a
public hearing:
(a) Outside seating and/or outside bar service as an accessory use
to a permitted bar, tavern or nightclub, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] The outside area shall not be permitted to operate past
2:00 a.m.
[2] Outside seating shall be permitted on the sidewalk area
adjacent to a dedicated roadway between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for dining purposes only,
provided it does not encroach onto the sidewalk by more
than 50% and further provided there is a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet. If on-street
parking is permitted adjacent to the sidewalk, then a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of five feet shall be
required. The service and consumption of alcohol shall
only be permitted as clearly accessory and incidental to
the service of food.
(4) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided
that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do
not include any activity conducted as a stand-alone business.
(b) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles
incidental or accessory to the authorized use.
(c) Food and catering services.
(5) Prohibited uses:
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
(b) Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit
pursuant to § 68-719D(3), no accessory use to that special
permit use shall be permitted unless same has been specifically
authorized by the board that authorized the special permit use.
(6) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 60 feet.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1159
(c) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, hotel pools or
parapet walls. In the event that such structures are within 1 1/
2 miles of an established airport, the approval by the Federal
Aviation Administration shall be secured and any and all
conditions imposed met.
(7) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadways, from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings.
E. IMU-C Civic.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Outdoor live performance and motion picture venues, subject
to all requisite permits and fees from the Town of Islip and/or
any other governmental unit or agency requiring same.
(b) Open space, green space, and water recreation.
(c) Outdoor and indoor athletic playing fields or courts.
(d) Senior/youth facilities.
(e) Open-air market.
(f) Ice skating rink.
(2) Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk
shall be as follows:
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1160
(a) By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the
outdoor sale and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es)
and/or plant(s) used as a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or
religiously significant season, including, but not limited to,
Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other holiday and/or
religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
(3) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided
that such uses are clearly incidental to the principal use and do
not include any activity conducted as a stand-alone business.
(b) Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles
incidental or accessory to the authorized use.
(c) Food, beverage, and dry goods sales structures, not to exceed
10% of buildable square feet.
(d) Public restrooms.
(e) Public transportation pickup/dropoff areas.
(f) Offices used in connection with any permitted use.
(4) Prohibited uses:
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
(5) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 20 feet,
except for a single motion picture screen and/or sports facility
structure which shall not exceed 50 feet.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
(c) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, or parapet walls. In
the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be secured and any and all conditions
imposed met.
(6) Setbacks:
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1161
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadways, from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 10 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings.
F. IMU-RET Retail.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Retail or wholesale sale of goods.
(b) Minor restaurants and restaurants, including outside seating.
(c) Convenience markets.
(d) Pharmacies and drug stores.
(e) Banks and automated teller machines.
(f) Personal service establishment.
(g) Art galleries.
(h) Assembly or social recreation centers.
(i) Dry-cleaning establishments.
(j) Live/work units for artists, including artist studios and artistic
performance spaces.
(k) Business service establishments, including printing, office
supplies, business machines, computers, photography studios
and film development stores.
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1162
(l) Professional offices.
(m) Single-user bulk retail/wholesale establishment.
(n) Museums.
(2) Uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a
public hearing:
(a) Family entertainment venues.
(b) Bar, tavern, or nightclub.
(c) Bank drive-in window as accessory to a bank facility or
pharmacy.
(3) Uses permitted by special permit from the Town Board after a
public hearing:
(a) Fast-food restaurant.
(4) Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
IMU-RET Retail Subdistrict:
(a) Off-street parking, parking garages, and other parking
structures, which shall not count toward the total allowable
retail square footage permitted.
(b) Other customary accessory uses.
(5) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 50 feet.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, or parapet walls. In
the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be secured and any and all conditions
imposed met.
(6) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1163
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings.
G. IMU-FLEX — Flex Zoning.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) All uses permitted in the IMU-RET, IMU-S and IMU-E
Subdistricts shall be permitted, provided such use is located on
the ground floor of a given building, except for buildings used
as parcel post companies.
(b) All uses permitted in the IMU-RET, IMU-S, IMU-I and IMU-RES
Subdistricts, provided such use is located on those floors above
the ground floor.
(2) Uses permitted with administrative approval of the Town Clerk
shall be as follows:
(a) By permit issued administratively by the Town Clerk, the
outdoor sale and/or display of any variety of tree(s), bush(es)
and/or plant(s) used as a symbol of expressing a holiday and/or
religiously significant season, including, but not limited to,
Christmas trees, wreaths and/or other holiday and/or
religiously significant plants or decorations, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 68-271.1.
(3) Uses permitted by special permit from the Planning Board after a
public hearing:
(a) A single accessory retail use within an industrial building, or
that shares a common wall with it, and sells only goods being
manufactured in the principal industrial building. The area
devoted to this accessory retail use shall not exceed 5% of the
gross floor area of the industrial building, and separate
exterior signage for this use shall be prohibited.
(b) Indoor recreational use.
(c) Bar, tavern, or nightclub.
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-719
66:1164
(d) Outside seating and/or outside bar service as an accessory use
to a permitted bar, tavern or nightclub, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] The outside area shall not be permitted to operate past
2:00 a.m.
[2] Outside seating shall be permitted on the sidewalk area
adjacent to a dedicated roadway between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for dining purposes only,
provided it does not encroach onto the sidewalk by more
than 50%, and further provided there is a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk area of eight feet. If on-street
parking is permitted adjacent to the sidewalk, then a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area of five feet shall be
required. The service and consumption of alcohol shall
only be permitted as clearly accessory and incidental to
the service of food.
(e) Family entertainment venues.
(4) Height:
(a) No structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 50 feet.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the height
of a church or similar place of worship, stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil, monument, chimney, water
tank, elevator, mechanical units/housing, or parapet walls. In
the event that such structures are within 1 1/2 miles of an
established airport, the approval by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be secured and any and all conditions
imposed met.
(5) Prohibited uses:
(a) All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building is completed
and used.
(b) Whenever a use has been authorized by a special permit
pursuant to § 68-719G(3), no accessory use to that special
permit use shall be permitted unless same has been specifically
authorized by the board that authorized the special permit use.
(6) Setbacks:
(a) Setbacks from Veterans Memorial Highway shall be 45 feet
and 60 feet from Sunrise Highway, the entire extent of which
shall remain natural, except for specified view corridors shown
on the approved site plan and decorative landscape treatments
§ 68-719 WATER QUALITY § 68-719
66:1165
§ 68-720. Parking.
adjacent to the entrances to the site as approved by the
Commissioner of Planning, and approved driveways,
sidewalks, utilities, and utility easements.
(b) Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
internal roadway or parking area.
(c) Side yard setbacks shall be a combined minimum total of 20
feet, with a minimum ten-foot setback on any individual side
from any internal roadway or parking area.
(d) All buildings erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
on a side street. This front yard shall have a minimum setback
of 10 feet from any internal roadway or parking area.
(e) All buildings erected on a through lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the internal roadway or parking area.
(f) A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be provided between
adjacent unconnected buildings.
A. Required number of parking spaces. The mixed-use design of the
IMUPDD reduces the need for on-site parking for individual uses.
Therefore, adherence to the standard on-site parking requirements for
the other zoning districts in the Town of Islip as required in Appendix E,
Table of Minimum Parking Spaces, in the Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations, would result in the overabundance of
parking spaces and reduction in land available for open space, public
spaces, landscaping and streetscape in the IMUPDD. To avoid such an
undesirable condition, the following shall be the minimum number of
required parking spaces:
(1) IMU-I: one parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) IMU-S: 3.3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) IMU-RES: 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling.
(4) IMU-E (Theatre): 0.3 parking spaces per one seat.
(5) IMU-E (Restaurant): four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
(6) IMU-E (Hotel): 1.5 spaces per guest unit plus 250 additional spaces
for employees and invitees.
(7) IMU-E: All other permitted uses not specifically mentioned herein
shall provide 3.3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet.
(8) IMU-C: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
§ 68-719 ISLIP CODE § 68-720
66:1166
§ 68-721. Loading.
§ 68-722. Landscaping.
(9) IMU-RET: four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area.
(10)IMU-FLEX: 3.3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area.
B. Permitted parking spaces:
(1) Surface parking, including dedicated parking lots and on-street
parking.
(2) Structured parking no higher than three parking stories above
grade and one parking story below grade.
A. Single- and multi-tenant buildings, with individual tenants, no larger
than 15,000 square feet may be serviced from either the front or rear of
the building and shall not require dedicated service docks. In addition,
common trash facilities may be provided for multi-tenant buildings.
B. Those buildings between 15,000 square feet and 30,000 square feet
may require dedicated service docks and loading areas for truck
delivery and trash removal if, in the sole discretion of the Commissioner
of Planning and Development, same is deemed necessary to promote
the health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Any building with one or more tenant of greater than 30,000 square feet
shall include a dedicated loading area for truck delivery and trash
removal.
D. All loading areas shall be screened from public view with a wall,
fencing, and/or landscaping.
A. Intent. The coordination of landscape design within a community
developed under this Code section is essential for creating a consistent,
high-quality character. A cohesive design unifies the various buildings
and strengthens the cohesiveness of the development. Individual
landscape treatments for building sites must complement the roadway
landscapes, create distinctive settings for buildings, and help reinforce
the design of the open space system and provide a transition for
pedestrians. The Planning Board may reduce any of the landscaping
requirements specified herein. Landscaping and decorative elements
for all development areas shall be provided to: 1) enhance the
aesthetics of the development; 2) create a pedestrian-friendly
environment; 3) break up the mass of buildings; 4) soften architectural
materials; 5) provide screening of service areas; 6) enhance the
streetscape/highway environment; 7) define building and parking area
entrances; 8) provide shade and climate control; and 9) provide buffers
between subdistricts.
§ 68-720 WATER QUALITY § 68-722
66:1167
§ 68-723. Exterior lighting.
(1) A minimum landscape area or green space of 15 feet shall be
maintained along all interior road frontages.
(2) Detached walks: Provide a minimum of one tree per 40 lineal feet of
street frontage between the sidewalk and curb, and an additional
one tree and eight shrubs per 40 lineal feet of street frontage
within 10 feet outside the sidewalk, internal to the development.
(3) Attached walks: Provide a minimum of one tree per 25 lineal feet of
street frontage within 15 feet of the edge of the sidewalk and a
minimum of five shrubs per tree, plus perennial flower beds,
ground cover or grass lawn is required within 20 feet of the edge of
curb.
(4) Meandering sidewalks: Provide a minimum of one tree per 30 lineal
feet of street frontage and accompany the trees with a variety of
shrubs and ground covers. A minimum of eight shrubs per tree plus
perennial flowerbeds, ground cover or grass lawn is required.
(5) Sight triangle: Provide adequate sight lines for an effective sight
triangle per the Town Code. Plant roadways with landscape
materials that do not interfere with the visibility of the motorist.
Plant trees a minimum of three feet from the back of the curb.
(6) Parking lots are necessary features of building sites that can, if not
designed properly, visually detract from the overall development
character. Parking lots within the subdistricts developed under the
IMUPDD should be designed to blend with each building site's
character using landscape plantings and grading.
(a) A minimum of one tree per 20 parking spaces (average
equivalent) is required in all parking lots, to be planted in
islands, medians, and perimeter areas adjacent to lots
(excluding streetscape tree plantings). Utilize landscaped
islands and medians to improve the definition of circulation
patterns, provide shading for paved areas and break up
continuous rows of parking. All parking areas shall be
landscaped, including landscaped islands.
(b) All parking lots over 15,000 square feet shall provide at a
minimum that every other double-loaded parking area where
possible shall be separated by a minimum landscape division of
six feet. Said areas shall be planted with trees at an average of
one tree for every 30 feet. The plant spacing herein is for the
purpose of determining the number of plants to be provided
and not to dictate the design thereof. Clustering of plants in
natural patterns is highly encouraged.
§ 68-722 ISLIP CODE § 68-723
66:1168
§ 68-724. Permitted encroachments.
§ 68-725. Determination by Planning Board.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all matters referred to the Planning
Board in this Article LIV may be determined pursuant to Town Law § 274-a,
Subdivision 2.
§ 68-726. Open development area.
Pursuant to § 280-a of the Town Law, the Town Board hereby declares this
zoning district an open development area within the Town, wherein building
permits may be issued for the erection of structures to which access is given
by right-of-way or easement, upon such conditions or regulations as may be
prescribed by the Town Engineer at the time of site plan review.
§ 68-727. Signs.
A. All exterior street and pedestrian lighting fixtures and columns shall be
consistent throughout each subdistrict of the IMUPDD and shall be
decorative in nature.
B. All lighting shall conform to the requirements of Article LII of this
Zoning chapter.
A. The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
(1) All lighting, cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, awnings, signs, or
bay windows projecting not more than 48 inches.
(2) One-story open porches and terraces not exceeding five feet in
height and projecting not more than 10 feet.
(3) One-story enclosed vestibules not greater than 12 feet wide.
(4) Guard booths, flagpoles, identification signs, sculptures, seating,
street furniture or gazebos.
(5) Shielded mechanical systems.
A. Intent; maintenance.
(1) This section is intended to control outdoor signs of all types and in
all subdistricts by regulating the size, location, quantity, quality,
content and design in order to:
(a) Protect the safety of the public.
(b) Enhance the aesthetic environment of the IMUPDD.
(c) Reduce motorist distraction.
(d) Provide for uniform design standards.
§ 68-723 WATER QUALITY § 68-727
66:1169
(e) Encourage excellence in sign design.
(f) Improve business identification and sign comprehension.
(g) Limit the use of energy in sign design and maintenance.
(2) All signs shall be maintained in a neat, safe and workable condition
at all times.
B. Permitted signs.
(1) Permitted signs may only identify the person, the establishment, or
the principal product and/or service available on the premises
which contains the sign.
(2) The following signs are permitted in the IMUPDD:
(a) Address: a sign identifying the number and/or name of the
occupant of a unit.
(b) Public interest: a sign containing a cautionary message, such
as "beware of dog" or "no trespassing," or an informational
message, such as "exit" or "parking."
(c) Place/identity: a sign identifying the development, residential
neighborhood or public facility.
(d) Monument/common tenant: a sign identifying multiple retail
tenants in a development. This may include both the
development's name and the tenants' names and/or logos.
(e) Institutional: a sign identifying a club, association, school,
hospital, church, firehouse, nursing home, care facility,
boardinghouse, institution or cemetery.
(f) Real estate: a sign indicating exclusively the sale, rental, lease
or development of the premises upon which it stands.
(g) Contractor's: a sign identifying the contractor or contractors
doing work on the premises or building which contains the
sign.
(h) Office: a sign identifying any office building or office use.
(i) Business: a sign identifying an establishment which retails a
product or provides a service or entertainment to the general
public as distinguished from places, institutions, or offices and
which is permitted in all business districts.
(j) Industrial: a sign identifying an establishment which produces
or assembles a product or warehouses a product and which is
permitted in all industrial districts.
(k) Marquee: a sign identifying motion pictures or events which
are subject to frequent change. A marquee sign is only
§ 68-727 ISLIP CODE § 68-727
66:1170
permitted when associated with an entertainment/club, public,
or civic facility. Marquees are fixed signs that may be digital in
nature and change regularly.
(l) Directory: a sign identifying two or more persons, agencies or
establishments, located in a place or location common to all.
(m) Corporate lawn: a sign identifying an office, industrial or
business establishment that is designed to integrate into the
landscape the character of the subject parcel. Such signs shall
be architecturally compatible with the building(s) and site and
must be located in a landscaped lawn area.
(n) Directional: a sign located outdoors which guides, instructs or
directs viewers to a place or event.
(3) Any sign permitted in this section is allowed to contain
noncommercial copy.
(4) This section does not apply to public art or historic/replica signage
or environmental graphics applied on building facades or
freestanding structures.
(5) For purposes of signage, the area of a sign shall be the area of a
rectangle, the sides of which completely enclose the sign,
excluding structural supports. All references to height refer to the
vertical dimension of this rectangle. The overall height of the sign
and structure shall correspond to building heights established in
the IMUPDD.
C. Prohibited signs. Any sign not specifically permitted is prohibited.
Prohibited signs include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any sign which is dangerous or hazardous, as determined by the
Commissioner of Planning and Development, to public safety by
virtue of its maintenance, structure, or projection.
(2) Any sign which obstructs the visibility of drivers or which conflicts
with or obstructs a traffic control device for any reason.
(3) Any sign which obstructs a required window or door in such a
manner as to prevent free egress or ingress.
(4) Mobile or portable signs.
(5) Flashing (nondigital), revolving, moving, sound-producing or
animated signs, including signs which have the capability of motion
in whole or in part, except signs which display time and/or
temperature exclusively.
(6) Commercial billboard which is rented or used to advertise a
product, service or establishment which is not the principal
§ 68-727 WATER QUALITY § 68-727
66:1171
product, service or establishment found on the property containing
the billboard.
(7) Any sign attached to a tree, telephone pole, portable object or to
the face of another sign.
(8) Any sign which uses breakable glass in its construction, except
glass used in illumination.
(9) Any sign in any street right-of-way.
(10) Any sign attached to a fence, except by written permission of the
Commissioner of Planning and Development.
(11) Light box signs.
(12) Roof signs or any other sign exceeding the height of the top story of
any building.
D. Type and quality of permitted signs. All signs within the IMUPDD shall
be either ground, facial, window, awning or canvas signs unless
otherwise provided herein.
(1) Monument/common tenant:
(a) A monument/common tenant sign is permitted to identify
multiple retail tenants in a development. This may include the
development's name as well as the tenants' names and/or
logos.
(b) Quantity. One monument/common tenant sign is permitted per
1,000 feet of roadway frontage on any road within the
jurisdiction of the New York State Department of
Transportation.
(c) Sign area. The maximum area of a monument/common tenant
sign may not exceed 500 square feet. Any sign may be doublefaced,
and only one face shall be used in determining
conformity to sign area limitation.
(d) Height. The maximum height of a monument/common tenant
sign shall be 35 feet.
(e) Setback. The setback of a monument/common tenant sign is
the shortest horizontal measurement from the property line to
any part of the sign. A monument/common tenant sign may be
erected within one foot of a street right-of-way only if the sign
is certified by a registered architect or engineer to be able to
withstand a one-hundred-mile-per-hour wind.
(f) Construction. All monument/common tenant signs must be
protected from vehicular damage.
§ 68-727 ISLIP CODE § 68-727
66:1172
(g) Illumination. Illumination of monument/common tenant signs
may be direct, indirect, or internal.
(h) Design. All monument/common tenant signs shall be
constructed to reflect the architecture of the development in
general. All tenant signs shall use either channel letters, halolit
letters, carved wood or similar material, or a similar design
approved by the Commissioner of Planning or his/her designee.
(2) Ground sign: a freestanding sign attached to a structure which is
intended and designed only to support the sign and which is
embedded in the ground or anchored in concrete.
(a) A ground sign is permitted to identify a building or use within a
building only if the building which it serves to identify is set
back more than 25 feet from the street curb or edge of the
street pavement.
(b) Quantity. One ground sign per building is permitted, except
public interest signs, which are permitted as required to safely
convey the message. Where two or more persons, agencies or
establishments are located in a place or location common to
all, such as a shopping center or an office complex, or where
separate facilities share a common parking area, one ground
sign per building is permitted in a common location. Real
estate signs may be attached to an existing sign as the need
arises.
(c) Sign area. The maximum area of a ground sign may not exceed
64 square feet. Any sign may be double-faced, and only one
face shall be used in determining conformity to sign area
limitation.
(d) Height. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be eight
feet.
(e) Setback. The setback of a ground sign is the shortest
horizontal measurement from the property line to any part of
the sign. A ground sign shall be set back from any street, rightof-
way, property line or required buffer a horizontal distance
equal to the height of the sign. A ground sign may be erected
within one foot of a street right-of-way only if the sign is
certified by a registered architect or engineer to be able to
withstand a one-hundred-mile-per-hour wind.
(f) Construction. All ground signs, except in residential areas,
must be protected from vehicular damage as determined by
the Commissioner of Planning and Development.
(g) Illumination. Illumination of ground signs may be direct,
indirect, or internal.
§ 68-727 WATER QUALITY § 68-727
66:1173
(3) Facial sign: a sign painted on, applied on or otherwise attached to a
wall of a building or storefront and designed as a unified message.
(a) Quantity. Only one facial sign is permitted per face of the
storefront or establishment. Where an establishment has
additional exterior walls which are visible from the main
thoroughfare, each such wall may have one facial sign
(secondary), but not more than two such additional facial signs
are permitted.
(b) Area. The area of a facial sign shall be the area of a rectangle,
the sides of which completely enclose the sign or letters which
are attached to the face of the building. The maximum area of a
facial sign may not exceed two times the width of the individual
storefront or establishment.
(c) Illumination. Illumination of ground signs may be direct,
indirect, or internal.
(d) Appearance. Facial signs existing in a shopping center shall be
of uniform design, including materials.
(4) Window sign: a sign entirely contained inside a building and which
is comprehensible from the street. Such signs are permitted to
allow for the notification of products on the premises, merchandise
sales, rental or sale of the premises or special events to be held
within the building containing the window sign. Window signs are
subject to the area limitations as set forth in the Schedule of Sign
Regulations.
(5) Awning sign: a sign painted on a retractable window awning which
identifies only the name of the establishment.
(6) Canvas sign: a stationary sign constructed for fire-retardant canvas
or similar material on a fire-retardant frame. Canvas signs shall
conform to the requirements of facial signs with respect to
quantity, area, height, construction and illumination.
E. In addition, the following conditions shall also apply to the following
sign types:
(1) Address. Maximum area: one square foot.
(2) Public interest. Maximum area: two square feet.
(3) Place/identity.
(a) Maximum area: 16 square feet.
(b) Maximum height: eight feet.
(4) Real estate. Maximum area: six square feet.
(5) Contractor's. Maximum area: 12 square feet.
§ 68-727 ISLIP CODE § 68-727
66:1174
§ 68-728. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not impair or invalidate the remainder hereof, but such
adjudication shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or section directly involved in the controversy in which judgment
shall have been rendered.
(6) Marquee. Maximum area: three times the width of storefront.
(7) Directional. Maximum area: 50 square feet with a maximum of two
directional signs.
§ 68-727 WATER QUALITY § 68-728
66:1175

ARTICLE LV
Use District Regulations: Pilgrim State Planned Redevelopment
District
[Added 7-18-2017 by L.L. No. 3]
§ 68-729. Legislative intent.
A. The primary intent of the Pilgrim State Planned Redevelopment District
(PSPRD) is to allow for a mixed-use, smart growth redevelopment of
approximately 452 acres, which were formerly part of the Pilgrim State
Psychiatric Center, pursuant to 1) a Master Plan, Development Unit 1-4
and Gateway Area Building Stories, Street Type and Open Space
Regulatory Plans; Subdistrict Specifications (hereinafter collectively
designated the "Master Plan"), 2) the provisions of this article and the
Regulating Plans included in this article, and 3) Design Guidelines for
the PSPRD. The aforesaid Master Plan and Design Guidelines are
annexed to this article394 and indicate, among other things, the general
locations of proposed subdistricts of the PSPRD, representative types
and general locations of land uses in the proposed subdistricts of the
PSPRD, and the general scale, sequencing, and intensity of
development within each subdistrict of the PSPRD.
B. The PSPRD is intended primarily to foster smart growth redevelopment
of abandoned and/or disused portions of a state psychiatric hospital site
which are now privately owned. The PSPRD is designed to allow for
creation of a new, efficiently designed, transit-oriented and served
multi-use community that includes residential facilities and retail and
employment opportunities for residents and nonresidents of the
community, and that also minimizes adverse effects on the Town. The
smart growth approach to community development, which facilitates
community interaction, interdependence, and neighborhood spirit,
encourages owners and occupants in the community to continually
reinvest socially and materially in the community, thereby promoting
the economic viability of the community.
C. The PSPRD is designed to result in a community of interconnected
streets, laid out according to the aforesaid Master Plan (as it may have
been amended) and the Regulating Plans included in this article, which
will allow for continuing flexibility in adapting to changing market
conditions during the anticipated long-term implementation of the
PSPRD development. The said community is designed to be socially and
economically interconnected and to be pedestrian-friendly. Moreover,
the layout of roadways, public spaces, and uses in the community, as
well as the intended development of shared parking facilities and the
use of traffic management programs, including shuttle buses for short
trips to a nearby commuter rail station, will reduce the community's
394. Editor's Note: The Master Plan and the Design Guidelines are included in the online
version of the Code of the Town of Islip (eCode360®). Said documents are also on file in
the Town offices.
§ 68-729 WATER QUALITY § 68-729
66:1177
§ 68-730. Lands included.
The PSPRD shall include Phase 1 of Development Unit 1A constituting
113 acres as depicted on the Overall Phasing Diagram contained within
Pages 5 and 6 of the Appendix herein and which constitutes p/o SCTM
0500-071.00-01.00-010.008.
dependence on automobiles and will, thereby, minimize potential traffic
impacts from the new community.
D. Upon its initial adoption, the Town Board will limit the PSPRD to Phase
1 of Development Unit 1A constituting 113 acres as depicted on the
Overall Phasing Diagram contained within Page 3 of the Appendix
herein. Specifically, the proposed parcels included in Phase 1 of
Development Unit 1A are contained on Page 7 of the Master Plan
entitled "Proposed Development Tabulation" and includes all of
Development Unit 1A with the exception of proposed parcels DU1A-10,
DU1A-13, DU1A-19, DU1A-20, DU1A-21 and DU1A-22.
E. The initial development of the Town Center in Development Unit 1A will
give the project an identity and sense of place that will anchor any
subsequent phases of development. Given the extensive timeframe
needed to complete Phase 1 of Development Unit 1A, the adoption of
the PSPRD as set forth herein will provide the opportunity to make
adjustments in response to conditions or circumstances which may
arise requiring attention as the development progresses. References
made to any other phase of development or any other development unit
other than Phase 1 of Development Unit 1A within this article or any
appendices thereof shall not be deemed an approval upon the adoption
of this PSPRD. Any development beyond Phase 1 of Development Unit
1A will require amendments to this article, its appendices and further
Town Board approval.
F. This article is enacted pursuant to Statute of Local Governments § 10(6)
and Municipal Home Rule Law §§ 10(1)(ii)(a)(14), 10(1)(ii)(d)(3), and
10(2), and is intended to and shall supersede Town Law § 261-b
(relating to incentive zoning), Town Law § 261-c (relating to planned
unit development zoning districts), Town Law § 262 (relating to zoning
districts), Town Law §§ 263 and 272-a (relating to comprehensive plans
and zoning purposes), Town Law § 269 (relating to zoning law
conflicts), Town Law §§ 270 and 273 (relating to official maps and
changes thereto), Town Law § 274-a (relating to site plan review and
approval), Town Law § 274-b (relating to special use permits), Town
Law §§ 276, 277, 278, and 279 (relating to subdivisions), and § 280-a
(relating to permits for buildings not on improved mapped streets) to
the extent that this article is inconsistent with such statutory
provisions.
G. The provisions of the text, regulating plans, and other diagrams of this
article shall prevail over any inconsistent provisions of the Master Plan
and Design Guidelines annexed to this article.
§ 68-729 ISLIP CODE § 68-731
66:1178
§ 68-731. General provisions.
§ 68-732. Definitions.
A. Development in the PSPRD shall be in accordance with the Master Plan
described in § 68-729, above (as it may have been amended), the
provisions of this article and Regulating Plans included in this article,
and the Design Guidelines annexed to this article, except to the extent
that the provisions of such Master Plan or Design Guidelines are
inconsistent with the text, Regulating Plans, and other diagrams of this
article.
B. The provisions of this article shall supplant, supersede, and prevail over
any other chapters, articles, and provisions of the Code of the Town of
Islip and the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations pertaining to public street pavement cross sections and
streetlighting that 1) are inconsistent or in conflict with the aforesaid
Master Plan (as it may have been amended), this article, and/or the
standards and procedures set forth herein, or 2) establish or impose
regulations, requirements, prohibitions, standards, parameters, and/or
procedures that are different from, or would be (if not supplanted and
superseded, as set forth herein) in addition to, those regulations,
requirements, prohibitions, standards, parameters, and/or procedures
set forth in the aforesaid Master Plan and this article.
C. Except as specifically provided in this article, the provisions of Chapter
11 (Conservation of Energy) of the Code of the Town of Islip and the
Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
pertaining to public street pavement cross sections and streetlighting;
Articles I (General Provisions), XXIX (Signs), XXX (Sight Obstructions,
Fences and Walls), XXXI (Minimum Site Improvements; Minimum
Development Standards for Property), XXXII (Arterial Highway
Setbacks) and LII (Exterior Lighting Standards) of Chapter 68 (Zoning)
of the Code of the Town of Islip; §§ 68-5, 68-6, 68-30.1, 68-30.3,
68-420.7, and 68-420.8 of Chapter 68 (Zoning) of the Code of the Town
of Islip, the Schedule of Sign Regulations and Guidelines for Exterior
Lighting set forth at the end of Chapter 68 (Zoning) of the Code of the
Town of Islip; and the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations pertaining to public street pavement cross sections and
streetlighting shall have no application, force, or effect within the
PSPRD.
A. As used in the Master Plan described in § 68-729 above, this article, and
the Regulating Plans and other diagrams included in this article, the
following terms shall have the following meanings.
B. The definitions enumerated in the Town of Islip Zoning and Subdivision
Chapters shall apply unless defined below.
BOUNDARY A — The property line of the lands described in § 68-730,
above, that is described as follows: Beginning at a concrete monument
§ 68-731 WATER QUALITY § 68-732
66:1179
with cap situated on the Corporate Boundary between the Town of Islip,
on the east, and the Town of Hempstead, on the west, where the said
Corporate Boundary intersects the southwesterly line of property now
or formerly owned by the Long Island Expressway NYSDOT (Park &
Ride), and running thence South 00 degrees 25 minutes 42 seconds
West, along the said Corporate Boundary, a distance of 2,899.79 feet to
another concrete monument with cap.
BUILD-TO FRONTAGE — The percentage of the width of a frontage in
which the ground floor facades of principal buildings must be located
within a designated build-to zone.
BUILD-TO ZONE — The range of distances, as measured from the
street right-of-way boundary, within which the ground floor facades of
principal buildings must be located along frontages. Exception: Where
there is open space between the street right-of-way boundary and a
building, the build-to zone shall be measured from the inner line, i.e.,
the line opposite and farthest from the street right-of-way boundary, of
such open space.
CIVIC SPACE — Property for community facilities which accommodates
a community need, including, but not limited to, post office, library,
police substation, fire substation, and ambulance substation.
CLASS A OFFICE SPACE — Office space within buildings of distinctive
architecture and the highest quality workmanship and materials
throughout. The frame will be reinforced concrete or heavy fireproof
steel. Marble or terrazzo floors in public areas, bronze elevator doors,
and expensive lighting fixtures are utilized. The buildings may have
special features, such as an elaborate entrance, grand staircase, etc.
FRONTAGE — The side of a tract of land included in a site plan
application that abuts a street right-of-way. The width of such frontage
shall be defined by any two adjacent street right-of-way lines or lot
lines.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area including all levels or
stories of a structure as measured from the exterior faces of the walls.
Gross floor area shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Primary buildings/structures.
(b) Accessory buildings/structures, except as described below.
(c) Mezzanines.
All ground-level covered or enclosed porches, patios and
decks, except those exempted below.
(d)
Area under a gable, hip, gambrel or similar-type roof where
there exists a floor-to-ceiling height of four feet six inches.
(e)
(f) Cellars and basements habitable or occupied.
(1)
§ 68-732 ISLIP CODE § 68-732
66:1180
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A single unit consisting of a home office, homebased
business, or a home-based art/craft studio that is connected
internally to a dwelling unit.
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan is defined as the Development
Unit 1 Building Stories, Street Type and Open Space Regulatory Plans;
Subdistrict Specifications, and Development Tabulations (as shown in
Appendix395).
OPEN SPACE — Area or horizontal space, including, but not limited
to, buffer-setback areas, recreation areas (passive or active), plazas,
courtyards, and rooftop open space areas, that is open to and
unobstructed from the sky, except for canopies or other approved
structures providing protection or shelter from sun or weather, and
is accessible to and usable by persons occupying or using the lot,
building, or structure that contains such space. Area developed as
parks, bioswales and stormwater detention basins shall not be included
in open space requirements.
The following structures shall not contribute towards gross floor
area:
Nonhabitable or unoccupied basements and cellars used for
mechanical space, storage, or parking.
(a)
Decks, provided that they are accessory to a permitted
principle use and are not roofed over, covered, or enclosed.
(b)
Covered, unenclosed residential porches located in any portion
of a front yard and which do not extend more than six feet from
the front wall of the dwelling.
(c)
Any decorative or cantilevered architectural element
protruding from any structure when not contributing more
than 25% of the facial area of the wall of said building.
(d)
Cloth or similar fabric awnings attached to buildings for
decorative purposes and which do not contain any signage or
wording. Said awnings shall not expand the functional floor
area of any use, including but not limited to public assembly,
inventory storage, or shielding or screening of HVAC
equipment.
(e)
Enclosures designed to conceal rooftop wireless
communication facilities, provided that enclosure does not
serve any other purpose or use.
(f)
Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, bay windows, and
fireplaces which extend no more than 48 inches from the
exterior walls of a building.
(g)
(2)
395. Editor's Note: The Appendix is included in the online version of the Code of the Town of
Islip (eCode360®). Said document is also on file in the Town offices.
§ 68-732 WATER QUALITY § 68-732
66:1181
§ 68-733. Designation of PSPRD subdistricts.
The subdistricts of the PSPRD, as specified and depicted in the aforesaid
Master Plan for the PSPRD and in the Regulating Plans included in this
article, are as follows:
§ 68-734. Regulating Plans.
The following Regulating Plans designate the aforesaid PSPRD subdistricts,
the building stories limitations for each PSPRD subdistrict, the hypothetical
street types for each PSPRD subdistrict, and the open spaces/buffers for
each PSPRD subdistrict.
PARK — An area of land publicly dedicated or owned by a homeowner
association in perpetuity for the enjoyment of the public, having
facilities for rest and recreation and containing natural vegetative and/
or landscaped features.
PAVEMENT — The motor vehicle travel, parking lanes and on-road bike
lanes of a private access or dedicated public street.
ROADWAY — The total width of a private access or dedicated street
inclusive of motor vehicle travel and parking lanes, off-road bike lanes
and pedestrian sidewalks.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor next above. For the top
story of a building, the story shall be measured from the upper surface
of the highest floor to the interior surface of the roof at the peak. If
the interior height of the top story exceeds four feet six inches, then it
shall be considered as a story on submitted plans. Mezzanines shall be
defined and regulated under the New York State Building Code and the
provisions of the ordinance.
A. Town Center (Development Unit 1 or DU1): a mixed-use subdistrict that
is intended to be developed with a range of compatible land uses,
including retail, housing, hotel/lodging, office, in-home office,
entertainment, and cultural uses. The objective of this subdistrict is to
allow for creation of a pedestrian-friendly infrastructure that
encourages street life, business activity, and a self-policing environment
incorporating distinctive people places which function as the focus for
community life, special events, celebrations, and festivals.
A. Designation of Subdistricts (development units). The Pilgrim State
Planned Redevelopment District (PSPRD), upon adoption of this article,
is approximately 113 (+/-) acres.
(1) DU1 will be the commercial heart of the community and is planned
for a variety of retail and commercial options, as well as housing. It
is located to the west of the Sagtikos Parkway and is connected by a
central organizing element, a circular boulevard.
§ 68-732 ISLIP CODE § 68-734
66:1182
B. Building stories.
Legend
Low-rise buildings (1-6 stories; 80 feet maximum)
Potential mid-rise tower (7-10 stories)
Note 1: Locations and maximum heights of specific buildings will be
determined during site plan.
Note 2: Residential buildings that abut the 130-foot buffer – setback
area along Boundary A shall not exceed three stories or 50 feet in
height.
C. Street type.
Legend
Street Type Pavement
— Type A 60 feet
§ 68-734 WATER QUALITY § 68-734
66:1183
Type B 40 feet
Type C 30 feet
Type D 24 feet
Type E 24 feet
Note: Locations of street types shown for illustrative purposes and
subject to change. See street type sections for more detailed
information.
D. Open space areas.
E. Subdistrict specifications; building alignment and frontage coverage in
DU1.
F. Town Center (Development Unit 1 or DU1): a mixed use subdistrict that
is intended to be developed with a range of compatible land uses,
including retail, housing, hotel/lodging, office, in-home office,
entertainment, and cultural uses. The objective of this subdistrict is to
allow for creation of a pedestrian-friendly infrastructure that
encourages street life, business activity, and a self-policing environment
incorporating distinctive people places, which function as the focus for
community life, special events, celebrations, and festivals.
(1) Use.
§ 68-734 ISLIP CODE § 68-734
66:1184
§ 68-735. PSPRD use regulations.
Residential Permitted at all levels
Commercial Permitted at all levels
Office Permitted at all levels
(2) Building configuration. (See Building Stories Plan for height limits.)
Maximum height, feet See Building Stories Plan
Maximum height, stories See Building Stories Plan
Minimum height, stories No minimum
(3) Alignment, principal buildings.
Build-to zone 0 feet - 20 feet
Build-to frontage 60%
(4) Streetscape. (Note: 50% of the distance between street trees shall
be improved with in-ground plantings, planters, street furniture, or
other structures.)
Street trees 60 feet – O.C.
(5) Parking structures within Development Unit 1 shall be screened/
wrapped within commercial/residential uses to provide a
meaningful street wall.
Note: Photographs are for illustrative purposes.
A. Any building, structure, or land in the PSPRD may be used for 1) any
one or more of the permitted uses, accessory uses, special permit, and
special exception uses allowed in any zoning district of the Town of Islip
as of the date of adoption of this article, without need for compliance
with the criteria set forth for special permit or special exception uses,
except with regard to retail fuel service stations, which are permitted
subject to the provisions of Article XXVII of Chapter 68 (Zoning) of the
Code of the Town of Islip, and except as specified in Subsection B,
below, and 2) live/work units, as defined in this article.
§ 68-734 WATER QUALITY § 68-735
66:1185
B. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the PSPRD:
(1) Adult uses of any kind, as defined in § 68-341.1B of this chapter.
(2) Check-cashing, money-wiring, and/or money-transfer activities,
except in federally or New York State-chartered banks or as
payment for goods or services.
(3) Pawn shops and pawn brokerages.
(4) Psychiatric, behavioral, and alcohol or substance abuse clinics.
(5) Airports.
(6) Lumberyard or building materials establishments.
(7) Commercial boat storage, indoor or outdoor.
(8) Commercial shipyard or boat repair.
(9) Ferry terminals, slips, landings, or facilities.
(10) Marinas or marina wharfs.
(11) Transfer stations/recycling centers.
(12) Printing plants.
(13) Mini storage warehouses.
(14) Sale, lease, or rental of heavy construction vehicles, emergency
vehicles, unattached trailers, and related equipment.
(15) Outside parking of unattached box trailers.
(16) Flour or feed mills.
(17) Gas manufacture from coal, coke, or petroleum.
(18)Railway roundhouses or shops.
(19) Commercial poultry, sheep, goat, fox, mink, chinchilla, and rabbit
farms.
(20) Production, processing, extraction, or permanent storage of
radioactive materials.
(21) All uses expressly prohibited in the Industrial 2 District, except for
the following uses, which shall be permitted:
(a) One and two-family dwellings.
(b) Apartment houses.
(c) Garden apartments.
(d) Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, and lodging houses.
§ 68-735 ISLIP CODE § 68-735
66:1186
(e) Nursing, convalescent, and rest homes.
(f) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(g) Retail stores and groups of stores.
(h) Personal service establishments.
(i) Professional buildings.
(j) Banks.
(k) Medical centers or health clinics (other than psychiatric,
behavioral, and alcohol or substance abuse clinics, which are
prohibited).
(l) Philanthropic institutions.
(m) Mortuary or undertaking parlors.
(n) Game rooms.
(o) Billiard halls.
(p) Restaurants, fast-food.
(q) Farmer's markets.
(r) Motor vehicle dealerships, except that no such use shall
include outdoor storage of motor vehicles.
(s) Community or regional theaters.
(t) Community buildings.
(u) Assembly and social recreation halls.
(v) Dance halls.
(w) Motorcycle dealerships.
(x) Mixed-use buildings.
C. Uses permitted by special permit of the Planning Board.
(1) Retail fuel service stations and vehicle repair shops, subject to
compliance with the following criteria:
(a) A parking relaxation of no greater than 20%;
(b) A landscaping relaxation of no greater than 20%;
(c) Approval will not result in any on- or off-site traffic impacts, as
determined by the Planning Board; and
§ 68-735 WATER QUALITY § 68-735
66:1187
§ 68-736. Number of uses.
Any building or parcel within the PSPRD may contain any number of uses,
as permitted by this article.
§ 68-737. Maximum development.
Development within the PSPRD shall not exceed the following amounts
within the Town Center (Development Unit 1):
§ 68-738. Buffer-setback areas.
In order to provide for suitable buffers and setbacks between PSPRD
development and the areas surrounding the PSPRD, no buildings and
structures, except for pathways, drainage facilities, and screening
structures, shall hereafter be erected or placed within the measured buffersetback
areas shown along the external boundaries of the PSPRD Zone in
development units DU1-B, DU2, DU3, and DU4, as depicted on the Open
Space Plans for such development units in the Regulating Plans included
in this article. All such buffer-setback areas shall be measured from the
PSPRD boundaries as they exist on the date of adoption of this article.
The Commissioner of Planning and Development may approve detention/
retention stormwater basins in buffer-setback areas which incorporate a
staggered double row of five-foot-high conifer trees creating a continuous
screen around the perimeter of any basin. The bottom of any detention
basin shall be top dressed and seeded. Commercial signage is prohibited
within any buffer area. Noncommercial signage/wayfinding/directional
signage is permitted with a Town sign permit.
§ 68-739. Open space areas.
Areas of open space in the PSPRD, as defined in § 68-729, above, shall be
of the following types and located in general conformance with the Open
Space Plan for each development unit in the Regulating Plans included in
this article.
(d) The use is consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town
Code and the PSPRD Master Plan (as it may have been
amended).
A. Office: 626,000 square feet.
B. Retail: 560,000 square feet.
C. Civic: 215,500 square feet.
D. Residential: 3,504 units.
§ 68-735 ISLIP CODE § 68-739
66:1188
A. All open spaces are provided within walking distance of the people they
serve and are programmed to encourage a range of activities.
(1) Recreation areas (passive or active): flexible outdoor spaces, which
may be paved or landscaped and may include plantings or be left as
open grass areas; may be used for drainage.
(2) Yard areas: outdoor space between the property line and building
setback; privately owned spaces that may be landscaped at
property owner's discretion.
(3) Plazas: hardscaped activity areas, typically with direct street
access from one or more sides, which are to be focal points of the
development. Areas should be predominately paved, and planters
and water features are optional amenities.
§ 68-739 WATER QUALITY § 68-739
66:1189
(4) Courtyards: outdoor spaces, typically surrounded on at least three
sides by buildings. Courtyards do not typically have direct street
access; may be paved or landscaped and can include a water
feature.
(5) Rooftop open space areas: outdoor areas atop buildings, with or
without plantings, that are usable by the residents, occupants, or
users of the buildings on which they are located for active or
passive recreation.
(6) Buffers-setback areas: large predominately naturalized open areas;
mostly located around the edge of the development to minimize
views of the development from the highway and adjoining
neighborhoods; pathways and some landscaping optional; may be
used for drainage.
§ 68-739 ISLIP CODE § 68-739
66:1190
§ 68-740. Heights of buildings and structures.
The maximum heights of all new buildings and structures in the various
PSPRD subdistricts shall be in accordance with the Building Stories Plans
of the Regulating Plans included in this article.
§ 68-741. Site plans.
A. Pursuant to Town Law § 274-a, approval of site plans is hereby required
as a condition for the issuance of building permits required for
construction or development in the PSPRD, unless site plan review and
approval is waived, as set forth herein.
B. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development and
the Planning Board are each hereby authorized to review and approve
applications for site plan approval, or to grant waivers of site plan
review and approval, in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in this section.
C. Any number of buildings, structures, parking facilities, roadways, open
spaces, and parks on any number of parcels within the PSPRD, whether
or not divided by roadways or intervening parcels, may be included in a
single application for site plan approval.
D. Applications for site plan approval in the PSPRD shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter IV of the Town's Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, except public road pavement widths and streetlighting
shall be in accordance with the PSPRD.
E. Prior to the approval of a site plan of the PSPRD, a) the site plan
applicant shall provide a computation of the total amount of the
maximum development set forth in § 68-737, above, broken down by the
office, retail, civic, and residential components of such maximum
development, that has been approved in all previously issued site plan
approvals; b) the site plan applicant shall provide a Subdistrict
Development Plan, in the form of an AutoCAD Dwg electronic file
utilizing AutoCAD software with NAD 83 SP Long Island zone horizontal
datum and NAVD 88 North America datum, for the specific PSPRD
Subdistrict (i.e., DU1, DU2, DU3, DU4, or Gateway) in which the lands
covered by the subject application are located, which Subdistrict
Development Plan shall set forth the metes and bounds of the
§ 68-739 WATER QUALITY § 68-741
66:1191
subdistrict boundaries, all existing streets, buildings, and reserved
parking locations in the subdistrict, and all streets, buildings, and
reserved parking locations proposed in the current site plan
application; c) the site plan applicant shall provide detailed plans of
proposed streetlighting and building signage; and d) a road opening
permit, pursuant to the Town's Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, shall have been issued for road, drainage, and utility
infrastructure necessary for that phase. The Commissioner of the
Department of Planning and Development or the Planning Board shall
approve a proposed site plan if the Commissioner or the Planning
Board determines that such site plan, and any buildings and structures
proposed thereon, are consistent with the Master Plan and the Design
Guidelines described in § 68-729, above (as they may have been
amended), the provisions of this article, the Regulating Plans included
in this article, the conditions of adoption of this article, and the
conditions of approval of any site plans, subdivisions, road openings,
or variances previously approved for lands within the PSPRD. In
determining such consistency, the Commissioner of the Department of
Planning and Development and/or the Planning Board shall consider
existing or proposed parking, means of ingress and egress, signage,
landscaping, drainage, architecture, and locations and dimensions of
buildings and structures.
F. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development (in
the event no variances or relaxations of standards are required) or the
Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
approval of any proposed site plan within 62 days after submission of a
complete application for site plan approval, or within such additional
time as shall be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development or the
Planning Board to act upon any application for site plan approval within
the aforesaid periods shall not constitute approval of such site plan.
G. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development or
the Planning Board may, as a condition of approval of a site plan,
require the applicant to post one or more performance bonds, or other
security acceptable to the Town, in sufficient amount(s), to ensure that
all parking, curbing, sidewalks, accessways, open spaces, landscaping,
drainage, and sanitary sewers shown on the site plan will be
satisfactorily installed. The applicant may apply to the Commissioner of
the Department of Planning and Development and/or the Planning
Board for release or reduction of such bonds as the improvements
covered by such bonds are satisfactorily constructed.
H. A site plan approval for proposed development in the PSPRD shall
expire five years after the date of the approval unless, within such time,
a valid building permit has been obtained in connection with such
development. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commissioner of the
Department of Planning and Development or the Planning Board may
§ 68-741 ISLIP CODE § 68-741
66:1192
§ 68-742. Subdivisions and road openings.
grant up to four extensions of such site plan approval, of 12 months
each, for good cause shown by the applicant.
I. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development or
the Planning Board may waive the requirement for site plan review and/
or approval for any previously approved site plan, except any detention/
retention stormwater management basin or swale located in a buffer
area pursuant to this section, where:
(1) The proposed development does not involve an increase of more
than 1,500 square feet in gross floor area, as defined in this article;
(2) The change in use or occupancy involved in the proposed
development does not require waiver or relaxation of any parking,
area, setback, landscaping, or other applicable requirement and
does not, in the determination of the Planning Board or the
Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development,
increase the intensity of the use of the property; or
(3) The Planning Board or the Commissioner of the Department of
Planning and Development finds that the waiver will not
significantly and adversely affect existing drainage, topography,
traffic circulation, buffers, and other considerations of site plan
approval set forth in this section.
J. If a landowner in the PSPRD wishes to amend an approved site plan
covering such landowner's property in the PSPRD, due to a change in
circumstances or for any other reason, it may apply for such
amendment to the official or board that approved the original site plan,
and such application for amendment shall be reviewed and acted upon
in accordance with the criteria and timing provisions set forth herein
for the initial approval of site plans.
A. Except as set forth herein, the Planning Board and the Commissioner of
the Department of Planning and Development shall process, review, and
approve land subdivision applications and proposed road openings in
the PSPRD pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in the
Town Law and the Town's Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations.
B. At the time of final approval of any subdivision application in the
PSPRD, any of the total development set forth in § 68-737, above, that
has not been previously developed or granted site plan approval shall
be allocated by the owners of the land included in the PSPRD at the
time of adoption of this article or by their successors in interest to each
of the proposed subdivision parcels, and such allocation shall be shown
on the subdivision map and established by covenant, recorded with the
Office of the Suffolk County Clerk, and a copy of such recorded
covenant shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Department of
§ 68-741 WATER QUALITY § 68-742
66:1193
§ 68-743. Roadways.
Planning and Development. Such covenant shall specifically
acknowledge that the development allocation(s) therein are subject to
amendment by subsequent agreement, by the owners of parcels in the
PSPRD, to transfer such potential development between or among their
respective parcels. In the event of any such subsequent agreement, the
aforesaid recorded covenant shall be amended to reflect the modified
development allocation(s), such amended covenant shall be recorded
in the Office of the Suffolk County Clerk, and a copy of such recorded
amended covenant shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the
Department of Planning and Development.
A. All roadways in the PSPRD shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with 1) the street type designations set forth in the
Regulating Plans included in this article, 2) the following design
specifications, and 3) the construction and materials standards set forth
in the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
The Town shall only accept dedication of the internal ring road, the Fish
Path Road connecting to Commack Road, and the roads linking Crooked
Hill Road and the Sagtikos Parkway to the ring road, so long as such
roadways comply with the design and construction specifications set
forth in this article and the construction and materials standards set
forth in the Town of Islip Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations. All other roadways shall be owned and maintained
privately.
B. The design specifications for the street types in the PSPRD shall be as
follows:
Legend:
Street Type
Road Width
(feet)
— Type A 60
— Type B 40
Type B with bike lane 43
§ 68-742 ISLIP CODE § 68-743
66:1194
Legend:
Street Type
Road Width
(feet)
Type C 30
Type D 30
Type E 24
Shared use park and plaza
path
N/A
Note: Locations of street types shown for illustrative purposes and
subject to change
(1) Street Type A.
Function: ring road.
Design speed: 30 to 35 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): 20 feet typical.
Curb to curb: 60 feet.
On-street parking: N/A.
Travel lanes: 12 feet; 2 each way; 4 total.
Median: 12 feet minimum.
Total right-of-way (ROW): 87 feet typical.
(2) Street Type B.
§ 68-743 WATER QUALITY § 68-743
66:1195
Function: two-way local street with parking.
Design speed: 15 to 20 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): 15 feet typical.
Curb to curb: 40 feet.
On-street parking: 8 feet.
Travel lanes: 12 feet; 1 each way; 2 total.
Median: N/A.
Total right-of-way (ROW): 60 feet typical.
(3) Street Type B with bike lane.
Function: two-way local street with parking.
Design speed: 15 to 20 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): 13.5 feet typical.
Curb to curb: 43 feet.
On-street parking: 8 feet.
Travel lanes: 12 feet; 1 each way; 2 total.
Median: N/A.
Total right-of-way (ROW): 63 feet typical.
(4) Street Type C.
§ 68-743 ISLIP CODE § 68-743
66:1196
Function: Alley/yield street.
Design speed: 5 to 10 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): varies; 17 feet typical.
Curb to curb: 30 feet.
On-street parking: 8 feet (potential parking lane).
Travel lanes: 11 feet; 1 each way; 2 total.
Median: N/A.
Total right-of-way (ROW): 50 feet typical.
(5) Street Type D.
Function: local street (without parking).
Design speed: 15 to 25 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): 17 feet typical.
Curb to curb: 30 feet.
On-street parking: N/A
Travel lanes: 12 feet; 1 each way; 2 total.
Median: N/A.
Total right-of-way (ROW): 50 feet typical.
(6) Street Type E.
§ 68-743 WATER QUALITY § 68-743
66:1197
§ 68-744. Open development area.
Pursuant to Town Board resolution adopted pursuant to § 280-a(4) of the
New York State Town Law, after due referral to and report of the Planning
Board, the PSPRD constitutes an open development area within the Town,
wherein building permits may be issued for the erection of structures to
which access is given by right-of-way or easement, upon such conditions
and subject to such limitations as may be prescribed by general or special
rule of the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development
or the Planning Board.
§ 68-745. Parking.
Function: park street.
Design speed: 20 to 25 miles per hour.
Building to back of curb (BOC): 17.5 feet.
Curb to curb: 106 feet.
On-street parking: 9 feet.
Travel lanes: 13 feet; 1 each way; 2 total.
Median: 62 feet minimum (central park).
Total right-of-way (ROW): 126 feet (including park).
A. Generally, parking requirements for proposed uses in the PSPRD shall
be determined by the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and
Development or the Planning Board during site plan review.
B. The smart growth character and transit-oriented design of the PSPRD
reduces the parking needs for individual uses in the PSPRD. Therefore,
adherence to parking requirements for other zoning districts in the
Town, as presented, for example, in the Table of Minimum Required
Parking Spaces in the Town's Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, would result in the provision of an excess of parking
spaces and a consequent reduction in land available for open space,
public spaces, landscaping, and streetscape in the PSPRD. To avoid
such an undesirable condition, a special method for computing parking
requirements in the PSPRD is provided in this section.
§ 68-743 ISLIP CODE § 68-745
66:1198
C. Parking structures within the Town Center DU1 shall be screened/
wrapped within commercial/office/residential uses to provide a
meaningful street wall along all private and public roads.
D. In the PSPRD, the minimum number of parking spaces for proposed
uses shall be determined by calculating the aggregate parking
required, as follows:
(1) Calculate the number of parking spaces required for each
component use by applying the rates set forth in Table 1, below (for
each proposed use not specifically listed in the table, use the rate
listed in the table for the use that is most similar to the proposed
use). These rates reflect a reduced parking demand because of the
decreased motor vehicle trip-making associated with the
availability of public transportation serving the PSPRD; and
(2) Add together the parking spaces required for each of the
component uses to obtain the aggregate number of parking spaces
required for all proposed uses.
E. No parking shall be required for the following uses if the Commissioner
of the Department of Planning and Development or the Planning Board
determines they are accessory to a primary residential use:
(1) In-home offices and art studio spaces, provided that they are meant
for sole use by the home's occupant(s), and do not regularly attract
external employees or customers to the home; and
(2) Below-grade storage facilities, provided that they are associated
with individual residential units in the same building.
F. Driveway, garage, and on-street parking spaces may be counted
towards satisfying parking requirements under this section, provided
that any driveway space must be on a driveway at least 20 feet deep.
G. On-street parking spaces adjacent to a use(s) shall be allocated towards
the required parking for such use(s) before a number of off-street
parking spaces is determined for such use(s).
H. Where an on-site dedicated car-sharing service is proposed, each
interior parking space dedicated to a car-sharing vehicle may be used
to replace 15 required parking spaces.
§ 68-745 WATER QUALITY § 68-745
66:1199
Table 1
Required Parking Spaces for Individual Uses
PSPRD Zoning District
Component or Use Category Number of Spaces per Unit or
Measurement
Retail uses, including, but not
limited to, florist shops,
stationery/card stores, hardware/
paint stores, specialty stores,
bookstores, dry goods stores,
clothing stores, bakeries, variety
stores, drugstores, delicatessens,
personal service shops and stores,
photography studios/stores,
business service establishments,
appliance stores, sporting goods
stores, department stores, sales
kiosks, and convenience markets
1 per each 250 square feet of
gross floor area (GFA) for the first
500,000 square feet and 1 per
each 350 square feet of GFA
thereafter
Offices and banks 1 per each 250 square feet of GFA
for the first 500,000 square feet
and 1 per each 350 square feet
GFA thereafter
Medical, dental, veterinary
offices, hospitals, and animal care
centers
1 per each 250 square feet of GFA
Restaurants, luncheonettes, cafes,
quick-service restaurants,
cafeterias, and similar uses
1 per each 6 seats or 1 per 6
persons legally accommodated,
whichever is less
Hotels 0.75 per sleeping room or suite
Entertainment facilities,
including, but not limited to,
performing arts centers, live
theaters, performance venues,
and aquaria; assembly or social
recreation centers; and auditoria
1 per each 500 square feet of
GFA, or 1 per each 4 seats,
whichever is less
Day-care centers and nursery
schools
1 per each 400 square feet of GFA
For-profit charter schools 1 per classroom
Residences, including, but not
limited to, apartments and
multifamily residences (but not
including senior citizen
apartments)
1.5 per dwelling unit
Senior citizen apartments 1 per dwelling unit
§ 68-745 ISLIP CODE § 68-745
66:1200
Table 1
Required Parking Spaces for Individual Uses
PSPRD Zoning District
Assisted-living facilities and
congregate-care facilities
0.5 per unit, plus 1 per each 2
employees on maximum shift
Nursing homes 0.2 per bed, plus 1 per each 2
employees on maximum shift
In-home offices and professional
uses
1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Artists' lofts 1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Storage facilities 1 per each 5,000 square feet of
GFA
Museums and art galleries 1 per each 400 square feet of GFA
over 2,000 square feet
Health clubs and gymnasia 1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Bowling centers 2 per alley
Recreational, sports, and fitness
facilities
1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Conference centers 1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Community facility buildings,
community service buildings, post
offices
1 per each 500 square feet of GFA
Houses of worship 1 per each 4 seats or 4 persons
legally accommodated
I. It is recognized, in view of the smart growth character and transitoriented
design of the PSPRD, that the number of parking spaces for
proposed uses, as calculated above, may not be initially necessary or
may never be necessary to provide for the actual parking needs of the
proposed uses. During the site plan review process, a maximum of 50%
reduction of parking required in Table 1 may be reserved. All approved
site plans shall denote the location of any reserved parking. All
reserved residential parking spaces shall be located within 1/4 mile of
the related residential uses and within the Town Center DU1
development unit subdistrict as the residential use. All reserved
commercial parking spaces shall be located within 1/4 mile of the
related commercial use and within the Town Center DU1.
J. Any site plan approval for proposed development in the PSPRD shall
require that sufficient lands or facilities be reserved or set aside for the
future provision of any required parking, as calculated under
Subsections C through G, above, that is not required to be constructed
pursuant to Subsection I, above. The locations of such lands or facilities
for future provision of parking shall be shown on the approved site plan.
§ 68-745 WATER QUALITY § 68-745
66:1201
§ 68-746. Exterior lighting.
K. Parking that is not initially constructed, pursuant to Subsection H,
above, shall thereafter be constructed only upon written determination,
by the Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development
or the Planning Board, that such unconstructed parking (or some
portion thereof) has become actually necessary for the use(s) for which
such parking was reserved. If no such written determination has been
issued within seven years after all certificates of occupancy have been
issued for the buildings shown on an approved site plan, then the
unconstructed parking shall be deemed to be unnecessary for the use(s)
for which lands and/or facilities that were set aside or reserved shall be
deemed released and may be used for any purpose(s) allowed by this
article or other applicable law, but may not exceed the maximum
allowable gross floor area of the Pilgrim State Planned Redevelopment
District.
L. Lands and/or facilities set aside or reserved for possible future parking,
pursuant to Subsection I, above, shall be released by the Commissioner
of the Department of Planning and Development or the Planning Board,
upon application of the owner of such lands or facilities or the site plan
applicant whose application required such set-aside or reservation [or
such applicant's successor(s) in interest], upon a showing that the
parking for which such lands or facilities were set aside is not or is no
longer necessary for the use(s) for which such lands and/or facilities for
future parking were set aside or reserved. Upon such release, the
released lands or facilities may be used for any purpose(s) allowed by
this article or other applicable law.
M. Parking spaces required under this section need not be on the same
parcel as the uses for which they are reserved, but shall be in
accordance with Subsection H relative to location within Town Center
DU1 and distance from the affected residential and/or commercial uses.
N. The Commissioner of the Department of Planning and Development or
the Planning Board may grant waivers of the above parking
requirements for good cause shown.
O. The number and locations of all loading and unloading areas shall be
subject to the review of the Commissioner of the Department of
Planning and Development or the Planning Board. All loading and
unloading areas shall be screened.
P. Nothing in this section or elsewhere shall preclude the owner(s) and/or
operator(s) of the private or nondedicated lands or facilities that are
covered by or include the parking spaces required pursuant to this
section from charging fees for the use of such parking spaces.
A. Recognizing the unique character and intent of the PSPRD, the exterior
lighting regulations set forth in this section constitute the exclusive
lighting standards and restrictions in the PSPRD, and supersede
§ 68-745 ISLIP CODE § 68-746
66:1202
lighting regulations applicable in other zoning districts and the Town of
Islip Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
B. Ownership.
(1) All exterior lighting located within a dedicated street shall be
owned and maintained in perpetuity by the adjacent land owner,
successors, lienholders or property association. Restrictive
covenants with hold harmless waiver(s) of liability shall be
recorded against the affected property disclosing this ownership
maintenance responsibility. A detailed lighting plan shall be
included with each site plan submission. All exterior streetlighting
shall uniformly match the development unit subdistrict in which it
is located.
(2) Alternative. A Town lighting district shall be established prior to
the issuance of any certificate of occupancy to address the initial/
continuous maintenance of exterior streetlighting fixtures not
consistent with the Town streetlighting standards.
C. Streetlighting shall maintain an average illumination between 0.5
footcandle and 1.5 footcandles unless an alternative level of
illumination is approved by the Commissioner of Planning and
Development.
D. Submittal requirements. A lighting plan shall be submitted with each
site plan that details the location and specifications of all lighting
provided. An ISO footcandle diagram shall also be provided to indicate
the level and extent of proposed lighting.
E. Lighting types. (NOTE: This is not an exhaustive list of acceptable
lighting types, but is intended for illustrative purposes.)
(1) Post; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
3. Maximum light standard height: 25 feet.
§ 68-746 WATER QUALITY § 68-746
66:1203
(2) Column; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
3. Maximum light standard height: 13 feet.
(3) Double column; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
3. Maximum light standard height: 13 feet.
(4) Reflected downlight; locations: DU1.
§ 68-746 ISLIP CODE § 68-746
66:1204
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
3. Not permitted within a dedicated public street right-of-way.
(5) Light column; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
3. Not permitted within a dedicated public street right-of-way.
(6) Hanging lights: locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. Must not include direct illumination (i.e., spotlights) of any
residential property outside the PSPRD. This restriction shall
not preclude lighting from being visible from outside the
PSPRD.
2. Must maintain illumination levels consistent with those
recommended in the most current IESNA (Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America) Recommended
Practices.
§ 68-746 WATER QUALITY § 68-746
66:1205
§ 68-747. Signs.
3. Not permitted within a dedicated public street right-of-way.
A. Recognizing the unique character and intent of the PSPRD, the signage
regulations set forth in this section constitute the exclusive signage
standards and restrictions in the PSPRD, and supersede signage
regulations applicable in other zoning districts.
B. Temporary signs.
(1) Temporary sale or lease signs. A temporary, nonilluminated sign
limited in area to 32 square feet, advertising real estate for sale or
lease or announcing contemplated improvements of real estate on
which it is placed. The sign shall be removed immediately upon sale
or lease of the property or when construction of the contemplated
improvements begin.
(2) Temporary construction signs. A temporary, nonilluminated sign
limited in area to 32 square feet, erected in connection with new
construction work and displayed on the premises only during such
time as the actual construction work is in progress.
C. The following types of nonilluminated and illuminated signs shall be
permitted in all PSPRD subdistricts, subject to a Town sign permit and
to the conditions set forth below: (NOTE: This is not an exhaustive list
of acceptable signage types, but is intended for illustrative purposes.)
(1) Address or nameplate; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any dedicated street (other than
traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of
drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Maximum size of 20 square feet.
6. Plastic sign panels and cabinet/sign boxes are prohibited.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(2) Awning with sign; locations: DU1.
§ 68-746 ISLIP CODE § 68-747
66:1206
Notes:
1. May not be in a non-sidewalk paved area of any dedicated
street (other than traffic control or construction signs),
obstruct the visibility of drivers or conflict with or obstruct a
traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Uplighting within awning is prohibited.
6. May not be vinyl or plastic material.
7. Minimum clearance to sidewalk: 9 feet.
8. May not be immoral or obscene.
(3) Band sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any dedicated street (other than
traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of
drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. 0.5-foot maximum sign square feet per linear length of tenant
building facade.
6. Plastic sign panels and cabinet/sign boxes are prohibited.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(4) Hanging sign; locations: DU1.
§ 68-747 WATER QUALITY § 68-747
66:1207
Notes:
1. May not be in a non-sidewalk paved area of any dedicated
street (other than traffic control or construction signs),
obstruct the visibility of drivers or conflict with or obstruct a
traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Minimum nine-foot clearance above sidewalk.
6. Maximum of 10 square feet per tenant facade.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(5) Marquee with sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a non-sidewalk paved area of any street (other
than traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the
visibility of drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control
device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Minimum nine-foot clearance above sidewalk.
6. Limited to one marquee sign per tenant facade.
7. Maximum size of 0.25 square foot per linear foot of tenant
facade.
8. Plastic sign panels and cabinet/sign boxes are prohibited.
9. May not be immoral or obscene.
§ 68-747 ISLIP CODE § 68-747
66:1208
(6) Outdoor display case; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any street (other than traffic
control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of drivers
or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Maximum of 30 square feet per tenant facade.
6. Plastic sign panels and cabinet/sign boxes are prohibited.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(7) Window sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any street (other than traffic
control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of drivers
or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Shall not exceed 35% of any individual window surface.
6. May not be immoral or obscene.
(8) Blade sign; locations: DU1.
§ 68-747 WATER QUALITY § 68-747
66:1209
Notes:
1. May not be in a non-sidewalk paved area of any street (other
than traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the
visibility of drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control
device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. Limit of two blade signs per building facade.
6. Maximum size of 40 square feet.
7. Minimum nine-foot sidewalk clearance.
8. May not be immoral or obscene.
(9) Neon sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any street (other than traffic
control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of drivers
or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. May not exceed 35% coverage of any individual window
surface.
6. Maximum size of 0.25 square foot per linear foot of tenant
facade.
7. Exterior neon shall be enclosed to prelude bird nesting.
8. May not be immoral or obscene.
§ 68-747 ISLIP CODE § 68-747
66:1210
(10) Building facade sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. No more than one such sign per each side of the building shall
be placed above the sixth story of any building.
2. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building.
3. No sign shall exceed 15 feet in height unless such exception
is waived by the Commissioner of the Department of Planning
and Development or the Planning Board.
4. Maximum size of 1.0 square foot of building facade length.
5. No more than one such sign per each side of the building shall
be placed above the sixth story of any building.
6. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(11) Media screen; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. May not be in a paved area of any dedicated street (other than
traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of
drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. A sign which motion pictures or video which requires electric
energy to function.
3. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
4. May not be attached to a tree.
5. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
6. Maximum of 0.5 square foot per linear foot of building facade.
7. May not be immoral or obscene.
(12) Freestanding sign; locations: DU1.
§ 68-747 WATER QUALITY § 68-747
66:1211
§ 68-748. Determinations by Planning Board.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all applications and other
matters considered by the Planning Board for the PSPRD may be
determined without a public hearing.
Notes:
1. May not be in any dedicated street right-of-way (other than
traffic control or construction signs), obstruct the visibility of
drivers or conflict with or obstruct a traffic control device.
2. May not obstruct a required window or door in such a manner
as to prevent free egress or ingress.
3. May not be attached to a tree.
4. May not use breakable glass in its construction, except for
glass used in illumination.
5. No sign shall be located within a dedicated Town right-of-way.
6. Architecturally significant opaque base is required. Pylons
are prohibited.
7. Maximum height of 25 feet.
8. Maximum of 250 square feet.
9. May not be immoral or obscene.
(13) Monument sign; locations: DU1.
Notes:
1. No sign shall be located within a dedicated Town street rightof-
way.
2. Maximum of two per building facade or property.
3. Maximum height of nine feet.
4. Maximum 150 square feet per sign.
5. May not be immoral or obscene.
§ 68-747 ISLIP CODE § 68-749
66:1212
§ 68-749. Amendment of Master Plan.
Upon application of the owners of the lands included in the PSPRD at the
time of adoption of this article or their successors in interest, the Master
Plan described in § 68-729, above, may be amended by the Town Board as
legally permissible. The revision or relocation of buffer-setback areas and/
or areas of open space, as well as modifications to streets or roadways on
the Master Plan, shall not be considered amendments for purposes of this
section, and may be approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Planning and Development or the Planning Board in the course of site plan
review.
§ 68-750. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article shall be
adjudged or determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment or determination shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the
remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article directly involved in said
court judgment or determination.
§ 68-749 WATER QUALITY § 68-750
66:1213
Appendix
Chapter A78
ZONING APPENDIX
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 2-15-2005 Tax exemption for
volunteer fire fighters and
ambulance workers
amendment
Ch. 48H
4-5-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-5-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-3-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
7-12-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
2-2005 8-16-2005 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
3-2005 11-15-2005 Property maintenance:
placarding of unsafe
residential structures
Ch. 6A
4-2005 12-13-2005 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
1-2006 1-31-2006 Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law
amendment
Ch. 14
2-2006 3-28-2006 Department of Code
Enforcement repealer;
Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
Department amendment;
Department of Town
Attorney amendment
Chs. 3E (footnote
only); 36A and 50
3-2006 7-11-2006 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
Res. 7-11-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-2006 9-12-2006 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
§ 68-750 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1214
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2006 11-14-2006 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
6-2006 12-12-2006 Freshwater streams
repealer
Ch. 47 (reference
only)
7-2006 12-12-2006 Wetlands and
watercourses amendment
Ch. 67
12-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2007 3-27-2007 Planning Board alternate
members
Ch. 1B, Art. I
3-27-2007 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
2-2007 4-24-2007 Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law
amendment
Ch. 14
3-2007 5-22-2007 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
4-2007 5-22-2007 Terms of office Ch. 49A
5-22-2007 Zoning amendment
(rental dwelling units)
Ch. 68
6-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
8-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
9-11-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-2007 10-16-2007 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
6-2007 11-27-2007 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 47
11-27-2007 Excavations in streets
amendment
Ch. 16
7-2007 11-27-2007 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
2-5-2008 Vehicular uses: Fire
Island amendment
Ch. 61
1-2008 2-5-2008 Taxation: exemption for
Cold War veterans
Ch. 48I
2-2008 2-5-2008 Empire Zone amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 8-2008
3-2008 2-26-2008 Residency of Town
employees amendment
Ch. 17A
4-2008 2-26-2008 Sewers: illicit discharges,
activities and connections
to storm sewer
Ch. 43A, Art. I
§ DL-1 WATER QUALITY § DL-1
66:1215
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-29-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-28-2008 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
5-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-2008 6-10-2008 Solid waste amendment Ch. 21
6-2008 7-15-2008 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
7-2008 8-12-2008 Empire Zone amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 8-2008
8-12-2008 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
8-2008 9-9-2008 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
9-2008 9-9-2008 Solid waste amendment Ch. 21
9-9-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
10-2008 5-28-2008 Wetlands and
watercourses amendment
Ch. 67
11-2008 5-28-2008 Department of Planning
and Development
amendment
Ch. 39A
12-2008 10-21-2008 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
13-2008 11-18-2008 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
11-18-2008 Plumbers: licensing
amendment
Ch. 40
12-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
14-2008 12-16-2008 Solid waste amendment Ch. 21
1-2009 1-27-2009 Animals: general
regulations of dogs
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. I
2-24-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
2-2009 3-10-2009 Property maintenance:
procedure for placarding
of unsafe residential
structures amendment
Ch. 6A, Art. I
3-10-2009 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 47A
3-10-2009 Junkyards amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 29; 68
§ DL-1 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1216
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2009 4-14-2009 Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
Department amendment;
parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment;
Department of Public
Safety Enforcement;
Department of Town
Attorney amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 36A; 37;
40B; 50; see Ch.
59
4-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-27-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-27-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-2009 6-23-2009 Collateral loan brokers Ch. 9
6-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-2009 7-14-2009 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
6-2009 8-11-2009 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
8-11-2009 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
8-11-2009 Plumbers: licensing
amendment
Ch. 40
7-2009 9-15-2009 Criminal background
checks
Ch. 18
8-2009 9-15-2009 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 47
9-2009 9-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
10-2009 8-11-2009 Abandoned and
impounded property
amendment
Ch. 60
11-2009 9-29-2009 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
9-29-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
§ DL-1 WATER QUALITY § DL-1
66:1217
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-29-2009 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
12-2009 12-1-2009 Public nuisances
amendment
Ch. 40A
12-1-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
13-2009 12-15-2009 Graffiti amendment Ch. 23A
12-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
12-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-26-2010 Shellfish amendment Ch. 44
1-26-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
2-9-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2010 1-26-2010 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
2-2010 3-2-2010 Code of ethics and
financial disclosure law
amendment
Ch. 14
3-2-2010 Shellfish amendment Ch. 44
3-2010 3-16-2010 Towing businesses
amendment
Ch. 51
4-2010 4-13-2010 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
5-2010 5-11-2010 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
6-8-2010 Department of Planning
and Development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 39A; 68
6-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-22-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-2010 6-28-2010 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 53
7-2010 8-17-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 21
8-2010 8-17-2010 Animals: equine livestock,
pigeons and poultry
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IV
9-2010 8-17-2010 Pesticides: maintenance
of Town-owned properties
Ch. 7, Art. I
§ DL-1 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1218
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2010 8-17-2010 Retirement incentive
program amendment
Ch. 17B
11-2010 10-13-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 21
10-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
12-2010 11-30-2010 Animals: general
regulation of dogs
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. I
1-2011 1-25-2011 Property maintenance:
community preservation
and anti-blight
enforcement
Ch. 6A, Art. II
2-2011 2-8-2011 Aviation and
Transportation
Department amendment;
Department of Public
Safety Enforcement
amendment
Chs. 3A; 40B
3-2011 3-8-2011 Code of Ethics and
Financial Disclosure Law
amendment
Ch. 14
3-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-2011 4-5-2011 General regulation of
dogs amendment
Ch. 12, Art. I
4-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-5-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
5-10-2011 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 37; 68
6-7-2011 Peddlers amendment Ch. 39
7-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
7-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
8-16-2011 Ice cream trucks
amendment
Ch. 28A
8-16-2011 Littering amendment Ch. 32
9-7-2011 Peddlers amendment Ch. 39
9-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
§ DL-1 WATER QUALITY § DL-1
66:1219
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-25-2011 Taxation: partial
exemption for senior
citizens amendment
Ch. 48
10-25-2011 Taxation: partial
exemption for veterans
amendment
Ch. 48D
10-25-2011 Taxation: exemption for
persons with disabilities
amendment
Ch. 48G
10-25-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
11-15-2011 Noise amendment Ch. 35
12-13-2011 Shellfish amendment Ch. 44
12-13-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
3-6-2012 Housing: discriminatory
practices amendment
Ch. 26
1-2012 3-20-2012 Taxation: exemption for
volunteer fire fighters and
ambulance workers
amendment
Ch. 48H
3-20-2012 Peddlers amendment Ch. 39
2-2012 5-8-2012 Department of Human
Services amendment
Ch. 28
3-2012 5-8-2012 Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
Department amendment
Ch. 36A
5-8-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
4-2012 6-19-2012 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
6-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-19-2012 Shellfish amendment Ch. 44
5-2012 8-14-2012 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
6-2012 8-14-2012 Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
Department amendment
Ch. 36A
7-2012 9-11-2012 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 2
§ DL-1 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1220
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2012 10-9-2012 Budget; levy increase NCM
12-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2013 1-15-2013 Traffic Code amendment See Ch. 59
2-2013 1-15-2013 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
3-2013 1-15-2013 Animals: equine livestock,
pigeons and poultry
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IV
4-2013 1-15-2013 Department of Planning
and Development
amendment
Ch. 39A
2-12-2013 Parades, races and
assemblies amendment;
carnivals, circuses and
outdoor shows
amendment
Ch. 36, Arts. I, II
5-2013 3-5-2013 Code of Ethics and
financial disclosure law
amendment
Ch. 14
6-2013 3-5-2013 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
7-2013 3-5-2013 Abandoned and
impounded property
amendment
Ch. 60
3-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
8-2013 4-23-2013 Fire prevention Ch. 19
4-23-2013 Solicitors and canvassers
amendment
Ch. 46
5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
9-2013 7-16-2013 Graffiti amendment Ch. 23A
9-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
10-2013 11-19-2013 Taxation: Superstorm
Sandy assessment relief
Ch. 48J
1-2014 3-4-2014 Traffic Code amendment See Ch. 59
§ DL-1 WATER QUALITY § DL-1
66:1221
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-4-2014 Peddlers amendment Ch. 39
3-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
8-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
2-2014 10-14-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 6A
12-2-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-7-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-7-2015 Animals: equine livestock,
pigeons and poultry
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IV
4-7-2015 Towing businesses
amendment
Ch. 51
6-9-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
8-4-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
12-15-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2016 2-9-2016 Department of Public
Safety Enforcement
amendment; Department
of Town Attorney
amendment
Ch. 40B; Ch. 50
2-9-2016 Peddlers amendment Ch. 39
2-2016 3-8-2016 Salaries and
compensation
Ch. 62
3-29-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-24-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
5-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
6-28-2016 Nighttime operation of
aircraft repealer
Ch. 3B, reference
only
6-28-2016 Airport, noise allocation
repealer
Ch. 3D, reference
only
6-28-2016 Noise surcharge on
airport operations
repealer
Ch. 3F, reference
only
6-28-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 49
3-2016 9-20-2016 Code of ethics and
financial disclosure law
amendment
Ch. 14
§ DL-1 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1222
Local
Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2016 10-18-2016 Tax levy limit override NCM
6-7-2016 Plumbers: licensing
amendment
Ch. 40
6-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2017 3-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
4-25-2017 Parks, swimming pools,
marinas, boats and
waterways amendment
Ch. 37
2-2017 7-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
3-2017 7-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
7-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
9-19-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
11-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
1-2018 5-15-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
5-15-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 68
7-17-2018 Solicitors and Canvassers
Amendment
Ch. 46
10-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 68
2-2018 12-18-2018 Department of Public
Safety Enforcement
Amendment; Department
of Town Attorney
Amendment
Ch. 40B; Ch. 50
1-2019 4-16-2019 Commercial Vehicles;
Weight Limits
Amendment
Ch. TC5
2-2019 5-14-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 19
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
9-24-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 68 248
9-24-2019 Traffic Code
amendment
See Ch. 59
10-22-2019 Traffic Code
amendment
See Ch. 59
§ DL-1 WATER QUALITY § DL-1
66:1223
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
11-19-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 68 249
12-17-2019 Traffic Code
Amendment
See Ch. 59
12-17-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 68 250
3-2019 12-17-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 68 250
Traffic Code
Part I: The Traffic Law
Chapter TC1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ DL-1 ISLIP CODE § DL-1
66:1224
ARTICLE I
Definitions; Word Usage
§ TC1-1. Definitions of words and phrases.
A. The words and phrases used in this Code shall for the purpose of this
Code have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article I of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article I of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purpose
of this Code:
CODE — The Uniform Traffic Code of the Town of Islip, Suffolk County,
New York.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
PARKING LOT OR AREA — Any part of land designated by the owner or
owners of said land to be used by the public for the purpose of parking
vehicles.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter, not inconsistent
with this Code, placed or erected for the regulation of parking by
authority of this Code. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by this Town and,
when operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking
time.[Amended 3-4-2014]
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone
adjacent to a parking meter or located in an area controlled by a
parking meter and duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by
lines painted or otherwise durably marked upon the curb or the surface
of the street adjacent to or adjoining a parking meter.[Amended
3-4-2014]
PARKING METER ZONE — Any street and/or any designated location
set aside under provisions of this Code for the installation of parking
meter and upon which parking meters have been installed and are in
operation.
PERSONAL TRAILER — Any device mounted upon wheels and
incapable of locomotion under its own power, which is normally
connected to a motorized unit, for transporting or hauling boats,
homes, automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, equipment,
and other materials, as well as other recreational trailers.[Added
5-24-2011]
SCHOOL DAYS — Days when school is officially open for regular
sessions.
§ TC1-1 WATER QUALITY § TC1-1
66:1225
§ TC1-2. Word usage; interpretation.
SCHOOL SPEED LIMITS — That speed limit established on any portion
of a highway passing a school building and for not more than 300 feet in
either direction from the building line of a school abutting on a highway.
A. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein or on
traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard which is in
current use in this state.
B. Measurements. Any linear measurements specified for various
regulations contained in this Code shall be deemed to be approximate
and such measurements, and the regulation to which they pertain, shall
not be affected or altered in any way by the widening of a street, by the
construction of curbs, gutters or sidewalks or by any other action which
might tend to obliterate the point from which such measurements were
originally made. Unless otherwise indicated, measurements shall be
made from the nearest curbline of the street referred to in the location
description or, if there is no curbline, from the nearest pavement edge.
C. For the purposes of this Code, all streets and highways in the Town shall
be deemed to run north-south or east-west, and streets or highways
running generally parallel to the direction indicated shall be deemed to
run in such direction.
§ TC1-1 ISLIP CODE § TC1-2
66:1226
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ TC1-3. Authority to install traffic control devices. [Amended
3-4-2014]
The Department of Public Works of the Town of Islip, Division of Traffic
Safety, shall install and maintain traffic control devices when and as
required under the provisions of this Code, to make effective the provisions
of this Code, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of regulating, warning
or guiding traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ TC1-4. Schedules; regulations.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this Code, there is hereby established a
system of schedules, appearing as Part II of this Code, in which shall be
entered all regulations after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed
a part of the section to which they refer. All regulations shall be adopted
with reference to the appropriate schedule as indicated in the various
sections of this Code.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Town Board, in accordance with
provisions of the Town Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by an
officer or agency authorized by the Town Board to adopt regulations
pursuant to § 1603(e) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ TC1-3 WATER QUALITY § TC1-4
66:1227

ARTICLE III
Penalties
[Amended 12-15-2009; 3-5-2013]
§ TC1-5. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided, every person convicted of a traffic infraction
or an offense against any provision of this Code which is not an offense
against any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more
than $75 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $150
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after
the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ TC1-5 WATER QUALITY § TC1-5
66:1229

ARTICLE IV
Repealer; Severability; Effective Date
§ TC1-6. Repealer.
All prior ordinances, regulations and rules, or parts of such, of the Town of
Islip regulating traffic and parking and not included in this Code are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not:
§ TC1-7. Severability.
If any chapter, Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision of this Code shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
to the chapter, Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ TC1-8. When effective.
A. Affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or committed in violation of any ordinance, regulation or rule
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Code.
B. Affect an ordinance adopted August 5, 1969, and included in the Code
of the Town of Islip as Chapter 61, Vehicular Uses: Fire Island.
C. Affect any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted after November 15,
1977, and before the effective date of this Code. Such ordinances, rules
or regulations shall be deemed to be a part of this Code and adoption of
this Code shall be understood to incorporate such ordinances, rules and
regulations. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the
provisions of such ordinances, rules or regulations and the provisions of
this Code, the provisions of such ordinances, rules or regulations shall
control.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and § 46 of the
Highway Law of the State of New York, this Code and any regulations
adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this Code and any regulations adopted hereunder
which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law and § 46 of the Highway Law of the State of New York shall take
effect from and after the day on which approval in writing is received
from both the New York State Department of Transportation and the
New York State Department of Public Works.
§ TC1-6 WATER QUALITY § TC1-8
66:1231
Chapter TC2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ TC1-8 ISLIP CODE § TC1-8
66:1232
ARTICLE I
Traffic Control Signals
§ TC2-1. Installation of traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals, including flashing signals and fire signals, shall
be installed, maintained and operated at the intersections and locations
described in Schedule A.
§ TC2-1 WATER QUALITY § TC2-1
66:1233

ARTICLE II
Turning Movements
§ TC2-2. (Reserved)
§ TC2-3. Prohibited turns.
The turning of vehicles is hereby prohibited as indicated (left, right, right on
red, etc.) at the intersections and locations described in Schedule C during
the hours designated in said schedule.
§ TC2-4. U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction (otherwise
known as a U-turn) is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule D.
§ TC2-2 WATER QUALITY § TC2-4
66:1235

ARTICLE III
One-Way Streets; Driveways
§ TC2-5. One-way streets.
The streets or highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule E are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated in said
schedule, during the hours specified.
§ TC2-6. Parking area exits and entrances.
The driveways described in Schedule F, between highways and off-street
parking areas in the town, shall be used for exit or entrance only, as
indicated in said schedule.
§ TC2-5 WATER QUALITY § TC2-6
66:1237

ARTICLE IV
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ TC2-7. Stop and yield intersections designated.
The intersections described in Schedule G are hereby designated as stop or
yield intersections, as indicated, and stop or yield signs shall be erected as
provided in said schedule.
§ TC2-7 WATER QUALITY § TC2-7
66:1239

ARTICLE V
Speed Restrictions
§ TC2-8. General speed limit.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Article, 30 miles per hour
is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed
on or along streets and highways within the town.
§ TC2-9. Speed limits on certain streets.
The speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets, or parts
of streets, described in Schedule H shall be as indicated in said schedule.
The maximum speed limit for streets which are a part of the state highway
system shall be as established by the State Department of Transportation.
§ TC2-10. School speed limits.
The speed limit at which vehicles may proceed along highways and streets,
or parts thereof, passing school buildings and for not more than 300 feet
in either direction from the building line of such schools are hereby
established as described in Schedule I during the hours indicated on school
days.
§ TC2-8 WATER QUALITY § TC2-10
66:1241
Chapter TC3
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ TC2-10 ISLIP CODE § TC2-10
66:1242
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ TC3-1. Application of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ TC3-2. Manner of parking.
Wherever a space shall be marked off, in any appropriate manner, on the
surface of any street, highway or public parking lot for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
markings designating such space.
§ TC3-1 WATER QUALITY § TC3-2
66:1243

ARTICLE II
Parking, Stopping and Standing Restrictions
§ TC3-3. Designation of areas and restrictions.
The parking, stopping or standing of vehicles in the locations described in
Schedule J is hereby restricted as follows:
§ TC3-3.1. Personal trailer restrictions. [Added 5-24-2011]
A. In locations designated as "no parking," the parking of vehicles is
prohibited at all times or during the hours or time periods indicated, if
any, and unless otherwise authorized by permit. [Amended
6-21-2011]
B. In locations designated as "limited parking," the parking of vehicles is
hereby prohibited for a longer period of time than that specified during
the hours indicated, if any.
C. In locations designated as "no standing," the standing of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours indicated, if any.
D. In locations designated as "no stopping," the stopping of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours indicated, if any.
E. In locations designated as "bus stops," the parking, standing or
stopping of vehicles other than buses is hereby prohibited.
F. In locations designated as "taxi stands," the parking, standing or
stopping of vehicles other than taxis is hereby prohibited. Taxis using
such stands shall not be left unattended and shall be subject to all other
vehicle and traffic regulations of the Town.
G. In locations designated as "metered parking," the parking of vehicles
shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter TC 8, Metered Parking, of
this Code, and parking is hereby prohibited for a longer period of time
than that specified during the hours indicated, if any. [Amended
3-4-2014]
H. In locations designated for "angle parking," vehicles shall be parked
only at the angle designated.
A. Daytime parking of personal trailers. A personal trailer shall not be
parked along a public road within the Town of Islip in such a manner so
as to constitute a traffic hazard. An unattached, unladen personal
trailer parked along a public road must be supplemented with traffic
cones or some other visual safety devices when parked so to give notice
to the public of the obstruction. A personal trailer may not be parked in
a location whereby it adversely affects another's use of his or her
driveway. A personal trailer's location along a public road must allow
for an adequate turning radius for proper ingress/egress to and from
adjacently situated driveways along the road. A personal trailer in the
§ TC3-3 WATER QUALITY § TC3-3.1
66:1245
public right-of-way qualifies as an obstruction to motorist's sight, as
defined in § 68-404 of the Islip Town Code, and is subject to the sight
triangle requirements of § 68-405 of the Islip Town Code, as well as all
applicable provisions of the Islip Town Code and New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
B. Overnight parking of personal trailers. All personal trailers are
prohibited from being parked on a public road within the Town of Islip
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ TC3-3.1 ISLIP CODE § TC3-3.1
66:1246
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)396
§ TC3-4. through § TC3-7. (Reserved)
396. Editor's Note: Former Article III, Metered Parking, was repealed 3-4-2014. See now Ch.
TC8, Metered Parking.
§ TC3-4 WATER QUALITY § TC3-4
66:1247

ARTICLE IV
Emergency Regulations
[Added 9-5-1978]
§ TC3-8. Purpose: snow emergency ordinance.
The Town Board of the Town of Islip does hereby find that an emergency
exists at any time that snow is permitted to accumulate on the streets
of the Town and that certain acts and omissions of the inhabitants of the
Town impede the removal of snow. It is further found that such acts and
omissions, by impeding the removal of snow from the streets of the Town,
also impede the provision of fire, police and ambulance service to the
residents of the Town and impede the provision of other necessary services
to Town residents. For the above reasons, the Town Board of the Town of
Islip does enact the following provisions.
§ TC3-9. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article.
EVEN SIDE OF A STREET — That side of a street on which a majority of the
buildings bear street addresses which are evenly divisible by two.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated or driven upon a public
highway by any power other than muscular power. The term "motor vehicle"
shall exclude fire, police and emergency vehicles.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ TC3-10. Snow emergency regulations: when effective.
The following provisions of this article shall be effective from the 15th of
December to the 15th of March and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.:
A. Parking in residential areas. No motor vehicle shall be parked on a
residential street.
B. Parking in business districts. No motor vehicle shall be parked on any
street in a business district.
C. Any person convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $75 or by imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $150 or by imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or
§ TC3-8 WATER QUALITY § TC3-10
66:1249
§ TC3-11. Snow emergency provisions.
The following provisions of this article shall be effective during a declared
snow emergency:
§ TC3-12. Snow clearance.
Every owner of a business or multiple dwelling shall be responsible for
clearing snow from said premises so as to allow access to the building by
fire trucks and other emergency vehicles.
§ TC3-13. Disposal of snow.
No person shall deposit snow on any street.
subsequent conviction within 18 months after the first conviction, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. [Added 3-5-2013; amended 3-4-2014]
A. Snow tires. All motor vehicles being operated on any streets must be
equipped with snow tires and/or chains.
B. Parking in residential districts. No motor vehicle shall be parked on any
residential street.
C. Parking in business districts. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the
even side of any street in a business district.
§ TC3-10 ISLIP CODE § TC3-13
66:1250
Chapter TC4
OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
§ TC4-1. Semipublic parking areas.
In accordance with §§ 1660-a and 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
traffic and parking regulations are hereby established for the parking areas
listed in Schedule K pursuant to the written request of either the owner or
the person in general charge of the operation and control of such parking
area:
§ TC4-2. Town parking lots.
The areas owned or leased by the Town of Islip and described in Schedule L
are Town parking lots and the parking, standing and stopping of vehicles in
such lots shall be subject to the restrictions and regulations in said schedule
and the following:
A. In any parking area listed in Schedule K, no vehicle shall be parked:
(1) In any manner other than as designated on the surface thereof by
appropriate markings.
(2) In any designated fire zone areas (FZ).
(3) In any space, area or parking stall which has been designated and
identified for use as a handicapped parking space, except for those
persons holding valid handicapped parking permits (HP). Any
person convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $170. [Amended 12-15-2009]
(4) Except in marked stalls only.
B. Traffic and parking regulations for the areas listed in Schedule K shall
be as indicated in said schedule.
A. In Town parking lots, or parts thereof, designated as "metered parking,"
the parking of vehicles shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
TC8, Metered Parking, of this Code. [Amended 3-4-2014]
B. The parking of vehicles is prohibited in any Town parking lot between
the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except by permit or as
designated by appropriate signs. [Amended 6-21-2011; 3-4-2014]
C. The parking of vehicles in any Town parking lot requiring a resident
parking sticker is prohibited unless a validly issued resident parking
sticker is affixed to the vehicle. Only those vehicles registered in the
name of a resident as defined herein shall be issued a resident parking
sticker. For purposes of this section, a resident shall include the
following:
§ TC3-13 WATER QUALITY § TC4-2
66:1251
Chapter TC5
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; WEIGHT LIMITS
§ TC5-1. Truck exclusions. [Amended 1-17-1989]
(1) A person who has his or her principal place of abode in the Town of
Islip, or
(2) A person who owns real property in the Town of Islip, or
(3) A corporation, association, partnership, or any other business
entity owning, renting or leasing real property within the Town of
Islip.
D. In any Town parking lot, no vehicle shall be parked:
(1) In any manner other than as designated on the surface thereof by
appropriate markings.
(2) In any designated fire-zone area.
(3) In any space, area or parking stall which has been designated and
identified for use as a handicapped space except for those persons
holding valid handicapped parking permits (HP). Any person
convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $170. [Amended 12-15-2009]
(4) Except in marked stalls only.
(5) If the motor vehicle does not have a certificate of inspection as
required by Article 5 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of New York
State. [Added 10-9-2001]
(6) If the motor vehicle does not have a current registration clearly
visible and affixed to said vehicle as required by Article 14 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of New York State. [Added 10-9-2001]
E. Additional traffic regulations shall be as indicated in Schedule L.
A. All trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations in excess of 5,000 pounds' maximum gross weight are
hereby excluded from the streets and highways, or parts thereof,
described in Schedule M.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following vehicles shall be
exempt from the restrictions imposed in § TC5-1A: pickup trucks,
school buses and recreational vehicles. [Amended 4-16-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. The regulations established in this section shall not be construed to
prohibit municipally owned vehicles or authorized public utility vehicles
nor to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property
§ TC4-2 ISLIP CODE § TC5-1
66:1252
§ TC5-2. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles. [Amended
7-11-1978; 6-3-1980; 3-5-2013]
All motor vehicles bearing commercial registrations, including tractortrailer
combinations; all buses, including those normally termed
"minibuses"; and all vehicles bearing advertising, which indicates other
than private use, are prohibited from parking between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on all town roads within the Town of Islip. Any person
convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ TC5-3. Parking of commercial vehicles and trailers. [Added
6-11-2002]
Chapter TC6
REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES
§ TC6-1. Authority to impound vehicles.
along the streets or highways from which such vehicles and
combinations are otherwise excluded.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle on any
public roadways within the Town of Islip, except while actively engaged
in the loading and unloading of passengers and/or merchandise and/or
while actively engaged in work on properties within the Town of Islip as
provided herein. However, this section shall not prohibit the stopping,
standing or parking of authorized emergency vehicles, municipal
vehicles and/or public utilities vehicles while actively engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of the streets and/or street utilities
within the Town. This section shall not supercede the Town of Islip
Uniform Traffic Code § TC5-1 or § TC5-2 or parking regulations as
specified in the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B. "Commercial vehicle" shall be defined, for the purposes of this section,
as every trailer and semi-trailer, and every motor vehicle designed for
carrying more than 10 passengers and/or used for the transportation of
persons for compensation, and every motor vehicle, including, but not
limited to, trucks over two tons' GVW (gross vehicle weight), dump
trucks and all refuse trucks designed and/or used for carrying freight,
merchandise or materials in furtherance of any commercial enterprise.
A. When any vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or is parked or
abandoned on any street, highway or parking area within this Town
during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects
that portion of the public street, highway or parking area upon which
said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by
the Town.
§ TC5-1 WATER QUALITY § TC6-1
66:1253
§ TC6-2. Tow-away zones.
The locations described below are hereby designated as tow-away zones
and when any vehicle is found unattended and unlawfully parked in such
a zone, said vehicle may be removed by the town or any duly constituted
police department or agency, or their respective designees:
§ TC6-3. Scofflaw impoundment without prior notice. [Added
1-15-2013]
Chapter TC7
PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
§ TC7-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the community of the Town of Islip and to provide a forum for the
disposition of offenses in relation to parking violations pursuant to the
provisions of Article 14B, §§ 370, 371 and 372, of the General Municipal
Law, the Town Board of the Town of Islip hereby establishes a Parking
Violations Bureau (hereafter the "Bureau") to hold hearings with regard
B. An impounded vehicle may only be redeemed by the registered owner, a
person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased
the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership
or authorization and who signs a receipt therefor. Any person
redeeming a vehicle must establish that he or she has a valid driver’s
license. [Added 1-15-2013]
A. Any public parking field owned or leased by the Town of Islip.
B. All no-parking or restricted parking areas on the streets and highways
in the town.
A. A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving
prior notice to its owner only when a vehicle is parked in a public rightof-
way or on other publicly owned or controlled property and the
vehicle is on the scofflaw list, as established by § TC7-11B of this Code;
that is, there are four or more parking violations issued against the
vehicle for each of which the registered owner has failed to respond,
failed to appear at a requested hearing or failed to pay a parking
violation for at least 30 days from the date of the notice of infraction.
B. Any person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter
must pay all outstanding penalties, fines, or fees owed relating to all
parking violations, plus all booting, removal, towing, storage, lost boot,
and the administrative fees charged against the vehicle and owed by
the registered owner to the Town of Islip. Upon payment in full the
Bureau may issue a written release authorization allowing the vehicle
to be removed from impound.
§ TC6-1 ISLIP CODE § TC7-1
66:1254
to such offenses and to have a hearing officer or officers preside at such
hearings and adjudicate such matters and to set and collect fines for such
offenses.
§ TC7-2. Administration. [Amended 4-14-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety Enforcement shall be
responsible for the administration of the Bureau and for the appointment
of hearing officers, subject to Town Board approval, who shall not be
employees of the Town of Islip, except to the extent that they shall be
entitled to such per-diem compensation as is, from time to time, established
by the Town Board. The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety
Enforcement will also appoint a Bureau Clerk and other personnel as it is
deemed necessary to effectively administer said Bureau. The Bureau shall
establish the dates and times for such hearings and establish fines and
collection procedures.
§ TC7-3. Parking violations only.
The Bureau is authorized to adjudicate and dispose of violations of parking
laws, ordinances and regulations written pursuant to Islip Town Code.
§ TC7-4. Payment of fines.
A. A person who has received a ticket for a violation of this Code, within
the time specified in such 30 days' notice, may: 1) appear in person at
the Bureau to plead not guilty, whereupon a conference date shall be
set; or 2) plead guilty and pay the prescribed fine or plead guilty with an
explanation, and the hearing officer shall, at or upon the next hearing
date, determine whether such explanation warrants mitigation of the
fine, in whole or in part, or refuse to mitigate the same, and notice of
said decision shall be forwarded by mail to such person upon such
adjudication; or 3) such person may, within the time specified in said
notice by a writing mailed to the Bureau, waive a hearing before said
Bureau and enter a plea of guilty, and each person with such mailing
shall pay the prescribed fine; or 4) such person may, within the time
specified in said notice by a writing mailed to the Bureau, waive a
hearing and plead guilty with an explanation, whereupon the hearing
officer shall, at or before the next hearing date, determine whether
such explanation warrants mitigation of the fine, in whole or in part,
and notice of such decision shall be provided by mail to such person; or
5) plead not guilty, and a conference date shall be thereafter fixed and
notice thereof forwarded by mail to such person. At a conference date,
if a resolution to the ticket is not reached between the Town Attorney, or
his/her designee, and the person who has received a ticket, the matter
shall be adjourned and a hearing date shall be provided by mail to the
person who has received the ticket. [Amended 1-15-2013; 3-4-2014]
§ TC7-1 WATER QUALITY § TC7-4
66:1255
§ TC7-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 1-15-2013; 3-4-2014]
The duties of the Bureau, or its designee, shall be as follows:
B. In any event where a person shall plead guilty with an explanation, such
person shall be entitled to submit a written explanation and/or such
evidence as such person may deem appropriate.
C. Payments of the prescribed or mitigated fine to the Bureau and receipt
and acceptance of same by the Bureau shall be complete satisfaction of
the violation, unless a conditional discharge shall have been fixed by the
hearing officer.
D. The Bureau shall give a written receipt for all fines paid.
A. It shall accept designated fines and issue receipts to those who desire to
plead guilty and waive a hearing.
B. It shall adjudicate the claims of those who plead guilty with an
explanation and mitigate the prescribed fine, in whole or in part, or
refuse to mitigate the same. The hearing officer may also issue a
conditional discharge on such conditions as are appropriate. It shall
adjudicate the claims of those who plead not guilty after being advised,
in writing, of their right to counsel and the date of hearing to answer
and defend any charge of a violation of any parking law, ordinance, rule
or regulation.
C. It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each
person that has pleaded or been found guilty during the preceding 18
months.
D. If a person charged with violation of such parking laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations does not appear and answer in response to such
notice as provided in this Code, the Bureau, or its designee, shall send
to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a
letter warning such owner that such owner shall be held responsible for
the appearance of the offender and, in the event that such owner or the
operator of said vehicle at the time of such violation fails to appear at
the Bureau within 10 days of mailing of such notice, a complaint may be
filed and a warrant of arrest may issue, and/or the hearing officer may
impose those additional penalties so detailed in § TC7-11 hereof.
E. In the event that any person fails to comply with a notice as provided in
this Code or fails to make an appearance pursuant to an appearance
ticket at the Bureau as provided by this Code or fails to appear for a
scheduled hearing, the Bureau may make application as is appropriate
to secure a warrant for such persons arrest.
F. The Bureau shall keep records of all appearance tickets for all notices
issued and all arrests made for violation of the parking laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations and of all fines imposed and all fines
collected by the Bureau and of the final disposition or present status of
§ TC7-4 ISLIP CODE § TC7-5
66:1256
§ TC7-6. Pleas of guilty by mail. [Added 1-15-2013397]
A guilty plea to a parking violation may be entered in absentia as referred
to in § TC7-4 hereof. The plea may be submitted to the Bureau in person, by
duly authorized agent, by first class mail or by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall be in the following form:
I hereby plead guilty to the charge stated on the reverse side of this ticket;
waive arraignment in open court and a formal hearing; waive the aid of
counsel. I elect and request this charge be disposed of and the fine or
penalty fixed by the court, pursuant to § 1807 of the New York State vehicle
and traffic law.
Signature Date ___________
Name (printed)
Address
Enclose check, cashier's check or money order payable to Town of Islip
Parking Violations Bureau, in the affixed envelope, place stamp on
envelope and mail. Plate number must be written on your check.
Notice
A plea of guilty to this charge is equivalent to a conviction after trial. If
you are convicted, not only will you be liable to a penalty, but in addition
your license to drive a motor vehicle or motor cycle, and your certificate
of registration, if any, will be subject to suspension and revocation as
prescribed by law.
For failure to answer a parking ticket after 30 days of date of violation,
a penalty will be imposed resulting in the fine being doubled. For failure
to answer a parking ticket within 60 days of date of violation, the sum of
the original fine plus double the penalty will be added. Failure to answer a
parking ticket after 90 days of date of violation will result in an additional
penalty of $20 being imposed.
Additionally, failure to answer a parking ticket may result in one or more of
the following consequences:
1) You being classified as a scofflaw, thereby resulting in nonrenewal of
your motor vehicle registration.
every summons, notice or appearance ticket issued pursuant to the
parking laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town.
G. The Bureau shall perform such other or additional duties and keep such
other and additional records as shall be prescribed by the Town Board
of the Town of Islip.
H. The Bureau shall adopt and promulgate its own rules and regulations as
to its forms and procedures.
397. Editor's Note: This resolution also repealed former § TC7-6, Power of attorney.
§ TC7-5 WATER QUALITY § TC7-6
66:1257
2) The filing of a civil default judgment against you that may adversely
affect your credit rating.
3) The immobilization of your motor vehicle.
4) The seizure of your motor vehicle.
Send payment
to:
Parking Violations Bureau
Town of Islip
28 Nassau Avenue
Islip, NY 11751-3633
§ TC7-7. Right to counsel.
Any person appearing before the Bureau may appear on his/her own behalf
or may be represented by counsel of his/her own choice.
§ TC7-8. Fines to be paid to Bureau. [Amended 3-4-2014]
All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the Parking
Violations Bureau of the Town of Islip or the Bureau's designee.
§ TC7-9. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or
any section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ TC7-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective January 1, 1993.
§ TC7-11. Additional penalties. [Amended 1-15-2013]
Notwithstanding any other provision in any law, ordinance or regulation to
the contrary, failure to pay or answer a notice of violation returnable to the
Parking Violations Bureau within 30 days of issuance thereof may result in
additional penalties. Such additional penalties shall include:
A. Default judgment.
(1) In the event a person charged with a parking violation does not
answer within the time specified, the Bureau may enter a plea of
guilty on behalf of the defendant and render a default judgment of a
fine determined by the hearing officer within the amount
authorized by law, pursuant to New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law § 1806-a. Any judgment entered pursuant to default shall be
civil in nature, but shall be treated as a conviction for the purposes
of this section.
§ TC7-6 ISLIP CODE § TC7-11
66:1258
(2) At least 30 days after the expiration of the original date prescribed
for entering a plea and before a plea of guilty and a default
judgment may be rendered, the Bureau shall notify the defendant
by certified mail of the violation charged, of the impending plea of
guilty and default judgment; that such judgment will be filed with
the county clerk of the county in which the operator or registrant is
located, and that a default or plea of guilty may be avoided by
entering a plea or making an appearance within 30 days of the
sending of such notice. Default judgments and pleas of guilty may
not be rendered more than two years after the expiration of the
time prescribed for originally entering a plea.
(3) When a plea of guilty is entered by the hearing officer for failure to
appear and a default judgment is entered, the Bureau shall then file
the judgment with the county clerk of the county in which the
operator or registrant is located. In the event that all penalties,
fines, or fees owed relating to default judgment are paid, the
Bureau shall then issue a satisfaction of judgment to be filed with
the appropriate county clerk's office.
B. Scofflaw list.
(1) When there are four or more parking violations issued against a
specific vehicle for each of which a person has either failed to
respond to a violation, failed to appear at a scheduled hearing, or
failed to pay an amount due for at least 30 days from the date of the
filing of each of those citations, the Bureau shall place the vehicle
on a list of scofflaws and shall mail, by first class mail, a notice of
said placement to the last known registered owner of the vehicle.
(2) The registered vehicle owner may request an administrative review
by the Bureau at any time that the vehicle is on the scofflaw list
until the vehicle has been immobilized or impounded. Said review
shall only examine whether the vehicle is properly on the scofflaw
list and shall not examine or adjudicate the underlying citations.
(3) A vehicle placed on the scofflaw list may be removed from the list
only upon a showing by the registered owner that either:
(a) Fewer than four of the parking violations that caused the
vehicle to be included on the scofflaw list were committed
while the current registered owner was the legal owner of the
vehicle; or
(b) All penalties, fines, or fees owed relating to all parking
violations, plus all immobilization, towing and storage charges
and administrative fees have been satisfied in full, or until a
payment plan has been entered into with the Bureau.
C. Immobilization.
§ TC7-11 WATER QUALITY § TC7-11
66:1259
(1) If the notice required under § TC7-11B(1) has been met, and if a
vehicle on the scofflaw list is parked in the public right-of-way or on
other publicly owned or controlled property within the Town, such
vehicle may be immobilized by the installation on the vehicle of a
wheel locking device known as a "boot," which clamps and locks
onto the vehicle's wheel and impedes movement. Once a vehicle is
immobilized in this manner, it shall not be released until full
payment has been made or a payment agreement has been entered
into for all outstanding penalties, fines, or fees owed relating to all
parking violations, plus all immobilization, towing and storage
charges and administrative fees.
(2) Any vehicle that remains booted for 48 hours or more, not including
weekends, or which becomes illegally parked while booted, shall be
subject to towing and impounding pursuant to § TC7-11D.
(3) At the time the boot is installed, notice shall be left under the
windshield wiper blade or shall be otherwise attached to the
vehicle advising the registered owner that the vehicle has been
booted by the Town of Islip for failure to respond, failure to appear
at a requested hearing, and/or failure to pay amounts due for four
or more adjudicated parking infractions for at least 30 days from
the date of the last such adjudication issued against the vehicle;
that release of the boot may be obtained by paying all outstanding
penalties, fines, or fees owed relating to all parking violations, plus
all immobilization, towing and storage charges and administrative
fees; that unless such payment is made within two business days of
the date of the notice, the vehicle will be impounded; that it is
unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove the boot, to
damage the boot, or to move the vehicle with the boot attached;
and that the registered owner may seek an administrative review of
the booting by submitting a request to the Bureau within 30 days of
the release of the boot.
(4) The vehicle may be released from immobilization when the vehicle
owner or an agent of the owner pays all outstanding penalties,
fines, or fees owed relating to all parking violations, plus all
immobilization, towing and storage charges and administrative
fees. Upon full payment or upon entry into a payment agreement,
the Town or its authorized agent shall promptly remove the boot
from the wheel of the vehicle. If payment is made in full, the vehicle
shall be removed from the scofflaw list and shall no longer be
subject to immobilization or impoundment for the paid violations.
(5) No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Town
of Islip shall remove or enable the removal of a boot from the wheel
of any vehicle on which it has been installed unless the
requirements of § TC7-11C(4) have been met.
(6) No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Town
of Islip shall move, either by towing or other means, any vehicle
§ TC7-11 ISLIP CODE § TC7-11
66:1260
Chapter TC8
METERED PARKING
§ TC8-1. Parking meter zones.
after it has been immobilized but before the boot has been
removed.
(7) Immobilization fees and administrative fees shall be set by the
Bureau. Administrative fees, if any, shall be levied at the time the
boot is removed.
(8) A person who intentionally removes a booting device may be
charged a replacement fee as determined by the Director of
Purchasing and also may be prosecuted for the crime of property
damage.
(9) The registered owner of a vehicle may seek a review of the
immobilization by submitting a written request to the Bureau
within 10 days of the placement of the notice on the vehicle, as
established by the notice date. Upon timely receipt of such written
request, the Bureau shall, within a reasonable time, conduct a
review of the issue of whether the immobilization was proper and
shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons on which the
decision is based; provided, however, that any previously
adjudicated parking violation that formed the basis of the vehicle's
scofflaw status shall not be subject to review. The person seeking
review shall have an opportunity to present evidence on his or her
behalf.
D. Impoundment without prior notice. A vehicle on the scofflaw list may be
impounded with or without citation and without giving prior notice to
its owner only when a vehicle is parked in a public right-of-way or on
other publicly owned or controlled property, pursuant to § TC6-3 of this
Code.
E. Nonrenewal of New York State motor vehicle registration. In the event
that a vehicle owner should fail to appear on the return date or any
subsequent adjourned date in response to three or more parking
violations summonses issued within an eighteen-month period charging
violations of the parking laws, ordinances and regulations written
pursuant to Islip Town Code, the Bureau shall so notify the Department
of Motor Vehicles, which shall then deny the vehicle's registration or
renewal application pursuant to New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 401-5a.
A. The following named and described areas, parking lots, streets or
portions of streets and such other areas, streets or portions of streets as
may hereafter be included in this section by amendment hereto shall
constitute the Bay Shore Parking Management District:
§ TC7-11 WATER QUALITY § TC8-1
66:1261
(1) Main Street between Clinton Avenue and Gibson Street, except
where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading
zone.
(2) Gibson Street between South Clinton Avenue and Main Street,
except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a
loading zone.
(3) South Clinton Avenue from Main Street to its terminus, to and
including the Bay Shore Marina, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(4) Ocean Avenue from Main Street to its terminus, to and including
the Ocean Avenue Dock, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(5) Park Avenue, north of Main Street, except where parking is
otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(6) South Park Avenue, north of Gibson Street and south of Main
Street, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated
as a loading zone.
(7) Maple Avenue, from Main Street to its terminus, to and including
the Maple Avenue Dock, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(8) Fourth Avenue, north of Main Street and south of Mechanicsville
Road, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated
as a loading zone.
(9) Third Avenue, north of Main Street and south of Mechanicsville
Road, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated
as a loading zone.
(10) Parking lot south of Main Street, west of South Clinton Avenue,
where Gibson Street ends, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(11) Parking lot north of Gibson Street, between South Clinton Avenue
and Bay Avenue except where parking is otherwise prohibited or
designated as a loading zone.
(12) Parking lot north of Main Street, south of Mechanicsville Road,
west of Smith Avenue, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(13) Parking lot north of Main Street between Park Avenue and Smith
Avenue, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or
designated as a loading zone.
§ TC8-1 ISLIP CODE § TC8-1
66:1262
§ TC8-2. Indication of legal parking.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate, by a proper legend, the legal
parking time established by the Town and, when operated, shall indicate the
duration of the period of legal parking.
§ TC8-3. Designation of parking spaces.
(14) Parking lot on the south side of Mechanicsville Road between Park
Avenue and Fourth Avenue, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(15) Parking lot north of Main Street between Third Avenue and Fourth
Avenue, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or
designated as a loading zone.
(16) Parking lot south of Gibson Street, west of South Park Avenue,
except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a
loading zone.
(17) Parking lot south of Gibson Street, west of Maple Avenue, except
where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading
zone.
(18) Parking lot north of Gibson Street, east of Maple Avenue, except
where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading
zone.
(19) Parking lot south of Gibson Street, between Maple Avenue and
Shore Lane, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or
designated as a loading zone.
(20) Parking lot north of Gibson Street, west of Shore Lane, except
where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading
zone.
(21) Parking lot north of Gibson Street between Shore Lane and Main
Street, except where parking is otherwise prohibited or designated
as a loading zone.
(22) Bay Shore Long Island Railroad northwest parking lot, North Park
Avenue at Oak Street, except where parking is otherwise
prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
(23) Bay Shore Long Island Railroad south parking lot, except where
parking is otherwise prohibited or designated as a loading zone.
A. Lines or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon
the street or avenue for the purpose of designating the parking space,
and each vehicle shall park within the lines or markings so established.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to park any vehicle
across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such position
§ TC8-1 WATER QUALITY § TC8-3
66:1263
§ TC8-4. Operation of parking meters.
When a vehicle is parked in a parking space located the Bay Shore Parking
Management District, which space is located within an area controlled by a
parking meter, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking
space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking meter
such proper coins or currency of the United States or insert an electronic
debit or credit card or make payment by an electronic communications
device as is required for the parking meter, and as designated by direction
on the meter; failure to deposit such coins or currency or to insert an
electronic debit or credit card or to make payment by an electronic
communications device and put the meter in operation shall constitute
a violation of this chapter. Upon depositing such coins or currency or
inserting the electronic debit or credit card or making payment by an
electronic communications device and placing the meter in operation, the
parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the period of time
provided for in § TC8-5. If the vehicle remains parked in the parking space
beyond the parking time limit fixed for the parking space, such vehicle shall
be considered as parked overtime and in violation of this chapter.
§ TC8-5. Parking time limits.
§ TC8-6. Penalties for offenses.
that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by
such lines or markings.
B. Any violation of the parking requirements set forth in Subsection A
shall be considered a violation of § TC3-2.
A. In addition to the rules and regulations stated herein, official posted
signs, pavement markings and instructions on parking pay stations
shall govern the rules and regulations regarding specific parking
locations within the Bay Shore Parking Management District as stated
in § TC8-1, including but not limited to parking fees, duration of the
legal parking period, and time periods when parking fees are in effect.
These rules and regulations shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board and, upon enactment, shall be available
for review with the Town Clerk.
A. It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to
cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking established for any parking meter zone as described in
this article.
B. It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to
permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space in any
parking meter zone while the vehicle occupying such parking space has
already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such
parking space.
§ TC8-3 ISLIP CODE § TC8-6
66:1264
Part II: The Schedules
Schedule A
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS
§ A-1. Traffic control signals. [Amended 8-18-1981]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-1, traffic control signals shall
be installed, maintained and operated at the following intersections and
locations as indicated. At flashing signals, the direction of traffic controlled
is noted for red and yellow indications.
Location Description of Signal
Abingdon Avenue at Candlewood
Road and at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 12-7-1982; amended
3-1-1983; 6-20-1995]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Ackerson Street at Clinton Avenue
(County Road 13A) (BSR)
[Amended 8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Ackerson Street
Yellow: South on County Road 13A
Ackerson Street at Fifth Avenue
(County Road 13) (BSR) [Amended
8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: East on Ackerson Street
Yellow: South on County Road 13
Ackerson Street at Fifth Avenue
(BSR)
Flashing signal
Red: West on Ackerson Street
Amber: South on County Road 13
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deface, injure,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article.
D. It shall be a violation of this article to deposit or use in any parking
meter any slugs, device or metallic substance or other substitute in
place of the required currency, electronic debit or credit card, or other
electronic payment.
E. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to maintain any
vehicle or portable stand or trailer in any parking space adjacent to any
parking meter for the purpose of soliciting trade therefrom.
F. The penalties for violation of TC8-5 can be found in TC1-5 and TC 7-11.
§ TC8-6 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1265
Location Description of Signal
American Boulevard at
Meadowbrook Drive and Second
Avenue (BWD) [Added 5-20-2003]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Amityville Street at Connetquot
Avenue (NGR) [Added 5-24-2011]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Arkansas Avenue and Brentwood
Road at Oakwood Boulevard (NBS)
[Amended 4-16-1985]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Atlantic Avenue and Tyler Avenue at
Montauk Highway (WSV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Audwin Drive at Clayton Street and
a driveway 30 feet east of Audwin
Drive (CIS) [Added 6-11-2002]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Clayton Street
North/South on Audwin Drive
South on driveway
Bay Shore Road at Howells Road
(BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Bay Shore Road at Manor Lane
(WBS, WBW)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Bay Shore Road at Udall Road (WIS) Semi-vehicle-actuated
Bayonne Avenue at Connetquot
Avenue (CIS) [Added 3-1-2005]
Fixed time
Bayport Avenue at Middle Road
(BPT) [Added 5-25-2010]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Middle Road
Yellow: South on Bayport Avenue
Bayport Avenue at Montauk
Highway (BPT)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Beaver Dam Road at Carleton
Avenue (EIS)
Fire signal
Bellmore Street at Udall Road (WIS)
[Added 8-31-1994]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Belmore Avenue at Manhattan
Boulevard (EIS) [Amended
8-18-1981; 8-25-1987]
Fixed time
Bernice Drive at Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added 5-1-1979]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Bradley Street/Brentwick Shopping
Center at Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1266
Location Description of Signal
Brentwood Road and Washington
Avenue at Suffolk Avenue (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Candlewood
Road (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Commack Road
(BWD) [Added 10-6-1998]
Flashing signal
Red: West on Commack Road
Yellow: North/South on Brentwood
Road
Brentwood Road at Connecticut
Avenue (NBS) [Added 5-3-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Dakota Avenue
(NBS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Second Avenue
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at South Fifth
Avenue (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Spur Drive
North (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Third Avenue
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Road at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 9-16-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brentwood Street at Howells Road
(WBW) [Added 4-22-1986;
amended 8-19-1986]
Fixed time
Broadway, 50 feet north of
Newberry Street (BWD) [Added
7-6-1982; amended 3-1-1983]
Fire signal
Broadway at Second Avenue (BWD) Fixed time
Broadway at Spur Drive North
(BWD) [Added 2-4-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Church Street
(HBK) [Added 4-16-1985]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Inverness Road
(HBK) [Added 2-4-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Maria Court
(HBK) [Added 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1267
Location Description of Signal
Broadway Avenue at Merrimac
School (south driveway), 300 feet
south of Maria Court (HBK)
[Amended 8-18-1981; 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Montauk
Highway (SVL) [Amended
9-16-1986]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Ronald Lane
(SVL) [Added 3-1-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Broadway Avenue at Terry
Boulevard (HBK) [Amended
1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated, with Fire
Department radio preemption
Broadway Avenue at West Bridge
Drive (South) and at driveway 1,475
feet north of Veterans Highway
(Stonehurst Apartments) (HBK)
[Added 9-19-1989]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brook Avenue at East Forks Road
(NBS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brook Avenue at Mildred Place
(NBS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brook Street at Cherry Avenue
(WSV)
Fixed time
Brook Street at Greeley Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: East on Brook Street
Yellow: North/South on Greeley
Avenue
Brook Street at Montauk Highway
(OKD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Brook Street at Second Avenue
(BSR) [Added 6-2-1992; amended
2-14-2012]
Flashing signal
Red: North/South on Second
Avenue
Red: East/West on Brook Street
Caleb's Path at Lexington Avenue
(BWD) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Caleb's Path at Vanderbilt Avenue
(CIS) [Added 5-3-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Candee Avenue at Montauk
Highway (SVL)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1268
Location Description of Signal
Candlewood Road at Fifth Avenue
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Carleton Avenue at Clayton Street
(CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Carleton Avenue at Earle Street
(CIS)
Fire signal
Carleton Avenue at Second Avenue
(CIS) [Added 5-5-1998]
Semi-vehicle-activated
Carleton Avenue at Spur Drive
North (EIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Carleton Avenue at Spur Drive
South (EIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Carleton Avenue at Suffolk Avenue
and Wheeler Road (CIS) [Amended
9-16-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Carleton Avenue at Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
5-19-1998]
Semi-vehicle-activated
Carleton Avenue at Union Boulevard
(EIS)
Full-vehicle-actuated
Cherry Avenue at Montauk Highway
(WSV) [Amended 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Chestnut Avenue at Johnson Avenue
(RNK)
Fire signal
Church Street at Holbrook Fire
Station #1 (HBK) [Added
3-28-2006]
Fire signal
Church Street at Johnson Avenue
(HBK)
Full-vehicle-actuated
Church Street at Knickerbocker
Avenue (BHM) [Added 5-3-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Church Street at Lakeland Avenue
(BHM)
Full-vehicle-actuated
Church Street at Lincoln Avenue
(HBK) [Added 4-16-1985]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Church Street at Locust Avenue
(BHM)
Fixed time
Church Street at Nicolls Road (BPT)
[Amended 9-16-1986]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Church Street at Ocean Avenue
(BHM)
Fixed time
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1269
Location Description of Signal
Church Street at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM)
Fixed time
Church Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 5-6-1986]
Fixed time
Church Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Added 3-1-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Clayton Street at Lowell Avenue and
Poplar Street (CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Clinton Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Commack Road at Fortieth Street
(ISL) [Added 6-22-1999]
3 color traffic signal
Commack Road, 100 feet south of
Forty-Seventh Street (ISL) [Added
2-6-1979]
Fire signal
Commack Road at Lake Street and
Romaine Street (ISL) [Added
3-20-2001]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Commack Road at Moffit Boulevard
and Wingan-Hauppauge Road (ISL)
[Amended 9-16-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Commack Road at Spur Drive North
(BWD) [Amended 6-20-1995]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Commack Road at Spur Drive South
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Community College Drive at
Crooked Hill Road (BWD) [Added
2-6-1979; amended 11-18-1986]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Community College Drive at
Heyward Street and Wicks Road
(BWD) [Added 2-6-1979;
amended 3-20-1979; 11-18-1986;
5-24-2011]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Craig Street/
Piney Street (EIS) [Added
6-8-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Jefferson
Street (EIS) [Added 9-19-1989]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Jericho
Street/Sunrise Highway eastbound
ramp (EIS) [Added 6-8-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1270
Location Description of Signal
Connetquot Avenue at Lowell
Avenue (NGR) [Added 7-7-1987]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Messina
Street (CIS) [Added 3-1-2005]
Fixed time
Connetquot Avenue at Oak Street
and Sportsmen Street (CIS) [Added
12-15-1987]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Union
Boulevard (GVR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Connetquot Avenue at Westbury
Street (EIS) [Amended 9-16-1986]
Fixed time
Corbin Avenue at Grand Boulevard
(EDG) [Added 3-1-1983; amended
6-20-1995]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Corbin Avenue at Pine Aire Drive
(EDG) [Added 3-10-2009]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Corbin Avenue at South Second
Street (EDG) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Crooked Hill Road at Express Drive
North (EDG) [Amended
8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: West on Express Drive North
Yellow: North/South on Crooked
Hill Road
Crooked Hill Road at Express Drive
South (EDG) [Amended
8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: East on Express Drive South
Yellow: North/South on Crooked
Hill Road
Crooked Hill Road at Suffolk County
Community College (BWD) [Added
4-21-1992]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Crooked Hill Road at Wicks Road
(BWD) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Dakota Avenue at Penataquit Avenue
(BSR) [Added 5-20-1997]
Flashing signal
Red: East/North/South
Deer Park Street at Howells Road
(WBW) [Added 12-9-1997]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Dietz Street at Wheeler Road and
Alfano School South Driveway (CIS)
[Added 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1271
Location Description of Signal
Dowsing Avenue at Fifth Avenue
(NBS) [Added 5-1-1979]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
East Forks Road at Spur Drive North
(BWD) [Added 1-30-1996]
Flashing signal
Red: North/South on East Forks
Road
Yellow: East/West on Spur Drive
North
East Forks Road at Spur Drive South
(BSR) [Added 5-20-1997]
Flashing signal
Red: North on East Forks Road
Yellow: East/West on Spur Drive
South
East Lakeland Street at Howells
Road (WBW) [Added 12-18-1979;
amended 5-5-1981]
Full-vehicle-actuated
East Oakdale Street at Howells Road
(WBW) [Added 4-22-1986;
amended 8-19-1986]
Fixed time
Easton Street at Pond Road (RNK)
[Added 3-1-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Eighth Street at Second Avenue
(BWD) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Executive Drive at Long Island
Avenue (EDG) [Added 4-22-1986]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Executive Drive at Pineaire Drive
(EDG) [Added 4-22-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive North at Motor
Parkway (Exit 55) (HPG, BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive North at Motor
Parkway (Exit 57) (HPG, CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive North at Nichols Road
(HPG)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive North at Ocean
Avenue (RNK)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive South at Motor
Parkway (Exit 55) (HPG, BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive South at Motor
Parkway (Exit 57) (HPG, CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive South at Nichols Road
(HPG)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1272
Location Description of Signal
Express Drive South at Ocean
Avenue (RNK)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive South at Pond Road
(RNK)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Express Drive South at Wicks Road
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Federal Plaza at Spur Drive North
(CIS) [Added 3-1-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Howells Road (BSR) Full-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at McAdams Street/
Connecticut Avenue (BWD) [Added
5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Pineaire Drive and
Third Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Spence Street
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Spur Drive North
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Spur Drive South
(NBS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Suffolk Avenue and
Wicks Road (BWD) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fifth Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
First Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
First Street at South Fifth Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 8-18-1981]
Flashing signal
Red: North/South on First Street
Yellow: East/West on South Fifth
Avenue
First Street at Third Avenue (BWD)
[Amended 6-20-1995]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Flick Place/Van Cedar Avenue at
Washington Avenue (BWD) [Added
5-3-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Foster Avenue at Middle Road (SVL) Semi-vehicle-actuated
Foster Avenue at Montauk Highway
(SVL)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1273
Location Description of Signal
Fourth Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fourth Street, 200 feet north of
Second Avenue (BWD)
Fire signal
Fourth Street at Second Avenue
(BWD)
Fixed time
Fourth Street at Suffolk Avenue
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Fulton Street at Nostrand Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-13-1993]
Fixed time
Fulton Street at Suffolk Avenue
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Furrows Road at Main Street (HBK)
[Added 7-7-1981; amended
8-18-1981; 11-17-1981;
9-20-1983]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Gibbons Court at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 3-1-2005; amended
3-28-2006]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Gibson Street at Maple Avenue
(BSR) [Added 2-4-1986]
Fixed time
Gillette Avenue at Middle Road
(BPT) [Added 5-25-2010]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Middle Road
Yellow: North/South on Gillette
Avenue
Gillette Avenue at Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added 4-16-1985]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Gillette Avenue at Montauk Highway
and Railroad Avenue (SVL)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Grant Avenue at Moffit Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 5-1 1979]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Grant Avenue at Union Boulevard
(ISL) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Greenbelt Parkway at Patchogue-
Holbrook Road (HTV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Greenbelt Parkway West at Nicolls
Road (CR 97) (HTV) [Added
9-19-1989]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Greene Avenue at Montauk Highway
(SLV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1274
Location Description of Signal
Grundy Avenue at Main Street
(HBK) [Added 4-16-1985;
amended 11-18-1986]
Flashing signal
Red: East on Grundy Avenue
Yellow: North/South on Main Street
Grundy Avenue at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Fire signal
Hancock Street at Wicks Road
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Hawthorne Avenue at Motor
Parkway (CIS) [Added 5-1-1979]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Hawthorne Avenue at Suffolk
Avenue (CIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Heyward Street and Roslyn Road at
Washington Avenue (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Higbie Lane at Hunter Avenue (WIS) Semi-vehicle-actuated
Higbie Lane at Lions Path (West
Islip High School) (WIS) [Added
1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Higbie Lane at Udall Road (WIS)
[Added 4-8-2014]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Higbie Lane at Union Boulevard
(WIS)
Full-vehicle-actuated
Higbie Lane at West Islip Boulevard
(WIS) [Added 4-3-2012]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Hilltop Drive at Second Avenue
(BWD) [Added 9-20-1983]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Hunter Avenue at Muncey Road and
Udall Road (WIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Idle Hour Boulevard at Montauk
Highway (OKD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Irish Lane at Moffit Boulevard (EIS)
[Added 4-16-1985]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Irish Lane at Union Boulevard (EIS) Semi-vehicle-actuated
Island Boulevard at Smithtown
Avenue and Terrys Road (SVL)
[Added 5-20-1997]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Johnson Avenue at Chestnut Street
(RNK) [Added 5-20-1997]
Fire signal
Johnson Avenue at Keyland Court/
McCormick Drive (BHM) [Added
5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1275
Location Description of Signal
Johnson Avenue at Lakeland Avenue
and Tariff Street (SVL)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Johnson Avenue at Locust Avenue
(RNK)
Fire signal
Johnson Avenue at Ocean Avenue
(RNK)
Fixed time
Johnson Avenue at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK) [Added 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Johnson Avenue at Pond Road (RNK)
[Added 4-15-1980; amended
8-18-1981; 9-19-1989]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Johnson Avenue at Sayville Plaza
(300 feet north of Sunrise Highway)
(BHM) [Added 5-7-1996]
Semi-vehicle actuated
Johnson Avenue at Terry Road (RNK)
[Added 6-20-1995; amended
6-24-2014]
Semi-vehicle-activated
Karshick Street at Lakeland Avenue
and K-Mart Shopping Center (BHM)
[Added 5-7-1996]
Full-vehicle actuated
Keith Lane at Union Boulevard
(WIS) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Kings Highway (Rabro Drive) at
Nicon Court (HPG) [Added
7-17-1979]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Kirk Avenue at Rosevale Avenue
(RNK) [Added 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Korol Street at Perkal Street and
Third Avenue (BSR) [Added
8-30-1995]
Flashing signal
Red: East on Korol Street
Red: West on Perkal Street
Red: North/South on Third Avenue
Lakeland Avenue at Manton Street
(SVL) [Added 3-9-1999]
Semi-vehicle-activated
Lakeland Avenue at Smithtown
Avenue (north intersection) (HBK,
LKL) [Added 4-15-1980]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Leahy Avenue at Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 5-24-2011]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1276
Location Description of Signal
Lincoln Boulevard at a driveway 300
feet south of Town Line Road (HPG)
[Added 12-6-1988]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Lincoln Boulevard at a driveway 500
feet south of Town Line Road (HPG)
[Added 12-6-1988]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Long Island Avenue at Deer Park
Railroad Station Access Drive (EDG)
[Added 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Lowell Avenue at Belt Drive East
and East Cherry Street (CIS)
[Added 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Lowell Avenue (Broadway) at Suffolk
Avenue (CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Madison Avenue and Second Street
at Suffolk Avenue (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Madison Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 5-6-1986;
amended 8-19-1986]
Fixed time
Manatuck Boulevard at Pine Aire
Drive (PNR) [Added 1-5-1982]
Full-vehicle-actuated
Manatuck Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Manhattan Boulevard at Spur Drive
North (EIS) [Added 12-18-1979;
amended 4-15-1980; 8-18-1981;
7-5-1988]
Fixed time
Manhattan Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (EIS) [Added 7-5-1988]
Fixed time
Manor Lane at Muncey Road (WBS)
[Added 9-20-1983; amended
2-5-1991]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Maple Street at South Bay Avenue
(ISL)
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Maple Street
Red: North/South on South Bay
Avenue
Marcus Boulevard at Motor Parkway
(BWD) [Added 5-5-1981]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
McConnell Avenue at Montauk
Highway (BPT) [Added 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1277
Location Description of Signal
Moffit Boulevard at Saxon Avenue
(BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Mohican Avenue at Richmond
Boulevard (RNK) [Added 12-15
1987; amended 3-24-1992]
Flashing signal
Red: North/South on Mohican
Avenue
Red: East/West on Richmond
Boulevard
Montauk Highway at Hanson Place/
Hiddink Street (SVL) [Added
5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Islip High
School easterly driveway (ISL)
[Added 11-17-1998]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Nicolls Road
(BPT)
Full-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Oakdale-
Bohemia Road (OKD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Oakdale
Shopping Center, 525 feet west of
Berard Boulevard (OKD) [Added
6-2-1981]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Ockers Drive
(OKD) [Added 11-17-1998]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Sayville
Boulevard (SVL)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Snedecor
Avenue (BPT) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at Vanderbilt
Boulevard (OKD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Montauk Highway at West Sayville-
Oakdale Fire House (WSV)
Fire signal
Motor Parkway at LIE exit ramp
(east of Wicks Road) (BWD) [Added
5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Motor Parkway at Nichols Road
(RNK) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Motor Parkway at Old Willets Path
(HPG)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Motor Parkway at Rosevale Avenue
(RNK)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1278
Location Description of Signal
Motor Parkway at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Motor Parkway at Wheeler Road
(CIS)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Motor Parkway at Wicks Road
(BWD)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Nassau Avenue at Union Boulevard
(ISL) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Nicolls Road at Purick Street (BPT)
[Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at Sycamore
Avenue (BHM) [Added 12-9-1997]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Oakwood Boulevard at Home Depot/
Shopping Center access road (NBS)
[Added 4-8-1997]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Ocean Avenue at Peconic Street
(LKL) [Added 1-5-1982]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Old Nichols Road at Terry Road
(HPG) [Added 4-16-1985;
amended 6-18-1985; 1-30-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Old Post Road at Terry Road (HPG)
[Added 10-6-1987]
Fixed time
Park Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Patchogue-Holbrook Road, 300 feet
south of Greenbelt Parkway (HTV)
Fire signal
Patchogue-Holbrook Road at
Singingwood Drive (HTV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Patchogue-Holbrook Road at
Springmeadow Drive (HTV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Patchogue-Holbrook Road at
Woodside Avenue (HTV)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Pearl Street at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM)
Fire signal
Penataquit Avenue at Redington
Street (BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Penataquit Avenue at Union
Boulevard (BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Pond Road at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 12-18-1979]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § A-1
66:1279
Location Description of Signal
Saxon Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR)
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Second Avenue, 600 feet east of
Eighth Street (BWD) [Added
5-1-1979]
Pedestrian-actuated
Second Avenue at 800 feet east of
Eighth Street (BWD) [Added
11-15-1988]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Second Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Smithtown Avenue at B.H. Aircraft
Facility, 1,200 feet south of Baeck
Street (HBK, LKL) [Added
5-1-1979; amended 8-12-1997]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Smithtown Avenue at South Second
Street (HBK, LKL) [Added
10-9-2001]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Smithtown Avenue at Wilson Street
(BHM) [Added 5-25-2010]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Wilson Street
Yellow: North/South on Smithtown
Avenue
Spur Drive North at Southern State
Parkway exit/entrance (east of
Carleton Avenue) (CIS) [Added
12-19-2000]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Spur Drive North at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
4-16-1985; amended 6-11-2002]
Flashing signal
Red: East/West on Spur Drive
North
Red: North/South on Wilson
Boulevard
Suffolk Avenue at Brentwood
Railroad Station (BWD) [Added
11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Terry Road at Hidden Pond Park
entrance (HPG) [Added 10-6-1987]
Fixed time
Terry Road at Wedgewood Drive
(HPG) [Amended 3-1-2005]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Third Avenue, 650 feet west of First
Street (BWD) [Added 12-7-1982]
Pedestrian-actuated
§ A-1 ISLIP CODE § A-1
66:1280
Location Description of Signal
Third Avenue, 100 feet east of Stein
Road (BWD) [Added 5-25-2010]
Fire signal
Third Avenue at Union Boulevard
(BSR) [Amended 11-18-1986]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Udall Road at Van Buren Avenue
(WIS) [Added 8-31-1994]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Udall Road at Watts Place (WIS) Fire signal
Union Boulevard at Islip High
School Driveway (ISL) [Added
2-24-2004]
Vehicle-actuated
Wheeler Road at Central Islip
Company No. 2 Fire House north of
Janice Lane (CIS)
Fire signal
Wheeler Road (CR-17) at Dietz
Street and Alfano Elementary
School South Driveway (CIS)
[Added 4-16-1996]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Wheeler Road (CR-17) at Central
Islip High School/Adams Street(CIS)
[Added 4-16-1996; amended
5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Wheeler Road at high school main
driveway (CIS) [Added 5-25-2010]
Semi-vehicle-actuated
Schedule B
(RESERVED)
Schedule C
PROHIBITED TURNS
§ C-1. Prohibited turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-3, the turning of vehicles is
prohibited as indicated at the intersections and locations described below
during the hours indicated:
§ A-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1281
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Abingdon Avenue at
Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 6-20-1995]
East on
Abingdon
Avenue
Right on red —
Adams Road at
Wheeler Road (CIS)
[Added 8-17-1999]
West on Adams
Road
Right on red —
Arkansas Avenue at
Brentwood Road and
Oakwood Boulevard
(NBS) [Added
5-7-1985; amended
12-9-1997;
5-18-1999;
1-30-2001]
North on
Brentwood
Road
Left Right on
red
—
Arkansas Avenue at
Brentwood Road and
Oakwood Boulevard
(NBS) [Added
5-7-1985; amended
12-9-1997;
5-18-1999]
West on
Oakwood
Boulevard
Right on red —
Atlantic Avenue at
Montauk Highway and
Tyler Avenue (WSV)
South on Tyler
Avenue
Right on red —
Audwin Drive at
Clayton Street (CIS)
[Added 3-6-1984]
West on Clayton
Street
Left, except
buses
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Bay Shore Road at
Howells Road and
Parkway entrance
(WBW) [Added
6-5-1984]
West on Bay
Shore Road
Left —
Bay Shore Road at
Manor Lane, the west
side of the safety
island only (BSR)
South on Manor
Lane, from the
west side of the
safety island
only
Left —
Bayport Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added
12-6-1983; amended
1-16-1990]
North/South on
Bayport Avenue
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1282
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Beach Street at a curb
cut 150 feet north of
Sherman Avenue (WIS)
[Added 9-13-2005]
West on curb
cut
Left —
Beaver Dam Road at
Carleton Avenue (EIS)
South on
Carelton Avenue
Right on red —
Belmore Avenue at
Manhattan Boulevard
(EIS) [Added
2-2-1988]
East/West on
Manhattan
Boulevard;
North/South on
Belmore Avenue
Right on red —
Bernice Drive at
Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added
7-14-2009; amended
5-11-2010]
South on
Bernice Drive
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Blue Point Road at
Waverly Avenue (HTV)
[Added 1-25-2005;
amended 9-23-2014;
12-2-2014]
South on
Waverly Avenue
Right on red —
Brentwood Road at
Brentwood Shopping
Center private
driveway (BWD)
West on
Brentwood
Shopping
Center private
driveway
Left —
Brentwood Road at
Candlewood Road
(WBW)
East/West on
Candlewood
Road; North/
South on
Brentwood
Road
Right on red —
Brentwood Road at
Dakota Avenue (NBS)
[Added 4-22-1986;
amended 4-13-2004]
East/West on
Dakota Avenue
Right on red —
Brentwood Road at a
curb cut 90 feet south
of Minnesota Avenue
(NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
West from curb
cut
Left —
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1283
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Brentwood Road at
Second Avenue (BWD)
[Added 10-19-1993]
North/South on
Brentwood
Road; East/West
on Second
Avenue
No turn on red —
Brentwood Road
between Spur Drive
North and Spur Drive
South (BWD) [Added
8-27-1991]
North on
Brentwood
Road
Straight
through and
right from left
lane
—
Brentwood Road
between Spur Drive
North and Spur Drive
South (BWD) [Added
8-27-1991]
South on
Brentwood
Road
Straight
through and
right from left
lane
—
Brentwood Road at
Spur Drive South
(NBS) [Added
11-15-1983]
North/South on
Brentwood
Road
Right on red —
Brentwood Road at
Suffolk Avenue and
Washington Avenue
(BWD)
South on
Washington
Avenue; East on
Suffolk Avenue
Right on red —
Brentwood Road at
Sunrise Highway
(north side entrance
for westbound Sunrise
Highway) (NBS)
[Added 3-5-1985]
North on
Brentwood
Road
Left —
Brentwood Road at
Union Boulevard (BSR)
[Added 1-5-1982;
amended 7-16-2002]
East/West on
Union
Boulevard;
North on
Brentwood
Road
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Brentwood Road at
Wisconsin Avenue
(BWD)
East on
Wisconsin
Avenue
Left and
straight ahead
—
Broadway Avenue at a
curb cut 460 feet north
of Maria Court (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980]
West on curb
cut
Left —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1284
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Broadway at Second
Avenue (BWD)
North/South on
Broadway; East/
West on Second
Avenue
Right on red —
Broadway Avenue at
Veterans Memorial
Highway (HBK)
[Added 5-19-1992]
North on
Broadway
Avenue
Straight
through and
right from left
lane
—
Brook Street at Cherry
Avenue (WSV)
North/South on
Cherry Avenue;
East/West on
Brook Street
Right on red
Brook Street at
Montauk Highway
(OKD)
South on Brook
Street
Right on red —
Caleb's Path
(northbound) at
Highland Road (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980]
East on
Highland Road
Right —
Caleb's Path
(northbound) at
Highland Road (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980]
West on
Highland Road
Left —
Caleb's Path
(northbound) at Motor
Parkway (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980]
West on Motor
Parkway
Left —
Candee Avenue at
Main Street (SVL)
East on Main
Street; North on
Candee Avenue
Right on red —
Candee Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(SVL)
West on
Montauk
Highway
Left —
Candlewood Road at
Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 6-20-1995]
East on
Candlewood
Road; South on
Stein Drive
Right on red —
Carleton Avenue at
Clayton Street (CIS)
East/West on
Clayton Street;
North/South on
Carleton Avenue
Right on red —
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1285
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Carleton Avenue at a
curb cut 50 feet north
of Beaverdam Road
(EIS) [Added
1-19-1999]
East on curb cut Left —
Carleton Avenue at a
curb cut 50 feet north
of Beaverdam Road
(EIS) [Added
1-19-1999]
North on
Carleton Avenue
Left —
Carleton Avenue at
Islip Boulevard (east
intersection) (EIS)
[Added 1-16-1979]
South on
Carleton
Avenue; West on
Islip Boulevard
Left —
Carleton Avenue at
Islip Boulevard (west
intersection) (EIS)
[Added 1-16-1979]
East on Islip
Boulevard;
North on
Carleton Avenue
Left —
Carleton Avenue at a
commercial driveway
located 125 feet north
of Montauk Highway
(EIS) [Added
5-15-2018; amended
8-21-2018]
East on
commercial
driveway; north
on Carleton
Avenue
Left —
Carleton Avenue at
Suffolk Avenue and
Wheeler Road (CIS)
East/West on
Suffolk Avenue;
South on
Wheeler Road
Right on red —
Cherry Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(WSV) [Added
4-8-2014]
West on
Montauk
Highway
Right on red —
Chestnut Place at West
Islip Boulevard (WIS)
[Added 8-12-2008]
East on West
Islip Boulevard
Right —
Church Street at
Lincoln Avenue (HBK)
[Added 6-5-1984]
East/West on
Church Street
Right on red —
Church Street at
Knickerbocker Avenue
(BHM) [Added
5-24-2011]
West on Church
Street
Right on red —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1286
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Church Street at
Locust Avenue (BHM)
North/South on
Locust Avenue;
East on Church
Street
Right on red —
Church Street at
Smithtown Avenue
(BHM)
North/South on
Smithtown
Avenue; East on
Church Street
Right on red —
Church Street at
Sylvan Avenue (BPT)
[Added 6-23-1998;
amended
12-16-2003]
North on Sylvan
Avenue
Left and
through
—
Clayton Street at
Lowell Avenue and
Poplar Street (CIS)
West on Poplar
Street; South on
Lowell Avenue
Right on red —
Coates Avenue at
Ellsworth Street (HBK)
[Added 7-7-1987]
South Straight
through
—
Coates Avenue at
Ellsworth Street (HBK)
[Added 7-7-1987]
West Straight
through and
left
—
Commack Road at
Moffit Boulevard (ISL)
East/West on
Moffit
Boulevard
Right on red —
Commack Road at
Spur Drive North
(BWD) [Added
1-2-1990; amended
7-18-1995]
West on Spur
Drive North;
North on
Commack Road
Right on red —
Commack Road at
Lake Street/Romaine
Street (ISL) [Added
8-14-2001]
East on Lake
Street; North on
Romaine Street
Right on red —
Commack Road
between Sunrise
Highway (south
service road) and
Grant Avenue (ISL)
[Added 6-22-1999]
South on
Commack Road
Straight
through from
right lane
—
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1287
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Community College
Drive at Wicks Road
(BWD) [Added
12-19-1989]
East on
Community
College Drive
No turn on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Connetquot Avenue at
CVS Shopping Center
private driveway
(NGR) [Added
10-25-2011]
South on
Connetquot
Avenue
Left —
Connetquot Avenue at
East Roslyn Street
service ramp (EIS)
[Added 3-19-1991;
amended
11-27-2007]
Westbound
service ramp
and North/
South on
Connetquot
Avenue
Right on red —
Connetquot Avenue at
Jericho Street service
ramp (EIS) [Added
1-25-2011]
North on
Connetquot
Avenue
Right on red —
Connetquot Avenue at
Manhattan Boulevard
(NGR) [Added
6-18-1985; amended
9-11-2012]
East on
Manhattan
Boulevard;
South on
Connetquot
Avenue
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Corbin Avenue at
Grand Boulevard
(EDG) [Added
2-5-1995; amended
6-18-1985;
6-20-1995]
South on Corbin
Avenue
Right on red —
Corbin Avenue/
Howells Road at Grand
Boulevard (EDG)
[Added 4-28-2009]
East on Grand
Boulevard
Right
CR 76, Town Line Road
at Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG) [Added
4-17-1990]
North on
Lincoln
Boulevard
Right on red —
Crooked Hill Road
(CR13) at Express
Drive North (EDG)
[Added 12-17-2002]
West on Express
Drive North
Right on red —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1288
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Crooked Hill Road at G
Road (BWD)
West on G Road Right on red —
Crooked Hill Road at
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 11-16-2004]
North on Wicks
Road
Left —
Delaware Street at
Saxon Avenue (BSR)
[Added 10-16-1990]
East on
Delaware Street
Left —
Dowsing Avenue at
Fifth Avenue (NBS)
[Added 4-2-1985]
East on
Dowsing Avenue
Right on red —
Easton Street at Ocean
Avenue (LKL) [Added
4-4-1989]
North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Left —
Evelyn Road at a curb
cut 90 feet north of
Montauk Highway
(WIS) [Added
12-14-2010]
West on curb
cut
Right —
Express Drive North at
Motor Parkway (Exit
55) (HPG)
West on Express
Drive North
Right on red —
Express Drive North at
Motor Parkway (Exit
57) (CIS)
West on Express
Drive North
Right on red —
Express Drive South at
Motor Parkway (Exit
55) (HPG)
East on Express
Drive South
Right on red —
Express Drive South at
Motor Parkway (Exit
57) (CIS)
East on Express
Drive South
Right on red —
Express Drive South at
Washington Avenue
(BWD) [Added
9-17-1991]
South on
Washington
Avenue
Straight ahead
and right from
left lane
—
Express Drive South
(Eastbound Long
Island Expressway
Entrance) at Wicks
Road (BWD) [Added
3-3-2015]
North on Wicks
Road
Right on red —
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1289
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Fifth Avenue at a curb
cut 200 feet north of
Candlewood Road
(BWD) [Added
12-14-2004]
West on curb
cut
Left —
Fifth Avenue at
Howells Road (BSR)
East/West on
Howells Road;
North/South on
Fifth Avenue
Right on red —
Fifth Avenue at Pine
Aire Drive (BWD)
[Amended
2-26-2008]
West on Third
Avenue; East on
Pine Aire Drive
Right on red —
Fifth Avenue at Suffolk
Avenue and Wicks
Road (BWD) [Added
2-27-1990; amended
4-25-2006]
North on Fifth
Avenue; East/
West on Suffolk
Avenue
Right on red —
First Avenue at Fourth
Street (BWD) [Added
3-20-1990]
North Right —
First Avenue at Fourth
Street (BWD) [Added
3-20-1990]
South Left —
First Street at Third
Avenue (BWD) [Added
6-20-1995]
North/South on
First Street;
East/West on
Third Avenue
Right on red —
Foster Avenue at
Middle Road (SVL)
[Added 10-18-1988]
North/South on
Foster Avenue;
East/West on
Middle Road
Right on red 6:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Fourth Avenue at
Union Boulevard (BSR)
East/West on
Union
Boulevard;
North/South on
Fourth Avenue
Right on red —
Fourth Street at
Second Avenue (BWD)
North/South on
Fourth Street;
East/West on
Second Avenue
Right on red —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1290
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Furrows Road at
Patchogue-Holbrook
Road (HBK) [Added
10-20-1998]
East on Furrows
Road
Straight
through from
curb lane
—
Gillette Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added
2-9-2010; amended
5-11-2010]
North on
Gillette Avenue
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Gillette Avenue and
Railroad Avenue at
Main Street (SVL)
East/West on
Main Street;
South on
Railroad
Avenue; North
on Gillette
Avenue
Right on red —
Grant Avenue at Pine
Aire Drive (BWD)
[Added 6-7-2016]
South on Grant
Avenue
Right on red —
Greeley Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
7-14-1993; amended
9-13-2005]
South on
Greeley Avenue
Left and
straight
through
—
Greenbelt Parkway at
Patchogue-Holbrook
Road (HTV)
North/South on
Greenbelt
Parkway; West
on Patchogue-
Holbrook Road
Right on red —
Greenbelt Parkway
West (Colin Drive) at
Nicolls Road (CR 97)
(HTV) [Added
4-13-1993]
South on Nicolls
Road
Right on red —
Greenbelt Parkway
West at Nicolls Road
(HBK) [Added
6-4-1985]
North on
Nicholls Road
Left —
Greenbelt Parkway
West at Nicolls Road
(HBK) [Added
6-4-1985]
South on Nicolls
Road
Right —
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1291
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Greene Avenue at
Main Street (SVL)
North/South on
Green Avenue;
East/West on
Main Street
Right on red —
Grove Street at Wicks
Road (BWD) [Added
10-13-2015]
West on Grove
Street
Left —
Handsome Avenue at
St. Lawrence Church
driveway 390 feet
south of Montauk
Highway (SVL)
[Added 6-5-1979]
East on
driveway
Left 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Sun.
Handsome Avenue at
St. Lawrence School
driveway 250 feet
south of Montauk
Highway (SVL)
[Added 6-5-1979]
West on
driveway
Right 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Sun.
Hawthorne Avenue at
Suffolk Avenue (CIS)
[Added 9-8-1998]
West on Suffolk
Avenue
Left —
Heyward Street and
Washington Avenue at
Roslyn Road (BWD)
East of
Heyward Street;
West on Roslyn
Road
Right on red —
Hiddink Street at
Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
9-16-1980; amended
4-9-2008]
West on
Montauk
Highway
Right on red —
Higbie Lane at Hunter
Avenue (WIS)
[Amended
10-19-1999]
East/West on
Hunter Avenue;
North/South on
Higbie Lane
No turn on red —
Higbie Lane at Lions
Path (WIS) [Added
4-12-1995]
North on Higbie
Lane; West on
Lions Path
No turn on red —
Higbie Lane at Ruth
Street (WIS) [Added
8-28-1990]
West on Ruth
Street
Right on red —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1292
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Higbie Lane at Udall
Road (CR82) (WIS)
[Added 11-12-2002]
South on Higbie
Lane
(Northwest leg)
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Higbie Lane at Udall
Road (CR82) (WIS)
[Added 11-12-2002]
South on Udall
Road
Left —
Hoffman Lane at Town
Line Road (CR76)
(HPG) [Added
8-17-1999]
North on
Hoffman Lane
Right on red —
Hunter Avenue at
Muncey Road and
Udall Road (WIS)
[Amended 5-4-2004]
West on Muncey
Road East on
Hunter Avenue
North/South on
Udall Road
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Irish Lane at Moffit
Boulevard (EIS)
[Added 8-30-1988]
East/West on
Moffit
Boulevard;
North/South on
Irish Lane
No turn on red —
Island Boulevard at
Smithtown Avenue and
Terry Road (BHM)
[Added 1-25-2005]
East/West on
Island
Boulevard;
North/South on
Smithtown
Avenue; North
on Terry Road
Right on red —
Jefferson Avenue at
Motor Parkway (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984;
amended 2-5-1985]
East on Motor
Parkway
Right 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
except Sat.
Johnson Avenue at
Ocean Avenue (RNK)
[Added 4-7-1981;
amended 3-1-1983]
North on Ocean
Avenue; East on
Johnson Avenue;
South on Ocean
Avenue
Right on red —
Johnson Avenue at
Terry Road (RNK)
[Added 6-6-1995;
amended 4-8-2014]
South on Terry
Road
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1293
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Karshick Street at
Lakeland Avenue
(BHM) [Added
7-10-2007]
East on
Karshick Street
Right on red —
Lakeland Avenue at
Johnson Avenue and
Tariff Street (SVL)
East on Tariff
Street; South on
Lakeland
Avenue; South
on Johnson
Avenue
Right on red —
Lakeland Avenue at
Peters Lane (BHM)
[Added 8-17-1999]
West on Peters
Lane
Left —
Lakeland Avenue at
Thirteenth Street
(BHM) [Added
4-7-1998]
East on
Thirteenth
Street
Left —
Lakeland Avenue at a
point approximately
450 feet north of
Thirteenth Street
(BHM) [Added
1-25-2000]
North on
Lakeland
Avenue
No U-turn
Lakeland Avenue (east
side) at a curb cut 150
feet north of Veterans
Memorial Highway
(BHM) [Added
4-8-1997]
West on
driveway
Left —
Lakeland Avenue at KMart
Access Road
(BHM) [Added
11-12-2002]
North on
Lakeland
Avenue
Right on red —
Lakeland Avenue at KMart
Shopping Center
driveway and Karshick
Street (BHM) [Added
8-17-1999; amended
1-25-2000;
7-16-2019]
South on
Lakeland
Avenue
Left —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1294
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Lakeland Avenue at KMart
Shopping Center
driveway and Karshick
Street (BHM) [Added
1-25-2000]
West on K-Mart
Shopping
Center driveway
Left —
Lakeland Avenue (east)
at a point
approximately 320 feet
south of K-Mart
Shopping Center
driveway at Apartment
Driveway (BHM)
[Added 1-25-2000]
West on
Apartment
Driveway
No turn on red
Lakeland Avenue west
at 7-11 entrance-exit
(BHM) [Added
9-17-1991]
North on
Lakeland
Avenue exiting
7-11
No left turn —
Lakeland Avenue at
Sunrise Garden
Apartments
(Greenbrier Drive)
(BHM) [Added
11-12-2002]
North on
Lakeland
Avenue
Right on red
Lincoln Avenue at
Motor Parkway (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984;
amended 2-5-1985]
East on Motor
Parkway
Right 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
except Sat. &
Sun.
Locust Avenue (west
side) at a curb cut
approximately 100 feet
north of Sunrise
Highway (BHM)
[Added 5-4-1999]
East on curb cut No left turn —
Lowell Avenue at
Clayton Street (CIS)
[Added 1-2-1991]
South on Lowell
Avenue
Straight
through from
curb lane
—
Lowell Avenue at
Suffolk Avenue (CIS)
[Amended 9-7-1982;
12-16-1997]
North on Lowell
Avenue
Right on red —
Madison Avenue at
Motor Parkway (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984;
amended 2-5-1985]
East on Motor
Parkway
Right 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
except Sat. &
Sun.
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1295
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Madison Street at
Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added
10-21-1997]
East on
Madison Street
Right on red —
Manatuck Boulevard at
Spur Drive South
(NBS)
West on Spur
Drive South
Right on red —
Manhattan Boulevard
at Spur Drive North
(EIS) [Added
7-5-1988]
East/West on
Manhattan
Boulevard;
North/South on
Spur Drive
North
No turn on red —
Manhattan Boulevard
at Spur Drive South
(EIS) [Added
7-5-1988]
East/West on
Manhattan
Boulevard;
North/South on
Spur Drive
South
No turn on red —
Merrill Street at Wicks
Road (BWD) [Added
9-22-2015]
East on Merrill
Street
Left —
Millpond Road at
Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
10-16-1990]
South on
Millpond Road
(western leg)
No left turn —
Moffit Boulevard at
Saxon Avenue (ISL)
East on Moffit
Boulevard
Right on red —
Montauk Highway at a
point 200 feet west of
Idle Hour Boulevard
(OKD) [Added
2-25-1997]
East on
Montauk
Left —
Montauk Highway at a
curb cut 200 feet west
of Idle Hour Boulevard
(OKD) [Added
2-25-1997]
South on curb
cut
Left —
Montauk Highway at
Oakdale-Bohemia Road
(OKD) [Added
7-15-2003]
West on
Montauk
Highway
Right on red —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1296
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Montauk Highway at
Oakdale Railroad
Station (OKD)
South on
Oakdale
Railroad Station
driveway
Left —
Montauk Highway at
Overton Street (SVL)
[Added 2-27-1996]
East on
Montauk
Highway
Left —
Montauk Highway at
St. Lawrence School
driveway 180 feet east
of Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
North on
driveway
Left —
Montauk Highway at
Sayville Boulevard
(SVL)
West on
Montauk
Highway
Right on red —
Montauk Highway at
Vanderbilt Boulevard
(OKD) [Added
6-5-1979]
East on
Montauk
Highway
Right on red —
Motor Parkway at
Church Drive (BWD)
[Added 2-2-1988]
East on Motor
Parkway
Right 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Motor Parkway/south
side opposite private
driveway (350A Motor
Parkway) 450 feet west
of Marcus Boulevard
(HPG) [Added
5-11-2010]
East on Motor
Parkway exiting
private
driveway
(Wendy's
Restaurant)
Left —
Motor Parkway at Old
Nichols Road (HPG)
[Added 11-9-1999]
South on Old
Nichols Road;
East on Motor
Parkway
Left —
Motor Parkway at
Thomas Street (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984;
amended 2-5-1985]
East on Motor
Parkway
Right 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
except Sat. &
Sun.
Motor Parkway at
Washington Avenue
(BWD)
East on Motor
Parkway
Right on red —
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § C-1
66:1297
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Motor Parkway at
Wheeler Road (CIS)
West on Motor
Parkway; South
on Wheeler
Road
Right on red —
Mowbray Place at
commercial driveway
located at a point 150
feet south of Montauk
Highway (BSR)
[Added 11-17-2015]
West on
commercial
driveway
Left —
Nichols Road at
Seusing Boulevard
(RNK) [Added
3-20-1990]
West/East on
Seusing
Boulevard
Right on red —
North Thompson Drive
at Pine Aire Drive
(EDG) [Added
5-15-2018]
North on North
Thompson Drive
Left 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Oakwood Boulevard at
Home Depot site
ingress/egress
roadway (NBS)
[Added 4-8-1997]
East on Home
Depot site
ingress/egress
roadway
Right —
Ocean Avenue at
Peconic Street (LKL)
[Added 4-15-1980]
North on Ocean
Avenue
Right on red —
Park Avenue at Union
Boulevard (BSR)
East/West on
Union
Boulevard;
South from
railroad station
parking lot
Right on red —
Patchogue-Holbrook
Road at Woodside
Avenue (HTV) [Added
6-23-2015]
West on
Woodside
Avenue
Right on red —
Penataquit Avenue at a
curb cut 75 feet south
of Sunrise Highway
(BSR) [Added
4-3-2001]
West on curb
cut
Left —
§ C-1 ISLIP CODE § C-1
66:1298
Location
Controlling
Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours
Pond Road at Rosevale
Avenue (RNK) [Added
4-21-1992]
East on
Rosevale
Avenue
Straight
through
—
Pond Road at
Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added
5-26-2015]
South on
Sycamore
Avenue
Right on red —
Railroad Avenue at
Smithtown Avenue,
CR. 29 (LKL) [Added
7-10-1990]
North/South on
Smithtown
Avenue East/
West on
Railroad Avenue
Left —
Salem Street at Spur
Drive South (EIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
North on Salem
Street
Left —
Saxon Avenue at Union
Boulevard (BSR, ISL)
[Added 1-5-1982]
East/West on
Union
Boulevard;
North/South on
Saxon Avenue
Right on red 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Second Avenue at
Union Boulevard (BSR)
East on Union
Boulevard
Right on red —
Spur Drive South at
38th Street (ISL)
[Added 5-20-1997]
West on Spur
Drive South
Left —
Town Line Road at
Wedgewood Drive
(HPG) [Added
10-5-1999]
West on Town
Line Road
Left 6:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
Wicks Road, 125 feet
north of Grove Street
at driveway (BWD)
[Added 10-22-2019]
North on Wicks
Road
Left —
Wicks Road at Yarnell
Street (BWD) [Added
3-2-1982]
North on Wicks
Road
Left —
Schedule D
U-TURNS
§ C-1 WATER QUALITY § D-1
66:1299
§ D-1. U-turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-4, U-turns are prohibited at any
of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Carleton Avenue (north) (CIS)
[Added 2-1-1994]
Belt Drive
Carleton Avenue (south) (CIS)
[Added 2-1-1994]
Spur Drive North
Fifth Avenue (north) (BSR) [Added
5-5-1987]
400 feet south of Sunrise Highway
Fifth Avenue (south) (BSR) [Added
7-7-1987]
Howells Road
Lakeland Avenue (south) (BHM)
[Added 7-16-2019]
K-Mart Shopping Center driveway
and Karshick Street
Montauk Highway (west) (BPT)
[Added 3-3-1981]
400 feet east of Gillette Avenue
Patchogue-Holbrook Road (CR-19)
(north, south) (HTV) [Amended
7-14-1998]
Woodside Avenue (CR-99)
Suffolk Avenue (west) (CIS) [Added
2-29-2000; amended 4-5-2005]
Dovecote Lane
Suffolk Avenue (west) (CIS) [Added
2-29-2000]
Gibbs Road
Suffolk Avenue (west) (CIS) [Added
9-8-1998]
Hawthorne Avenue
Suffolk Avenue (west) (CIS) [Added
2-29-2000]
Powell Avenue
Suffolk Avenue (west) (CIS) [Added
9-8-1998]
Weeks Avenue
Schedule E
ONE-WAY STREETS
§ E-1. One-way streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-5, the following described
streets or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ D-1 ISLIP CODE § E-1
66:1300
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Arrival Avenue (HBK)
[Amended
10-17-1987;
5-7-1985]
Counterclockwise — From the east roadway of
MacArthur Memorial Highway to
the access road to the air freight
area
Bay Avenue (BSR) North — From Gibson Street (South
Service Road) to Montauk
Highway
Bay Avenue (BSR) South — From Gibson Street (South
Service Road) to Lawrence
Avenue
Belmore Avenue
(NGR)
North — From Lowell Avenue to Seacliff
Street
Belmore Avenue
(NGR)
South — From Lowell Avenue to
Cedarhurst Street
Belt Drive West (CIS)
[Added 6-16-1981]
East — From G Road to Carleton Avenue
Broadway (ISL) North — From Commack Road to Forty-
Third Street
Brook Street (NBS)
[Added 4-8-1997]
East — From Saint Louis Avenue to
Saxon Avenue
Canal Road (NGR) East — From Cedar Place to the
90-degree bend in Canal Road
located north of Tower Mews
Canal Road (NGR) East/North — From Cedar Place to Edgewater
Road
Clinton Avenue (BSR) South — From 225 feet north of Reil Place
to Mechanicsville Road
Clinton Avenue (BSR) South — From Mechanicsville Road to
West Main Street
Clinton Avenue (BSR) South — From West Main Street to Gibson
Street
Commack Road (west
spur) (BWD)
South/ West — At Spur Drive North
Dakota Avenue (NBS)
[Added 9-1-1991]
East — From Penataquit Avenue to
Brentwood Road
DeKalb Avenue
[Added 5-6-1986]
East — From Fulton Street to Highland
Road
Departure Drive
(HBK) [Amended
5-7-1985]
Counterclockwise — From Arrival Avenue to the west
roadway of MacArthur Memorial
Highway
§ E-1 WATER QUALITY § E-1
66:1301
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Dunwoodie Road
(WIS) [Added
12-6-1983]
Counterclockwise — From Dunwoodie Road, south
leg, to Dunwoodie Road, south
leg
East Bay Drive (WIS) North — From Montauk Highway to
Center Bay Drive
Eaton Lane Extension
(WIS)
South/West — At Eaton Lane
Express Drive North
(BWD)
West — From 900 feet east of Wheeler
Road (Rt. 111) to 1,200 feet west
of Motor Parkway (Exit 55)
Express Drive North
(RNK)
West — From Pond Road to 600 feet west
of Shafter Street
Express Drive North
(CIS, HPG)
West — From 300 feet east of
Blydenburgh's Road to Roosevelt
Boulevard
Express Drive North
(north spur) (RNK)
West/North — At Nichol's Road
Express Drive North
(south spur) (RNK)
East/South — At Nichol's Road
Express Drive South
(BWD)
East — From Fulton Street to 400 feet
east of Caleb's Path
Express Drive South
(BWD)
East — From 600 feet west of Wicks
Road to 1,000 feet east of Wicks
Road
Express Drive South
(CIS, HPG)
East — From Roosevelt Boulevard to 600
feet east of Blydenburgh's Road
Express Drive South
(EDG)
East — From the Huntington town line
to Crooked Hill Road
Express Drive South
(RNK)
East — From 500 feet west of Nichol's
Road to Pond Road
Fifth Avenue (BSR) North — From Montauk Highway to 225
feet north of Reil Place
First Avenue (BSR)
[Added 6-6-1978;
amended 17-1991;
1-11-1995]
North — From Montauk Highway to Union
Boulevard
First Avenue (BWD)
[Added 2-6-1990]
West — From Brentwood Road to Fourth
Street
First Street (HBK) West — From Lincoln Avenue to
Flaxwood Drive
§ E-1 ISLIP CODE § E-1
66:1302
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Forty-Third Street
(ISL)
West — From Commack Road to
Broadway
Frog Lane (OKD)
[Added 12-6-1994]
East — From Jade Street to Golden Horn
G Road (east spur)
(CIS) [Added
6-16-1981]
South — From G Road to Belt Drive West
Girard Avenue (WBS) North — From Bay Bright Court to
Mackenzie Court
Girard Avenue (WBS) South — From Neptune Court to Shore
Road
Golden Horn (OKD)
[Added 12-6-1994]
South — From Frog Lane to Featherbed
Lane
Grand Boulevard
(east side) (BWD)
[Added 7-2-1991]
North — From Noble Street to Alkier
Street
Grand Boulevard
(west side) (BWD)
[Added 7-2-1991]
South — From Alkier Street to Noble
Street
Grand Boulevard
(south spur) (EDG)
[Added 2-24-2009]
South/East — At Howells Road
Harrison Avenue
(EIS)
South — From Montauk Highway to Duval
Street
Highland Road (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980]
East — From Caleb's Path (southbound)
to Caleb's Path (northbound)
Highland Road (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980]
East — From West End Avenue to
Caleb's Path (southbound)
Highland Road (BWD) South — From Express Drive South to
DeKalb Avenue
Hollywood Drive
(north spur) (OKD)
West/North — At Idle Hour Boulevard
Jade Street (OKD) North — From Featherbed Lane to
Hollywood Drive
Julbet Drive (west
spur) (SVL)
South/West — At Sunrise Drive
Keith Lane (east spur)
(WIS) [Added
1-19-1993]
North — From 250 feet south of Union
Boulevard to Union Boulevard
§ E-1 WATER QUALITY § E-1
66:1303
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Keith Lane (west
spur) (WIS) [Added
1-19-1993]
South — From Union Boulevard south for
250 feet
Lakeview Avenue
(west spur) (WIS)
[Added 6-16-1981]
Northwest — From Lakeview Avenue to Archie
Place
Lakeview Avenue
(WIS) [Added
6-16-1981]
North — From Montauk Highway (New
York State Route 27A) to Archie
Place
MacArthur Boulevard
(CIS) [Added
2-4-1986]
North — From Motor Parkway to Bridge
Road
Mackenzie Court
(WBS)
East — From Girard Avenue to Bayway
Avenue
Madison Avenue
(BSR) [Added
6-24-1997]
South — From Montana Avenue to
Gunther Avenue
Manor Lane (east
spur) (WBS)
North/East — At Bay Shore Road
Manor Lane (west
spur) (WBS)
South/West — At Bay Shore Road
Maple Avenue (CIS) North 7:30 a.m. to
1:30 p.m. Sun.
From Third Avenue to Second
Avenue
Mechanicsville Road
(BSR) [Added
6-10-2003]
East — From Third Avenue to First
Avenue
Merritt Street (south
spur) (WIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
East/South — At Pat Drive
Middle Road (SLV) East — From Montauk Highway to
Collins Avenue
Minnesota Avenue
(NBS) [Added
11-19-1985]
East — From Illinois Avenue to
Brentwood Road
Neptune Court (WBS) West — From Bayway Avenue to Girard
Avenue
Oakwood Avenue
(east spur) (BPT)
[Added 6-22-1999]
North/East — At Railroad Street
§ E-1 ISLIP CODE § E-1
66:1304
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Oakwood Avenue
(WIS) [Added
8-12-2008]
East — 200 feet east of Higbie Lane to
Chestnut Place
Oakwood Boulevard
(NBS) [Added
4-8-1997]
East — From Monroe Avenue to Saint
Louis Avenue
Ocean Avenue (LKL)
[Added 3-23-2004]
South — From Lakeland Avenue to 500
feet south of Third Street
Ockers Drive (OKD) West/South — From 320 feet north of Montauk
Highway, north and around the
circle to the west exit at
Montauk Highway
Overton Street (SVL)
[Added 2-27-1996]
West — From Montauk Highway to
Macon Avenue
Paprocki Avenue
(WIS) [Added
8-12-2008]
East — From West Islip Boulevard to
Chestnut Place
Paumanake Avenue
(WIS) [Added
4-15-1980]
West 7:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Higbie Lane to Dogwood
Road
Princess Gate (OKD) East — From Tower Mews to Jade Street
Public Street (south
spur) (HPG)
East/South — At Terry Road
Quality Street (OKD) South/East — From Hollywood Drive to Jade
Street
Railroad Street (south
side) (BPT)
East — From 210 feet west of Snedecor
Avenue to 220 feet east of East
Road
Railroad Street (south
spur) (BPT)
East/South — At Snedecor Avenue
Railroad Street (north
side) (BPT)
West — From 210 feet west of Snedecor
Avenue to 220 feet east of East
Road
Rockaway Street
(NGR)
East 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Sundays
From Greenlawn Avenue to its
terminus at the Church Parking
Field
Roosevelt Street
(north spur) (BSR)
[Added 8-14-2007]
South/West — From Third Avenue to Evans
Place
§ E-1 WATER QUALITY § E-1
66:1305
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
St. Johns Street East
(CIS) [Amended
4-5-1983]
East 7:30 a.m. to
1:30 p.m.
Sundays
From Carleton Avenue to
Kenmore Avenue
Salt pad driveway
(CIS) [Added
6-16-1981]
Clockwise — From DPW Drive (east
intersection) to DPW Drive (west
intersection)
Secatogue Lane (WIS)
[Added 4-18-1989]
South/West — From Secatogue Lane (east spur)
to Bay 5th Street
Secatogue Lane (east
spur) (WIS) [Added
4-18-1989]
West/North — From Bay 5th Street to
Secatogue Lane
Second Avenue (BSR)
[Added 6-6-1978]
South — From Union Boulevard to East
Main Street
Short Street (CIS)
[Added 3-21-1978]
East — From Hawthorne Avenue to
William Street
Smith Street (SVL)
[Added 4-30-1996]
South — From Hiddink Street to Montauk
Highway
South Park Avenue
(BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
South — From West Main Street (Montauk
Highway) to Gibson Street
Station Street (HBK)
[Added 1-5-1982]
South — From Railroad Avenue Extension
to Railroad Avenue
Stevens Avenue (WIS) North 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Sundays
From Edward Avenue to Hunter
Avenue
Sunburst Boulevard
(north side) (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1994]
West — From Belt Drive East to Sunburst
Terrace (west intersection)
Sunburst Boulevard
(south side) (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1994]
East — From Robbins Drive to Belt Drive
East
Sycamore Avenue
(CIS)
South — From the north terminus south
for 300 feet.
Sylvan Avenue (BPT)
[Added 6-23-1998]
North — From 250 feet south of Church
Street to Church Street
Third Avenue (CIS) East 7:30 a.m. to
1:30 p.m.
Sundays
From Carleton Avenue to Maple
Street
Thirteenth Street
(BHM) [Added
4-7-1998]
East — From Lafayette Avenue to
Lakeland Avenue
§ E-1 ISLIP CODE § E-1
66:1306
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Tower Mews (OKD) South — From Hollywood Drive to
Featherbed Lane
Udall Road (WBW)
[Added 12-19-1978]
South — From Howells Road to Deer Park
Street
Van Bomel Boulevard
(east spur) (OKD)
[Added 2-25-1992]
North — From 105 feet south of Chateau
Drive to Chateau Drive
Van Bomel Boulevard
(west spur) (OKD)
[Added 2-25-1992]
South — From Chateau Drive south for
140 feet
West Bay Drive (WIS) South — From Montauk Highway to
Center Bay Drive
William Street (CIS)
[Added 3-21-1978]
South — From Short Street to Suffolk
Avenue
Wingan-Hauppauge
Road (ISL)
North — From Moffitt Boulevard to James
Street
Schedule F
PARKING AREA EXITS AND ENTRANCES
§ F-1. Parking area exits and entrances.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-6, the driveways described
below, between highways and off-street parking areas in the town, shall be
used for exit or entrance only as indicated below:
Driveway On Side Use398 Location
Bayport Avenue
(BPT)
West Exit At a point 190 feet north of
Middle Road
Beach Street (WIS)
[Added
9-13-2005]
East Ent. At a curb cut opposite
Sherman Avenue
Beach Street (WIS)
[Added
9-13-2005]
East Exit At a curb cut 150 feet north of
Sherman Avenue
Broadway Avenue
(HBK) [Added
5-7-1996]
West Exit At a point 300 feet south of
Maria Court (south driveway
of Merrimac School)
398. Note: “Ent.” stands for “Entrance.”
§ E-1 WATER QUALITY § F-1
66:1307
Driveway On Side Use Location
Candlewood Road
(BWD) [Added
5-6-1980]
North Ent. At a point 300 feet west of
Arbell Drive
Clayton Street
(CIS) [Added
5-20-1997]
North Ent. At a point 290 feet west of
Lowell Avenue
Clayton Street
(CIS) [Added
5-20-1997]
North Exit At a point 490 feet west of
Lowell Avenue
Collins Avenue
(SVL)
West Ent. At a point 100 feet south of
Middle Road
Collins Avenue
(SVL)
West Exit At a point 160 feet south of
Middle Road
Commack Road
(ISL) [Added
10-6-1981]
East Exit At a point 180 feet south of
Moffit Boulevard
Eighth Street
(BWD) [Amended
4-1-1986]
East Exit, 7:00
a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Mon. - Fri.
At Third Avenue
Gillette Avenue
(SVL)
East Ent. At a point 230 feet south of
Main Street
Gillette Avenue
(SVL)
East Exit At a point 120 feet south of
Main Street
Greeley Avenue
(SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
East Ent. At Sayville Jewish Community
Center 120 feet north of Easy
Street
Greeley Avenue
(SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
East Exit At Sayville Jewish Community
Center 280 feet north of Easy
Street
Greeley Avenue
(SVL)
East Exit At a point 10 feet north of
Railroad Street (Depot Street)
(westbound)
Greenlawn Avenue
(NGR)
West Ent. At a point 150 feet north of
Rockaway Street
Handsome Avenue
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
East Ent. At St. Lawrence School
driveway 80 feet south of
Montauk Highway
Handsome Avenue
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
East Exit,
except for
school
buses
At St. Lawrence School
driveway 250 feet south of
Montauk Highway
§ F-1 ISLIP CODE § F-1
66:1308
Driveway On Side Use Location
Handsome Avenue
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
West Ent. At St. Lawrence Church
driveway 120 feet south of
Montauk Highway
Handsome Avenue
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
West Exit At St. Lawrence Church
driveway 390 feet south of
Montauk Highway
Higbie Lane (WIS)
[Added
6-20-1978]
West Ent. At a point 230 feet south of
South Street
Higbie Lane (WIS)
[Added
6-20-1978]
West Exit At a point 380 feet south of
South Street
Islip Avenue (ISL)
[Added
6-16-1981]
West Ent. At a point 320 feet south of
Moffit Boulevard
Islip Avenue (ISL)
[Added
10-6-1981]
West Ent. At a point 220 feet south of
Moffit Boulevard
Islip Avenue (ISL)
[Added
6-16-1981]
West Exit At a point 450 feet south of
Moffit Boulevard
Lakeland Avenue
(SVL)
West Ent. Opposite Henry Street
Lakeland Avenue
(SVL)
West Exit At a point 250 feet north of
Henry Street
Lincoln Avenue
(SVL)
West Exit At the south end of the Lincoln
Avenue Elementary School
Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG) [Added
12-6-1988]
East Ent. At a point 520 feet south of
Town Line Road
Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG) [Added
12-6-1988]
East Exit At a point 480 feet south of
Town Line Road
Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG) [Added
12-6-1988]
West Ent. At a point 1,100 feet south of
Town Line Road
Locust Avenue
(OKD) [Added
9-15-1987]
East Ent. At a point 575 feet north of
Riverdale Avenue
Middle Road (BPT) North Ent. At a point 140 feet west of
Bayport Avenue
§ F-1 WATER QUALITY § F-1
66:1309
Driveway On Side Use Location
Montauk Highway
(OKD) [Added
6-2-1981]
North Ent. At a point 200 feet west of
Berard Boulevard
Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
South Ent. At St. Lawrence Church
driveway opposite Garfield
Avenue
Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
South Exit At St. Lawrence School
driveway 180 feet east of
Handsome Avenue
Nassau Avenue
(ISL)
West Ent. At a point 130 feet north of
Montauk Highway (Main
Street)
Ninth Avenue
(BWD) [Added
5-6-1980]
South Exit At a point 300 feet west of
Owens Street
Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Added
3-16-1994]
West Ent. Opposite Windwood Road
Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Added
3-16-1994]
West Exit At a point 300 feet south of
Windwood Road
Penataquit Avenue
(BSR) [Added
4-3-2001]
East Exit At a point 75 feet south of
Sunrise Highway
Railroad Avenue
(BPT)
South Ent. At a point 750 feet west of
Snedecor Avenue (James
Wilson Young High School)
Railroad Avenue
(SVL)
West Ent. At a point 10 feet north of
Railroad Street (Depot Street)
(westbound)
Second Avenue
(BWD) [Added
6-1-1993]
North Ent. 50 feet west of Timberline
Drive
Second Avenue
(BWD) [Added
6-2-1981]
North Exit 60 feet east of Third Street
Second Avenue
(BWD) [Added
6-1-1993]
North Exit 50 feet east of Westwood
Drive
Snedecor Avenue
(BPT)
West Exit At a point 850 feet south of
Railroad Avenue
§ F-1 ISLIP CODE § F-1
66:1310
Driveway On Side Use Location
South Denver
Avenue (BSR)
[Added 5-7-1985]
West Ent. At a point 100 feet south of
Sunrise Highway South
Service Road
Suffolk Avenue
(CIS)
North Ent. At a point 94 feet east of
Williams Street
Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS)
[Added
1-11-1995]
South Ent. At a point 390 feet east of
Robbins Drive
Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS)
[Added
1-11-1995]
South Exit At a point 790 feet east of
Robbins Drive
Union Boulevard
(ISL) [Added
5-18-1982]
North Ent. At a point 1,560 feet west of
Grant Avenue
Waverly Avenue
(HTV) [Added
10-12-2004]
West Ent. At Sequoya Middle School
driveway 1675 feet south of
Blue Point Road West
Waverly Avenue
(HTV) [Added
10-12-2004]
West Exit At Sequoya Middle School
driveway 2135 feet south of
Blue Point Road West
Westbury Street
(EIS) (driveway
opposite)
West Exit At Connetquot Avenue
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
West Ent. At a point 600 feet north of
Chapel Hill Drive
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 4-5-1983]
West Ent. At a point 140 feet south of
Express Drive South
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
West Exit Opposite Chapel Hill Drive
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 4-5-1983]
West Exit At a point 240 feet south of
Express Drive South
Williams Street
(CIS)
East Exit At a point 256 feet north of
Suffolk Avenue
Schedule G
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
§ F-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1311
§ G-1. Stop and yield intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-7, the following described
intersections are designated as stop or yield intersections as indicated:
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Abbey Creek Court at Suffolk Lane
(EIS) [Added 8-12-2003]
Stop West on Abbey Creek
Court
Abbey Lane at Millay Lane (NBS)
[Added 12-19-1978]
Stop North/South on Abbey
Lane
Abbey Lane at Spur Drive South
(NBS)
Stop North on Abbey Lane
Abbott Place at Hyman Avenue
(WBS) [Added 2-7-1989]
Stop South on Hyman Avenue
Abbott Place at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Added 2-7-1989]
Stop East on Abbott Place
Aberdeen Lane at Ventura Lane
(BSR) [Added 8-21-1984;
amended 10-1-1985]
Stop East on Ventura Lane;
North/South on Aberdeen
Road
Aberdeen Road at Bardolier Lane
(WBS) [Added 5-3-1983]
Stop East on Bardolier Lane;
North/South on Aberdeen
Road
Aberdeen Road at Castle Lane
(WBS) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop East on Castle Lane
Aberdeen Road at Hampshire Road
(WBS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop West on Aberdeen Road
Aberdeen Road at Hother Lane
(WBS) [Added 6-21-2011]
Stop East on Hother Lane
Aberdeen Road at Northfield Lane
(WBS) [Added 8-17-1999]
Stop East on Northfield Lane
Aberdeen Road at Sunny Lane
(WBS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop North/South on Aberdeen
Road; East on Sunny Lane
Aberdeen Road at Warwick Lane
(north intersection) (BSR) [Added
10-1-1985]
Stop East on Warwick Lane;
North/South on Aberdeen
Road
Abrew Street at Brook Avenue
(NBS) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 6-19-2012]
Stop West on Abrew Street;
North/South on Brook
Avenue
Abrew Street at East Forks Road
(NBS)
Stop East on Abrew Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1312
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Academy Avenue at Jefferson
Street (EIS) [Amended 1-5-1982;
4-7-1987]
Stop South on Academy
Avenue; East/West on
Jefferson Street
Academy Lane at Adams Street
East (EIS) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop North on Academy Lane
Academy Lane at LaSalle Place
(WSV) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on LaSalle
Place
Academy Lane at Madison Street
(EIS) [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 4-3-1990]
Stop North/South on Academy
Lane; East/West on
Madison Street
Academy Street at April Lane
(BPT) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 8-17-1999]
Stop East/West on Academy
Street; South on April
Lane
Academy Street at Bayport Avenue
(north leg) (BPT) [Added
6-7-2016]
Stop West on Academy Street
Academy Street at Bayport Avenue
(south leg) (BPT) [Added
6-7-2016]
Stop North/South on Bayport
Avenue; East on Academy
Street
Academy Street at Fairview
Avenue (BPT) [Amended
6-8-2010]
Stop North/South on Fairview
Avenue; East/West on
Academy Street
Academy Street at Gillette Avenue
(BPT) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop North/South on Gillette
Avenue; East on Academy
Street
Academy Street at Kensington
Avenue (BPT)
Stop North/South on
Kensington Avenue
Academy Street at McConnell
Avenue (BPT) [Amended
11-18-1997]
Stop East/West on Academy
Street; North/South on
McConnell Avenue
Academy Street at Oakwood
Avenue (BPT) [Amended
9-7-1999]
Stop East/West on Academy
Street; North/South on
Oakwood Avenue
Academy Street at Ocean Avenue
(BPT)
Stop North on Ocean Avenue
Academy Street at Snedecor
Avenue (south leg) (BPT) [Added
10-6-1998]
Stop East on Academy Street;
North/South on Snedecor
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1313
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Academy Street at Snedecor
Avenue (north leg) (BPT)
[Amended 10-6-1998]
Stop West on Academy Street
Ace Court at Kane Street (WIS) Stop East on Ace Court
Ace Court at Phyllis Place (WIS) Stop West on Ace Court
Ackerman Street at Audwin Drive
(CIS)
Stop East on Ackerman Street
Ackerman Street at Cordello
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Ackerman Street
Ackerman Street at Kenmore
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Ackerman
Street
Ackerson Boulevard at Chenango
Drive (NBS) [Amended
12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive; South on Ackerson
Boulevard
Ackerson Boulevard at Chestnut
Drive (NBS)
Stop North/South on Ackerson
Boulevard
Ackerson Boulevard at Fire Road
Drive (NBS)
Stop North/South on Ackerson
Boulevard
Ackerson Boulevard at Huron
Drive (NBS)
Stop North/South on Ackerson
Boulevard
Ackerson Boulevard at Montauk
Drive (NBS) [Amended 4-4-1995]
Stop East/West on Montauk
Drive; North/South on
Ackerson Boulevard
Ackerson Boulevard at Ontario
Drive (NBS) [Amended
2-27-2007]
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive; South on Ackerson
Boulevard
*Ackerson Street at County Road
13A (BSR)
+Ackerson Street at Fifth Avenue
(BSR)
Acorn Avenue at Apricot Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Acorn
Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Brier Street (CIS) Stop South on Acorn Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Brightside Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Acorn
Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Cinnamon Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Acorn
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1314
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Acorn Avenue at Date Street (CIS)
[Amended 1-14-2003]
Stop North/South on Acorn
Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Lemon Street
(CIS)
Stop North on Acorn Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Olive Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Acorn
Avenue
Acorn Avenue at Palmetto Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Palmetto
Street
Acorn Avenue at Sage Street (CIS)
[Amended 9-23-2014]
Stop South on Acorn Avenue;
East/West on Sage Street
Acorn Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Sassafras
Street
+Adams Avenue and Farmers
Market exit at Oakwood Boulevard
(BSR)
Stop South on Adams Avenue;
North on Farmers Market
exit
Adams Avenue at Fletcher Street
(BWD) [Amended 9-21-1993]
Stop East on Fletcher Street
Adams Avenue at Gunther Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 12-13-2011]
Stop North/South on Adams
Avenue; East/west on
Gunther Avenue
Adams Avenue at Hamilton Place
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Adams
Avenue
Adams Avenue at Hancock Road
(WIS)
Stop West on Adams Avenue
Adams Avenue at Jackson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North on Adams Avenue
Adams Avenue at McKinley Street
(BWD) [Amended 5-3-1983]
Stop West on McKinley Street
Adams Avenue at Montana Avenue
(NBS) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop North on Adams Avenue
Adams Avenue at Oak Street
(BWD) [Amended 3-8-2011]
Stop East/West on Oak Street;
North/South on Adams
Avenue
Adams Avenue at Oakwood
Boulevard (BSR) [Added
11-20-1984]
Stop South on Adams Avenue
Adams Avenue at Pine Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Pine Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1315
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Adams Avenue at Quincy Place
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Adams
Avenue
Adams Avenue at Spruce Street
(BWD) [Amended 11-17-1981;
3-8-2011]
Stop West on Spruce Street
Adams Avenue at Van Cedar Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Van Cedar
Street
Adams Place at Muncey Road
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Adams
Place
Adams Road at Brown Street (CIS)
[Added 11-15-1994]
Stop East/West on Adams
Road; South on Brown
Street
Adams Road at Feller Place (CIS)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop North on Adams Road
Adams Road at Forest Place (CIS)
[Added 9-10-2002]
Stop South on Forest Place
Adams Road at Hawthorne Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East on Adams Road
Adams Street East at Conlu Drive
East (EIS)
Stop South on Conlu Drive
East
Adams Street East at Conlu Drive
West (EIS)
Stop South on Conlu Drive
West
Adams Street East at Robinhood
Drive (EIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop South on Robinhood Drive
Adams Street East on Sherwood
Drive (EIS)
Stop South on Sherwood Drive
Adams Street East at Spur Drive
South (EIS)
Stop East on Adams Street
East
Adams Street East at Tojan Drive
(EIS) [Added 3-20-1979;
amended 9-8-1998]
Stop East/West on Adams
Street East; South on
Tojan Drive
Adams Street East at Wantagh
Avenue (EIS)
Stop South on Wantagh Avenue
Adams Street West at Garfield
Avenue and a driveway opposite
Garfield Avenue (EIS) [Added
2-25-2003]
Stop North on Garfield Avenue
South on driveway
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1316
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Adams Street West at Irish Lane
(EIS) [Amended 12-8-1998]
Stop East/West on Adams
Street West; North/South
on Irish Lane
Adams Street West at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Stellenwerf Avenue
Adams Street West at Washington
Avenue (EIS) [Amended
2-25-2003]
Stop East/West on Adams
Street West; North/South
on Washington Avenue
Adelhaide Lane at Haide Place
(EIS) [Added 9-7-1999]
Stop West on Haide Place
Adelphi Street at Ocean Avenue
(ISL) [Added 4-4-2000]
Stop West on Adelphi Street
Adler Street at Belmore Avenue
(EIS)
Stop West on Adler Street
Adolphi Place at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-2-2014]
Stop North of Adolphi Place
Adrienne Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Added
2-23-1993]
Stop East on Adrienne Drive
Aero Road at Central Avenue
(HBK) [Added 12-16-1997]
Stop East on Aero Road
Afta Court at Fairdale Drive (BWD)
[Added 11-14-2000]
Stop South on Afta Court
Agate Street at Cedar Drive (PNR)
[Added 5-3-2005]
Stop South on Agate Street
Agate Street at Hemlock Drive
(PNR) [Added 5-16-1989]
Stop North on Agate Street
Airport Perimeter Road at
Smithtown Avenue (HBK) [Added
12-6-1977]
Stop North on Smithtown
Avenue
Airway Road at Johnson Avenue
(HBK) [Added 6-6-1978]
Stop East on Airway Road
Alan Street at Argyle Drive (EIS)
[Added 9-20-1983; amended
6-1-1993]
Stop South on Alan Street
Alan Street at Keswick Drive (EIS) Stop East on Keswick Drive
Alan Street at Sherry Street (EIS) Stop East on Sherry Street
Alan Street at Simmons Drive (EIS) Stop East on Simmons Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1317
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Albert Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Albert Street
Alden Avenue at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North on Alden Avenue
Alden Avenue at Jefferson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Jefferson
Avenue
Alden Avenue at Madison Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Alden
Avenue
Alden Avenue at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Alden Avenue
Alden Avenue at Washington
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East/West on Washington
Avenue
Alden Road at Pelham Drive (BWD)
[Added 1-31-2012]
Stop West on Alden Road
Alden Road at Winfield Avenue
(BWD)
Stop South on Winfield Avenue
Aldrich Court at Maple Avenue
(BSR)
Stop West on Aldrich Court
Aldrich Street at Astor Drive (SVL)
[Amended 1-17-1984]
Stop East on Aldrich Street
Aldrich Street at Claire Lane (SVL)
[Added 11-17-1987]
Stop North on Claire Lane
Aldrich Street at Macon Avenue
and Rose Street (SVL) [Amended
12-16-1986]
Stop North/South on Macon
Avenue; East/West on
Aldrich Street and Rose
Street
Aletta Place at Aletta Place (east
leg) (BSR) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop East on Aletta Place
Alexander Avenue at Center Street
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Center
Street
Alexander Avenue at Coates
Avenue (HBK) [Amended
9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; East on
Alexander Avenue
Alexander Avenue at Oliver Street
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Oliver
Street
Alexander Boulevard at Alexander
Court (RNK) [Added 11-20-2018]
Stop South on Alexander Court
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1318
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Alexander Boulevard at Ocean
Avenue (LKL) [Added 4-20-1994]
Stop East on Alexander
Boulevard
Alexander DiGuardia Boulevard at
Waverly Avenue (HTV) [Added
9-9-2008]
Stop East on Alexander
DiGuardia Boulevard
Alfred Street at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop West on Alfred Street
Alice Road at Jean Road (WIS)
[Added 8-21-1984]
Stop North on Alice Road
Alice Road at Sears Road (WIS)
[Added 8-21-1984]
Stop South on Alice Road
Alinda Avenue at Canby Court
(WIS) [Added 12-8-1998]
Stop East/West on Alinda
Avenue; South on Canby
Court
Alinda Avenue at Higbie Lane
(WIS) [Added 11-20-1984]
Stop West on Alinda Avenue
Alinda Avenue at Udall Road (WIS) Stop East on Alinda Avenue
Alisa Lane at Oakridge Drive
(BWD) [Added 12-14-2004]
Stop South on Alisa Lane
Alisa Lane at Spur Drive North
(BWD) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop North on Alisa Lane
Aljan Drive (north leg) at American
Boulevard (BWD)
Stop North on Aljan Drive
Aljan Drive (south leg) at American
Boulevard (BWD) [Amended
2-25-1997]
Stop East on Aljan Drive;
North/South on American
Boulevard
Alkier Street at Broadway (BWD)
[Amended 5-3-1983]
Stop East/West on Alkier
Street; North/South on
Broadway
Alkier Street at Charter Oaks
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on Charter Oaks
Avenue
Alkier Street at Front Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 6-19-2012]
Stop North on Front Avenue;
South on Commercial
driveway
Alkier Street at Gibson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Gibson
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1319
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Alkier Street at Grand Boulevard
(BWD) [Amended 4-17-1990]
Stop North/South on Grand
Boulevard; East/West on
Alkier Street
Allen's Point Road at Degnon
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
12-16-2003]
Stop West on Allen's Point
Road
Allwood Avenue at Connetquot
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Allwood
Avenue
Allwood Avenue at Deerpath Road
(CIS) [Added 5-7-1996]
Stop North on Deerpath Road
Alma Street at Joseph Street (SVL)
[Added 9-20-1983]
Stop North on Alma Street
Alma Street at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-20-1983]
Stop East on Alma Street
Altmar Avenue at Arbour Street
(WIS) [Amended 6-16-1992]
Stop West on Altmar Avenue;
North/South on Arbour
Street
Altmar Avenue at Cotter Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Cotter
Street
Altmar Avenue at Gridley Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Gridley
Street
Altmar Avenue at Horton Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978;
2-4-1992]
Stop North/South on Horton
Street; East/West on
Altmar Avenue
Altmar Avenue at Penney Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Penney
Street
Altmar Avenue at Reilly Street
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Reilly
Street
Altmar Avenue at Udall Road (WIS) Stop East on Altmar Avenue
Altmar Avenue at Ward Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-3-1978;
6-10-2008]
Stop East/West on Altmar
Avenue North/South on
Ward Street
Alwick Avenue at Burling Lane
(WIS) [Added 10-18-2005]
Stop West on Burling Lane
Alwick Avenue at Burling Lane
North (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Stop South on Alwick Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1320
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Alwick Avenue at Burling Lane
South (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Stop North on Alwick Avenue
Alwick Avenue at Edmore Lane
(WIS)
Stop West on Edmore Lane
Alwick Avenue at Edmore Lane
North (WIS)
Stop South on Alwick Avenue
Alwick Avenue at Edmore Lane
South (WIS) [Amended 6-2-1981;
11-18-1986]
Stop North on Alwick Lane
Alwick Avenue at Everdell Avenue
(WIS) [Added 8-30-1983]
Stop North on Alwick Avenue
Alwick Avenue at Merritt Street
(WIS) [Added 11-17-1992]
Stop South on Alwick Avenue
Alwick Avenue at North Dyre
Avenue (WIS) [Added
10-18-2005]
Stop East on North Dyre
Avenue
Alyssa Court at Atlantic Avenue
(NBS) [Added 4-27-2004]
Stop South on Alyssa Court
Alyssa Court at Broadway Avenue
(HBK) [Added 9-22-2015]
Stop East on Alyssa Court
Amboy Road at Ocean Avenue
(OKD) [Added 3-23-1993]
Stop North on Amboy Road
Amboy Road at Riverdale Avenue
(OKD) [Added 3-23-1993]
Stop South on Amboy Road
Amboy Road at Trout Street (OKD)
[Added 12-10-2013]
Stop East on Trout Street
American Boulevard at Bert Court
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978;
amended 2-25-1997]
Stop North/South on American
Boulevard; West on Bert
Court
+American Boulevard at Commack
Road (BWD)
Stop South on American
Boulevard
American Boulevard at Pic Court
(BWD) [Added 10-19-1999]
Stop West on Pic Court
American Boulevard at Second
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on American
Boulevard
Ames Street at Broadway (BWD) Stop East/West on Ames Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1321
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Amesbury Court and Jefferson
Avenue at Roosevelt Street (EIS)
[Added 12-18-1984]
Stop South on Amesbury
Court; North on Jefferson
Avenue
Amfer Court at Delaware Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-17-2018]
Stop North on Amfer Court
Amfer Court at Indiana Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-17-2018]
Stop West on Amfer Court
Amherst Road at Brook Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop South on Amherst Road
Amherst Road at Hilary Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980;
amended 1-30-1996]
Stop North on Amherst Road
East/West on Hilary
Street
Amherst Street at Cambridge
Avenue (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop South on Amherst Street
Amherst Street at Dartmouth Drive
(NBS) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop East on Dartmouth Drive
Amherst Street at Farragut Avenue
(NBS) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop North on Amherst Street
Amherst Street at Freeman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop West on Amherst Street
Amherst Street at Whitman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East on Amherst Street
Amityville Street at Belmore
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Amityville
Street
Amityville Street at North
Greenlawn Avenue (NGR)
[Amended 2-7-1989]
Stop East/West on Amityville
Street; North/South on
North Greenlawn Avenue
Amy Drive at Sejon Drive (east
intersecion) (SVL) [Added
12-2-2008]
Stop East on Sejon Drive
Amy Drive at Sejon Drive (west
intersecion) (SVL) [Added
12-2-2008]
Stop North on Amy Drive
Anchorage Drive at Drake Court
(WIS) [Added 1-3-1989]
Stop East on Drake Court
Anchorage Drive at Skipper Drive
(WIS) [Added 1-3-1989]
Stop East on Skipper Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1322
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Anchorage Drive at Snedecor
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Snedecor
Avenue
Andover Drive at Locust Avenue
(BHM) [Added 3-21-2017]
Stop East on Andover Drive
Andover Drive at Locust Avenue
(BHM) [Added 3-21-2017]
Stop West on Andover Drive
Andrea Lane at Bartley Lane
(WSV) [Added 8-21-2018]
Stop North on Andrea Lane
Andrea Road at Beacon Road
(HBK) [Added 8-29-1989]
Stop West on Andrea Road
Andrea Road at Colin Drive (HBK)
[Added 8-29-1989]
Stop North on Andrea Road
Andrew Avenue at Charles Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 9-29-2009]
Stop North/South on Charles
Avenue East/West on
Andrew Avenue
Andrew Avenue at Kunigunda
Place (EIS)
Stop North on Kunigunda
Place
Anisko Landing and Bayview Drive
at Blue Point Road (OKD) [Added
12-10-2013]
Stop North/South on Blue Point
Road; North/South on
Bayview Drive; West on
Anisko Landing
Anna Road at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 11-17-1992]
Stop East on Anna Road
Anna Street at Tillie Street (BSR) Stop North on Anna Street
Annandale Road at Glensummer
Road (HBK) [Added 7-13-1994]
Stop South on Annandale Road
Annandale Road at Inverness Road
(HBK) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 8-21-1984]
Stop North on Annandale
Road; East/West on
Inverness Road
Anne Lane at Oakland Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Anne Lane
Annette Court at Third Street
(LKL)
Stop North on Annette Court
Anson Lane at Bartley Lane (WSV)
[Added 10-17-1995]
Stop South on Anson Lane
Anson Lane at Brook Street (WSV)
[Added 10-17-1995]
Stop North on Anson Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1323
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Anson Lane at Munson Lane (WSV)
[Added 12-2-2014]
Stop West on Munson Lane
Antarctic Street at Atlantic Avenue
(NBS) [Added 3-27-2007]
Stop South on Antarctic Street
Antarctic Street at Brook Avenue
(NBS)
Stop North on Antarctic Street
Anthony Lane at Maria Court
(HBK) [Added 6-5-1990]
Stop North on Anthony Lane
Apallo Lane to Grissom Way (HPG)
[Added 5-21-1996]
Stop North on Apallo Lane
Appian Way at Locust Avenue
(OKD) [Added 8-16-2005]
Stop East on Appian Way
Apple Street at Ferndale Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 9-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Apple
Street; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Apple Street at Freeman Avenue
(BWD)
Stop West on Apple Street
Apple Street at Mayflower Avenue
(BWD) [Added 2-9-2016]
Stop South on Mayflower
Avenue
Apple Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Apple Street
Applegate Drive at Birchgrove
Drive (CIS)
Stop East on Birchgrove Drive
Applegate Drive at Evergreen
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Evergreen
Avenue
Applegate Drive at Glenmore
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on Glenmore Avenue
Applegate Drive at Pinetop Drive
(CIS)
Stop North on Pinetop Drive
Applegate Drive at Pinetop Drive
(south) (CIS)
Stop South on Pinetop Drive
(south)
Applegate Drive at Vanderbilt
Avenue (CIS)
Stop North/South on Applegate
Drive
Applegate Drive at Vita Drive (CIS)
[Added 1-3-1989]
Stop North on Vita Drive
Applegate Drive at Yalta Drive
(CIS) [Added 6-23-2009]
Stop East on Yalta Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1324
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Apricot Street at Bark Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Apricot
Street
Apricot Street at Branch Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Branch
Avenue
Apricot Street at Cone Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 10-7-2003]
Stop East/West on Apricot
Street; North/South on
Cone Avenue
Apricot Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
9-21-1993; 5-12-2020]
Stop East/West on Apricot
Street; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Apricot Street at Leaf Avenue (CIS) Stop North on Leaf Avenue
Apricot Street at Root Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Apricot
Street
Apricot Street at Tree Avenue
(CIS)
Stop South on Tree Avenue
Apricot Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Apricot Street
April Lane at Midway Court (BPT)
[Added 12-18-1984]
Stop North on April Lane
Arbell Drive at Brentwood Road
(BWD)
Stop East on Arbell Drive
Arbell Drive at Candlewood Road
(BWD) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop South on Arbell Drive
Arbour Street at Haynes Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 4-22-1986]
Stop West on Haynes Avenue
Arbour Street at Kime Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 4-22-1986]
Stop South on Arbour Street;
East/West on Kime
Avenue
Arbutus Court at Johnson Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-15-2009]
Stop North on Arbutus Court
Arcadia Drive at Pine Avenue
(WIS) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop East/West on Arcadia
Drive
Arcadia Drive at Singingwood
Drive (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North on Arcadia Drive
Arcadia Drive at Spruce Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 1-6-1987]
Stop North/South on Spruce
Avenue; East/West on
Arcadia Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1325
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Archie Place at Lakeview Avenue
(WIS) [Added 9-25-2012]
Stop East on Archie Place
Archie Place at Lakeview Avenue
(west spur) (WIS) [Added
6-16-1981]
Stop Northwest on Lakeview
Avenue (west spur)
Archie Place at McCall Avenue
(WIS) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop West on Archie Place
Arctic Avenue at Church Street
(BHM) [Added 2-6-1979]
Stop North/South on Arctic
Avenue
Arctic Avenue at Feldman Street
(BHM) [Added 10-13-2015]
Stop East on Feldman Street
Arctic Avenue at Kahle Street
(BHM) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop North/South on Arctic
Avenue
Arctic Street at Brook Avenue
(BSR)
Stop North on Arctic Street
Ardee Avenue at Paul Place (RNK)
[Added 10-9-2001]
Stop South on Ardee Avenue
Ardmore Drive at Brentwood
Parkway (BWD) [Added
10-6-1981]
Stop East on Ardmore Drive
Ardmore Drive at Oxford Road
(BWD) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop South on Oxford Road
Ardmore Drive at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop West on Ardmore Drive
Ardmore Drive at Winthrop Road
(BWD) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop South on Winthrop Road
Ardmore Drive at Wyndham Road
(BWD) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop North on Wyndham Road
Ardsley Lane at Country Village
Lane (EIS)
Stop North on Ardsley Lane
Argosy Street (Tenth Street) at
Manhattan Boulevard (EIS)
Stop North/South on Argosy
Street (Tenth Street)
Argyle Drive at Country Village
Lane (EIS)
Stop East on Argyle Drive
Argyle Drive at Manistee Lane
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Argyle
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1326
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Arizona Avenue at East Third
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Arizona Avenue
Arizona Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Arizona
Avenue
Arkansas Avenue at Illinois Avenue
(NBS) [Added 2-6-1979]
Stop West on Arkansas Avenue
Arleen Avenue at Coates Avenue
(HBK) [Added 12-18-1979]
Stop East on Arleen Avenue
Arlene Drive at Candlewood Road
(BWD)
Stop South on Arlene Drive
Arlene Drive at Commack Road
(BWD)
Stop North on Arlene Drive
Arline Drive at School House Road
and a curb cut opposite Arline
Drive (EIS) [Added 9-20-1983;
amended 1-30-2001]
Stop East on Arline Drive; West
from curb cut North/
South on School House
Road
Arline Lane at Oakwood Hills Drive
(north intersection) (EIS) [Added
8-27-2013]
Stop West on Oakwood Hills
Drive
Arline Lane at Oakwood Hills Drive
(south intersection) (EIS) [Added
8-27-2013]
Stop West on Oakwood Hills
Drive
Arline Lane at Rosemary Place
(EIS) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop East on Rosemary Place
Arline Lane at Timber Point Road
(EIS)
Stop North on Arline Drive
Arlington Road at Brentwood
Parkway (BWD)
Stop West on Arlington Road
Arlington Road at Standish Road
(BWD)
Stop West on Standish Road
Aron Drive at Belver Drive (BHM)
[Added 9-1-1993]
Stop North on Belver Drive
Aron Drive at Kenwood Drive
(BHM) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop East on Aron Drive
Aron Drive (west leg) at Nathan
Drive (BHM) [Added 7-2-1991]
Stop West on Aron Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1327
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Arrival Avenue at Airport Terminal
Building (HBK) [Added
7-11-2000; amended 9-12-2000]
Stop West on Arrival Avenue at
Crosswalk Numbers 1, 2,
3 and 4
Arrival Avenue at Flight Service
Station exit (L.I. MacArthur
Airport) (RNK) [Added
1-19-1993]
Stop Exiting Flight Service
Station
Arrival Avenue (north roadway) at
MacArthur Memorial Highway
(east roadway) and access road for
air freight area (HBK) [Amended
5-7-1985]
Stop North on MacArthur
Memorial Highway
Arrival Avenue and access road for
air freight area at MacArthur
Memorial Highway (east roadway),
west spur (HBK) [Amended
12-18-1979; 5-7-1985]
Stop North on MacArthur
Memorial Highway
turning west on west spur
Arrival Avenue at MacArthur
Memorial Highway Avenue (east
roadway) (HBK) [Amended
5-7-1985; 2-2-1988]
Stop East on Arrival Avenue
Arrival Avenue (north roadway) at
MacArthur Memorial Highway
(east roadway) and access road for
air freight area (HBK) [Amended
5-7-1985]
Yield South on access road
from air freight area
Arrival Avenue and Schaefer Drive
at MacArthur Memorial Highway
(southbound) (HBK) [Added
6-6-1978; amended 11-18-1980;
5-7-1985; 2-2-1988]
Stop East on Schaefer Drive;
West on Arrival Avenue
Arrival Avenue (south roadway) at
MacArthur Memorial Highway
(northbound roadway, southeast
spur) [Added 2-4-1986]
Yield East on Arrival Avenue
(south roadway)
Arrival Avenue at Parking Area "A"
(northeast exit) (HBK)
Yield North from parking lot
exit
Arthur Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Arthur
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1328
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Arthur Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Arthur
Street
Arthur Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Arthur
Street
Arthur Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Arthur Street
Artic Avenue at Debbie Lee Lane
and Pam Court (BHM) [Added
11-14-1995]
Stop North/South on Artic
Avenue
Artic Avenue at John Street (BHM)
[Added 6-9-1998]
Stop East on John Street
Ash Lane at Springmeadow Drive
(HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop South on Ash Lane
Ash Street at Boulevard Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Ash Street
Ash Street at Lowell Avenue (CIS) Stop West on Ash Street
Ash Street at Nicoll Avenue (CIS)
[Added 1-30-2001]
Stop East on Ash Street
Ash Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 10-6-1981;
11-20-2018]
Stop North/South on Prospect
Avenue; East/West on Ash
Street
Asharoken Boulevard at Chenango
Drive (NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Asharoken Boulevard at Hiawatha
Drive (WBS) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop North/South on
Asharoken Boulevard
Asharoken Boulevard at Huron
Drive (NBS)
Stop North on Asharoken
Boulevard
Asharoken Boulevard at Iroquois
Drive (WBS)
Stop East/West on Iroquois
Drive
Asharoken Boulevard at Mohawk
Drive (WBS) [Amended
1-17-1978; 9-7-1999]
Stop East/West on Mohawk
Drive; North/South on
Asharoken Boulevard
Asharoken Boulevard at Montauk
Drive (NBS) [Amended
6-19-2012]
Stop South on Asharoken
Boulevard
Asharoken Boulevard at Orinoco
Drive (WBS) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop South on Asharoken
Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1329
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Asharoken Boulevard at Penataquit
Avenue (WBS) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 3-1-1983]
Stop East/West on Penataquit
Avenue; North/South on
Asharoken Boulevard
Asharoken Boulevard at
Wohseepee Drive (WBS)
Stop North/South on
Asharoken Boulevard
Ashford Drive at Buckingham Lane
(north intersection) (BHM) [Added
3-16-1994]
Stop West on Ashford Drive
Ashford Drive at Buckingham Lane
(south intersection) (BHM) [Added
3-16-1994]
Stop South on Buckingham
Lane
Ashford Drive at Westminster
Drive (BHM)
Stop West on Ashford Drive
Aster Road at Dogwood Road
(WIS) [Added 7-17-1979]
Stop North on Dogwood Road
Aster Road at Ember Lane (WIS)
[Added 12-18-2001]
Stop South on Ember Lane
Aster Road at Higbie Lane (WIS) Stop East on Aster Road
Astor Drive at McNeil Street (SVL)
[Added 4-4-1978; amended
10-6-1987]
Stop West on McNeil Street;
North/South on Astor
Drive
Astor Drive at Mill Pond Road
(SVL)
Stop West on Mill Pond Road
Astor Drive at Versa Place (SVL)
[Added 10-6-1987]
Stop West on Versa Place;
North/South on Astor
Drive
Athol Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS) [Added 2-9-2010;
amended 3-19-2019]
Stop South on Athol Street
Athol Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Athol Street
Atlanta Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop West on Atlanta Street
Atlantic Avenue at East Nassau
Street (EIS) [Added 6-9-1998]
Stop North on Atlantic Avenue
Atlantic Avenue at East Roslyn
Street (EIS)
Stop North/South on Atlantic
Avenue
Atlantic Place at Club Lane (HPG) Stop South on Club Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1330
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Atlantic Place at Dennard Road
(HPG) [Added 8-11-1998]
Stop East on Dennard Road;
North/South on Atlantic
Place
Atlantic Place at a driveway
opposite Gloria Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 3-23-1999]
Stop South on driveway
Atlantic Place at Grissom Way
(HPG) [Added 11-17-1992;
amended 5-27-2009]
Stop North on Atlantic Place;
East/West on Grissom
Way
Atlantic Place at Heller Place
(HPG) [Amended 2-18-1978]
Stop East on Heller Place
Atlantic Place at Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG) [Amended 11-15-1988]
Stop East/West on Atlantic
Place; North/South on
Lincoln Boulevard
Atlantic Place at Lori Way (HPG)
[Added 5-20-1997; amended
8-11-1998]
Stop East on Lori Way; North/
South on Atlantic Place
Atlantic Place at Roosevelt
Boulevard (HPG) [Amended
3-24-1998]
Stop East/West on Atlantic
Place; North/South on
Roosevelt Boulevard
Atlantic Place at Schneider Lane
(HPG) [Amended 9-20-1983]
Stop North on Schneider Lane
Atlantic Place at Spacecraft Lane
(HPG)
Stop West on Spacecraft Lane
Atlantic Street at Belmore Avenue
(CIS, NGR) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 4-5-1983]
Stop East/West on Atlantic
Street
Atlantic Street at Connetquot
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Atlantic
Street
Atlantic Street and Julie Crescent
(south intersection) at Lowell
Avenue (CIS, NGR) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop East on Julie Cresent
(south intersection); West
on Atlantic Street
Atlantic Street at North Greenlawn
Avenue (NGR) [Added
2-25-1997]
Stop North/South on North
Greenlawn Avenue
Atlantis Court at Minerva Avenue
(WIS) [Added 6-22-1999]
Stop East on Atlantis Court
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1331
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Auburn Avenue at Bayview Avenue
(BSR) [Added 9-25-2018]
Stop South on Auburn Avenue
Auburn Avenue at Lawrence
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North on Auburn Avenue
Audubon Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (HBK) [Added 2-15-2005]
Stop North on Audubon
Avenue
Audwin Drive at Clayton Street
and a driveway 30 feet east of
Audwin Drive (CIS) [Amended
5-7-2002]
Stop East/West on Audwin
Drive; North/South on
Audwin Drive; South on
driveway
Audwin Drive at Clift Street (CIS) Stop East on Clift Street
Audwin Drive at Earle Street (CIS) Stop East on Earle Street
Audwin Drive at Elmore Street
(CIS)
Stop East on Elmore Street
Audwin Drive at Irish Lane (EIS) Stop East on Audwin Drive
Audwin Drive at Irving Street (CIS) Stop East on Irving Street
Audwin Drive at Islip Boulevard
(EIS)
Stop South on Audwin Drive
Audwin Drive at Roosevelt Street
(EIS) [Added 5-18-1999]
Stop West on Roosevelt Street
Ava Drive at Manatuck Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop East on Ava Drive
Avenue D at Furrows Road (HBK)
[Added 12-18-1979; amended
6-9-1998]
Stop North/South on Avenue D
Avenue D at Railroad Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North on Avenue D
Avenue E at Furrows Road (HBK)
[Added 12-18-1979]
Stop South on Avenue E
Avenue E at Railroad Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North on Avenue E
Avis Drive at Grundy Avenue (HBK)
[Added 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Avis Drive
Avis Drive (east intersection) at
Lexington Avenue (HBK) [Added
4-4-1978; amended 11-20-1979]
Stop East on Lexington Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1332
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Avis Drive (west intersection) at
Lexington Drive (HBK) [Added
11-20-1979]
Stop South on Avis Drive (west
intersection)
Avon Place at Colony Drive (WSV)
[Amended 12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Avon Place;
North/South on Colony
Drive
Avon Place at Washington Avenue
(WSV) [Added 8-25-1992;
amended 12-15-1992]
Stop East on Avon Place;
North/South on
Washington Avenue
Avondale Drive at South Bay
Avenue (ISL) [Added 4-16-1991;
amended 6-16-1992]
Stop West on Avondale Drive
Awixa Avenue at South Court
(BSR) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop East on South Court
Aztec Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
9-22-2015]
Stop East on Aztec Drive
Aztec Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
9-22-2015]
Stop West on Aztec Drive
Aztec Drive at Richland Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Aztec Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Babe Ruth Street at Carll Drive
(WBS)
Stop North/South on Carll
Drive
Babe Ruth Street at Hyman
Avenue (WBS) [Amended
6-2-1981]
Stop North/South on Hyman
Avenue
Babe Ruth Street at Manor Lane
(WBS) [Added 3-15-1988]
Stop East on Babe Ruth Street
Babe Ruth Street at Namdac
Avenue (WBS)
Stop North/South on Namdac
Avenue
Babe Ruth Street at Oakneck Road
(WBS) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Oakneck
Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1333
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Babe Ruth Street at Thompson
Drive (BSR) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop East/West on Babe Ruth
Street; North/South on
Thompson Drive
Babylon Avenue at Clyde Street
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Babylon
Avenue
Babylon Avenue at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Babylon Avenue
Babylon Avenue at Kline Street
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Kline Street
Babylon Street at Belmore Avenue
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Babylon
Street
Babylon Street at Connetquot
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Babylon
Street
Babylon Street at Lowell Avenue
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Babylon
Street
Babylon Street at Montauk Avenue
(NGR)
Stop East on Babylon Street
Babylon Street at North Greenlawn
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Babylon
Street
Bacon Lane at Spur Drive South
(NBS)
Stop North on Bacon Lane
Baeck Street at Cedar Avenue
(LKL) [Added 5-21-1991]
Stop West on Baeck Street
Baeck Street at Elm Avenue (LKL)
[Added 5-21-1991]
Stop East on Baeck Street
Baeck Street at Smithtown Avenue
(LKL) [Added 7-6-1982]
Stop East on Baeck Street
Baeck Street at Walnut Avenue
(LKL) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop North/South on Walnut
Avenue
Bailey Avenue at East Third
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Bailey
Avenue
Bailey Avenue at Spur Drive North
(BWD)
Stop East on Bailey Avenue
Bailey Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop South on Stein Drive
Bainbridge Street at Commack
Road (ISL)
Stop East on Bainbridge Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1334
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bainbridge Street at Grimsley
Road (ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Read
Baldwin Boulevard at Cedar Drive
(PNR) [Amended 5-3-2005]
Stop North/South on Baldwin
Boulevard; East/West on
Cedar Drive
Baldwin Boulevard at Chestnut
Drive (NBS) [Added 4-2-1991]
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Drive
Baldwin Boulevard at Elm Drive
(PNR)
Stop North on Baldwin
Boulevard
Baldwin Boulevard at Fig Place
(PNR) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Fig Place
Baldwin Boulevard at Fire Road
Drive (NBS) [Amended
1-15-1980]
Stop South on Baldwin
Boulevard
Baldwin Boulevard at Hemlock
Drive (PNR) [Amended
5-16-1989]
Stop North/South on Baldwin
Boulevard; East/West on
Hemlock Drive
Baldwin Boulevard at Huron Drive
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Huron Drive
Baldwin Boulevard at Locust Drive
(PNR)
Stop North/South on Baldwin
Boulevard
Baldwin Boulevard at Oswego
Drive (NBS)
Stop West on Oswego Drive
Baldwin Boulevard at Peach Place
(PNR) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Peach Place
Baldwin Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Baldwin
Boulevard
Baldwin Street at Belmore Avenue
(EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on Baldwin Street
Baldwin Street at Commercial
Avenue (EIS) [Added 1-5-1988]
Stop South on Commercial
Avenue
Baldwin Street at Pacific Avenue
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Pacific
Avenue
Ballad Circle at Bening Lane (HBK) Stop West on Bening Lane
Ballad Circle at Flute Lane (east
intersection) (HBK)
Stop East on Flute Lane (east
intersection)
Ballad Circle at Flute Lane (west
intersection) (HBK)
Stop West on Flute Lane (west
intersection)
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1335
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ballad Circle at Roberts Street
(HBK)
Stop East on Roberts Street
Baltimore Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop West on Baltimore Street
Banana Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East/West on Banana
Street
Banana Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Banana Street
Bancroft Road at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Added 11-17-1992]
Stop East on Bancroft Road
Banks Street at Udalia Road (WIS)
[Added 10-2-1990]
Stop South on Banks Street
Barbara Place at Oakneck Road
(WBS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop West on Barbara Place
Barberry Road at Larkspur Drive
(WIS) [Added 2-26-1991]
Stop North/South on Barberry
Road; East on Larkspur
Drive
Barber Street at Broadway (BWD) Stop East/West on Barber
Street
Barber Street at Koehler Place
(BWD) [Added 9-16-1986]
Stop West on Barber Street
Bardolier Lane at Gardiner Lane
(WBS) [Amended 5-18-2004]
Stop East/West on Bardolier
Lane North/South on
Gardiner Drive
Bardolier Lane at Gladstone
Avenue (WBS) [Added
9-12-2000]
Stop West on Gladstone
Avenue
Bardolier Lane at Hampshire Road
(WBS) [Amended 5-6-1980;
amended 1-5-1988; 5-18-2004]
Stop East/West on Bardolier
Lane North/South on
Hampshire Road
Bardolier Lane at Manor Lane
(WBS) [Amended 12-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Bardolier
Lane North/South on
Manor Lane
Bardolier Lane at McCall Avenue
(WBS) [Amended 9-12-2000]
Stop East/West on Bardolier
Lane North/South on
McCall Avenue
Bardolier Lane at Myrtle Avenue
(WBS)
Stop North/South on Myrtle
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1336
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bardolier Lane at Oakneck Road
(WIS) [Amended 12-16-1986;
3-3-1987; 4-16-1996]
Stop North/South on Oakneck
Road East/West on
Bardolier Lane
Bardolier Lane at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Amended 8-27-2013]
Stop North/South on
Thompson Drive; East/
West on Bardolier Lane
Bark Avenue at Brier Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Brightside Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North on Bark Avenue
Bark Avenue at Cinnamon Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Date Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Lemon Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Olive Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Palm Street (CIS)
[Amended 7-14-2015]
Stop South on Bark Avenue;
East/West on Palm Street
Bark Avenue at Palmetto Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Bark
Avenue
Bark Avenue at Sage Street (CIS) Stop East/West on Sage Street
Bark Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Sassafras
Street
Barleau Street at Grahn Drive
(BWD) [Added 2-26-2008]
Stop West on Barleau Street
Barleau Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Barleau
Street
Barleau Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Barleau
Street
Barleau Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Barleau
Street
Barleau Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Barleau Street
Barnaby Court/Barnaby Court East
at School House Lane (HPG)
[Added 12-12-1995]
---- East on Barnaby Court
West on Barnaby Court
East
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1337
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Barnard Street at Dubois Road
(WIS) [Amended 5-11-2010]
Stop East/West on Dubois
Road; North/South on
Barnard Street
Barnard Street at Ogden Road
(WIS) [Added 6-16-1992;
amended 10-8-2002]
Stop East/West on Ogden Road
South on Barnard Street
Barnard Street at Udalia Road
(WIS) [Added 6-5-1990]
Stop North/South on Barnard
Road East/West on Udalia
Road
Barnsley Lane at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-15-1987]
Stop West on Barnsley Lane
Barrett Avenue at Bond Street
(BPT) [Amended 7-5-1988]
Stop East on Bond Street;
North/South on Barrett
Avenue
Barrett Avenue at Davis Street
(BPT) [Amended 2-7-1995]
Stop East on Davis Street;
North/South on Barrett
Avenue
Barrett Avenue at Elliot Street
(BPT)
Stop East on Elliot Street
Barrett Avenue at Fulton Street
(BPT) [Added 7-11-1978;
amended 2-9-2010]
Stop East on Fulton Street;
North/South on Barrett
Avenue
Barrett Avenue at Garrison Street
(BPT)
Stop East on Garrison Street
Bartley Lane at Brook Street
(WSV) [Added 7-17-2018]
Stop North on Bartley Lane
Barton Lane at Renee Drive (BPT)
[Added 4-5-1988]
Stop North on Renee Drive
Bastow Street at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Bastow
Street
Bauss Road at Uncas Street (RNK) Stop South on Bauss Road
Bay Avenue at Lawrence Avenue
(BSR)
Stop South on Bay Avenue
Bay Avenue at Linden Place (BSR) Stop South on Bay Avenue
Bay Avenue at Seaman Avenue
(BPT)
Stop East/West on Bay Avenue
Bay Bright Court at Girard Avenue
(WBS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop South on Girard Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1338
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bay Eighth Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay Eighth
Street
Bay Fifth Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Amended 5-7-1996]
Stop North/South on Center
Bay Drive East/West on
Bay Fifth Street
Bay Fifth Street at Secatogue Lane
East (WIS) [Added 7-17-1979]
Stop North on Secatogue Lane
East
Bay Fifth Street at Secatogue Lane
West (WIS) [Added 2-25-2003]
Stop North on Secatogue Lane
West
Bay Fifth Street at Secatogue Road
(WIS) [Added 4-9-2008]
Yield South on Secatogue Road
Bay First Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay First
Street
Bay Fourth Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay Fourth
Street
Bay Second Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981;
amended 5-7-1996]
Stop East/West on Bay Second
Street North/South on
Center Bay Drive
Bay Second Street at South Bay
Avenue (ISL) [Added
12-14-2010]
Stop West on Bay Second
Street
Bay Seventh Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay Seventh
Street
Bay Shore Avenue at Bellmore
Street (WIS)
Stop North/South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue at East Belmont
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 4-22-1986]
Stop North/South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue at East
Lakeland Street (WBW)
[Amended 4-22-1986]
Stop North/South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue at East Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 4-22-1986;
9-16-1986; 12-11-2012]
Stop East/West on East
Oakdale Street; North/
South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue at Howells Road
(WBW)
Stop North on Bay Shore
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1339
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bay Shore Avenue at
Mechanicsville Road (BSR)
[Amended 5-27-2009;
6-23-2009; 9-29-2009]
Stop East on Mechanicsville
Road;
Bay Shore Avenue and Roosevelt
Place at Muncey Road (WIS)
[Amended 4-6-1982; 7-6-1982]
Stop North on Roosevelt Place;
South on Bay Shore
Avenue; East/West on
Muncey Road
Bay Shore Avenue at Ridgewood
Street (WIS) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop East on Ridgewood Street
Bay Shore Avenue at Rockaway
Street (WIS)
Stop North/South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue at Stewart
Street (WBW) [Amended
4-22-1986]
Stop North/South on Bay Shore
Avenue
Bay Sixth Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay Sixth
Street
Bay Third Street at Center Bay
Drive (WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Bay Third
Street
Bay Third Street at South Bay
Avenue (ISL) [Added
12-18-2001]
Stop West on Bay Third Street
Bayonne Avenue at Connetquot
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Bayonne
Avenue
Bayport Avenue at Bond Street
(BPT) [Amended 2-9-2010]
Stop West on Bond Street;
North/South on Bayport
Avenue
Bayport Avenue at Davis Street
(BPT) [Amended 4-4-1989]
Stop East/West on Davis
Street; North/South on
Bayport Avenue
Bayport Avenue at Elliot Street
(BPT)
Stop West on Elliot Street
Bayport Avenue at Fulton Street
(BPT) [Added 7-11-1978;
amended 1-16-1990]
Stop West on Fulton Street;
North/South on Bayport
Avenue
Bayport Avenue at Garrison Street
(BPT)
Stop West on Garrison Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1340
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
*Bayport Avenue at Middle Road
(BPT)
Bayport Avenue at curb cut 121
feet north of Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added 3-5-1985]
Stop West on curb cut
Bayport Avenue at curb cut 156
feet north of Montauk Highway
(BPT) [Added 3-5-1985]
Stop West on curb cut
Bayport Avenue at Railroad Street
(BPT)
Stop East/West on Railroad
Street
Bayview Avenue at Burnett Avenue
(BSR) [Added 2-27-2007]
Stop South on Burnett Avenue
Bayview Avenue at South Clinton
Avenue and a driveway opposite
Bayview Avenue (BSR) [Amended
9-9-2008]
Stop West on Bayview Avenue;
East on driveway
Bayview Avenue at Deer Run (EIS)
[Added 11-22-2016]
Stop West on Deer Run
Bayview Avenue at Dock Road
(EIS) [Added 4-21-1992]
Stop East on Dock Road
Bayview Avenue at Duval Street
(EIS)
Stop East on Duval Street
Bayview Avenue at East Islip
Marina exit (EIS)
Stop West on East Islip Marina
exit
Bayview Avenue at Harbor Avenue
(ISL) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop North on Bayview Avenue
Bayview Avenue at Indian Orchard
Lane (EIS) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop West on Indian Orchard
Lane
Bayview Avenue at Kay Court/
Midwood Court (EIS) [Amended
8-30-1988]
Stop West on Kay Court; East
on Midwood Court;
North/South on Bayview
Avenue
Bayview Avenue at Kemp Street
and Timber Point Road (EIS)
[Added 6-2-1981; amended
12-16-2003]
Stop East on Kemp Street;
West on Timber Point
Road; North/South on
Bayview Avenue
Bayview Avenue at Maple Street
(ISL) [Added 11-20-1990;
amended 10-6-1992]
Stop South on Bayview
Avenue; East/West on
Maple Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1341
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bayview Avenue at Ocean Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East on Bayview Avenue
Bayview Avenue at Orowoc Avenue
(ISL) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop West on Orowoc Avenue
Bayview Avenue at Starlight Drive
(EIS) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop East on Starlight Drive
Bayview Drive at Byron Lake Park
Access Road (OKD) [Amended
6-6-1989]
Stop East on Byron Lake Park
Access Road; North/South
on Bayview Drive
Bayview Drive at Franklin Road
(OKD)
Stop East/West on Franklin
Road
Bayview Drive at Ludlow Way
(OKD) [Amended 4-21-1998;
12-14-2004]
Stop North/South on Bayview
Drive; East on Ludlow
Way
Bayway Avenue at Mackenzie
Court (WBS) [Added 6-7-1988]
Stop East on Mackenzie Court
Bayway Avenue at Linwood Court
(WBS) [Added 1-24-2017;
amended 5-23-2017]
Stop East on Linwood Court;
South on Bayway Avenue
Beach Drive at Gate Lane (WIS) Stop West on Gate Lane
Beach Drive/West at a curb cut
(Baxter Pavillion) 280 feet north of
Gale Lane (WIS) [Added
7-13-1994]
Stop East on curb cut
Beach Road at Beach Manor Court
(WIS) [Added 2-2-1993]
Stop West on Beach Manor
Court
Beach Road at a curb cut 200 feet
north of Gate Lane (WIS) [Added
3-5-1985]
Stop East on curb cut
Beach Street at Highland Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Beach Street
Beach Street at Sherman Avenue
and a curb cut opposite Sherman
Avenue (WIS) [Added 5-3-1983;
amended 9-13-2005]
Stop West on curb cut; South
on Beach Street
Beach Street at a curb cut 150 feet
north of Sherman Avenue (WIS)
[Added 5-3-1983]
Stop West on curb cut
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1342
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Beach Street at Wavecrest Avenue
(WIS) [Added 2-4-2003]
Stop East on Wavecrest Avenue
Beachview Place at Waterview
Avenue (RNK) [Added
10-20-1998]
Stop East on Waterview
Avenue
Beacon Drive at Colin Drive (HBK)
[Added 8-29-1989]
Stop North on Beacon Drive
Beatrice Avenue at Bellmore Street
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Beatrice
Avenue
Beatrice Avenue at Norma Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Beatrice Avenue
Beatrice Avenue at Rockaway
Street (WIS)
Stop North/South on Beatrice
Avenue
Beaver Lane at Hawthorne Avenue
(RNK) [Added 11-21-1989]
Stop West on Beaver Lane
Beaver Lane at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Beaver Lane
Beaver Dam Road at Ferndale
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
1-5-1982; amended 3-3-1987]
Stop East/West on Beaver Dam
Road; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Beaver Dam Road at Irish Lane
(EIS) [Added 10-19-1999]
Stop East/West on Beaver Dam
Road; North on Irish Lane
Beaver Dam Road at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop North on Wilson
Boulevard
Bedford Avenue at Fulton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Bedford
Avenue
Bedford Avenue at Liberty Street
(HPG) [Added 1-11-1995]
Stop East/West on Liberty
Street
Bedford Avenue at Terry Road
(HPG) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop North on Bedford Avenue
Beech Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop East on Beech Lane
Beech Lane at Elder Road (ISL) Stop North on Beech Road
Beech Street at Elm Street (west
intersection) (CIS) [Added
4-16-1991]
Stop North on Beech Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1343
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Beech Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Beech
Street
Beech Street at McKinney Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Beech
Street
Beech Street at Walnut Street
[Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North on Beech Street
Beech Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop South on Wilson
Boulevard
Beecher Avenue at Kunigunda
Place (EIS)
Stop East/West on Beecher
Avenue
Beecher Avenue at Park Place
(EIS)
Stop East/West on Beecher
Avenue
Beecher Avenue at Wantagh
Avenue South (EIS)
Stop East on Beecher Avenue
Beecher Avenue Extension at
Wantagh Avenue (EIS) [Added
7-11-1989]
Stop West on Beecher Avenue
Extension
Belcul Court at Irish Lane (EIS)
[Added 9-9-1997]
Stop West on Belcul Court
Beldon Lane at East Forks Road
(NBS)
Stop East on Beldon Lane
Beldon Lane at East Third Avenue
(NBS) [Added 8-22-2017]
Stop West on Beldon Lane
Belford Avenue at Edwin Street
(BSR)
Stop East/West on Edwin
Street
Belford Avenue at Ellen Street
(BSR) [Amended 1-30-1996]
Stop East/West on Ellen Street
North/South on Belford
Avenue
Belford Avenue at Redington
Street (BSR) [Amended
1-6-1981]
Stop North/South on Belford
Avenue
Belford Avenue at Tillie Street
(BSR)
Stop North/South on Belford
Avenue
Belinda Court at Wyandanch Road
(SVL) [Added 9-25-2012]
Stop West on Belinda Court
Belinda Lane at Stephen Road
(BPT) [Added 9-24-2019]
Stop East on Belinda Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1344
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bella Casa Lane at Bow Lane (CIS)
[Added 5-2-1995]
Stop East on Bow Lane
Bella Casa Lane at Second Place
(CIS) [Added 7-18-1995]
Stop East on Second Place
Belle Avenue at Boulder Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Boulder
Street
Belle Avenue at Collington Drive
(RNK) [Amended 2-12-2013]
Stop North/South on Belle
Avenue; East/West on
Collington Drive
Belle Avenue at Croaton Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Croaton
Street
Belle Avenue at Deer Road (RNK) Stop East/West on Deer Road
Belle Avenue at Fir Grove Road
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Fir Grove
Read
Belle Avenue at Ontario Street
(RNK) [Added 6-10-2008]
Stop East on Ontario Street
Belle Avenue at Shelter Road
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Belle
Avenue
Belle Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK) [Amended 7-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Wildwood
Road; North/South on
Belle Avenue
Bellevue Road at Cross Road
(OKD)
Stop North/South on Bellevue
Road
Bellmore Avenue at Nicoll Avenue
and Orange Street and Palermo
Street (CIS) [Added 3-23-2004]
Stop East on Orange Street;
North on Bellmore
Avenue; South on Nicoll
Avenue; West on Palermo
Street
Bellmore Street at Fire Island
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North/South on Fire
Island Avenue
Bellmore Street at Leopold Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 6-6-1978;
4-17-1990]
Stop North/South on Leopold
Avenue; East/West on
Bellmore Street
Bellmore Street at Norma Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Bellmore Street
Bellmore Street at Ocean Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 4-17-1990]
Stop North/South on Ocean
Avenue; East/West on
Bellmore Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1345
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Belmore Avenue at Cedarhurst
Street (NGR) [Amended
10-17-1978; 9-19-1989]
Stop East/West on Cedarhurst
Street; North South on
Belmore Avenue
Belmore Avenue at Cedarwood
Street (EIS)
Stop West on Cedarwood
Street
Belmore Avenue at East
Farmingdale Street (EIS)
[Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop East/West on East
Farmingdale Street;
North/South on Belmore
Avenue
Belmore Avenue at East Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on East Madison
Street
Belmore Avenue at East Manhasset
Street (EIS)
Stop East/West on East
Manhasset Street
Belmore Avenue at East Nassau
Street (EIS)
Stop East/West on East Nassau
Street
Belmore Avenue at East Roslyn
Street (EIS) [Amended
1-16-1979]
Stop East/West on East Roslyn
Street
Belmore Avenue at Edgewood
Street (NGR)
Stop West on Edgewood Street
Belmore Avenue at Elmwood
Street (EIS)
Stop West on Elmwood Street
Belmore Avenue at Floral Park
Street (NGR) [Amended
2-7-1989]
Stop East/West on Floral Park
Street; North/South on
Belmore Avenue
Belmore Avenue at Freeport Street
(EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on Freeport Street
Belmore Avenue at Garden City
Street (EIS)
Stop West on Garden City
Street
Belmore Avenue at driveway 300
feet south of Jericho Street
(Belmore Garden Apartments)
(EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop East on driveway
Belmore Avenue at Jericho Street
(EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on Jericho Street
Belmore Avenue at Lynbrook
Street (EIS)
Stop West on Lynbrook Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1346
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Belmore Avenue at Maplewood
Street (EIS)
Stop West on Maplewood
Street
Belmore Avenue at Merrick Street
(EIS) [Amended 2-16-1999]
Stop North/South on Belmore
Avenue; West on Merrick
Street
Belmore Avenue at Norwood
Street (NGR)
Stop West on Norwood Street
Belmore Avenue at Oceanside
Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Oceanside
Street
Belmore Avenue at Piney Street
(EIS)
Stop West on Piney Street
Belmore Avenue at Rockaway
Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Rockaway
Street
Belmore Avenue at Seacliff Street
(NGR) [Amended 1-16-1978;
11-21-1989]
Stop East/West on Seacliff
Street; North/South on
Belmore Avenue
Belmore Avenue at Spur Drive
North (EIS) [Added 1-16-1979]
Stop East on Spur Drive North
Belmore Avenue at Valley Stream
Street (NGR)
Stop East on Valley Stream
Street
Belmore Avenue at Westbury
Street (EIS) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on Westbury Street
Belmore Avenue at Woodmere
Street (NGR)
Stop West on Woodmere Street
Belt Drive East at Gull Haven
Drive (CIS) [Added 7-10-2001]
Stop East on Gull Haven Drive
Belt Drive East at Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
3-1-1994]
Stop East on Sunburst
Boulevard
Belt Drive West at DPW Drive and
west driveway for salt pad (CIS)
[Added 5-6-1980]
Stop East on DPW Drive; North
on driveway for salt pad;
South on Belt Drive West
Belt Drive West at G Road (east
spur) (CIS) [Added 6-16-1981]
Yield Southeast on G Road
(east spur)
Belt Drive West at K Road and K
Road (north spur) (CIS) [Added
5-6-1980]
Yield East/West on K Road
(north spur); South on K
Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1347
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Belver Drive at Seventh Street
(BHM)
Stop South on Belver Drive
Benedict Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Added 2-15-2005]
Stop West on Benedict Street
+Bening Lane at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop East/West on Bening
Lane; North/South on
Grundy Avenue
Bening Lane/Namrof Lane at
Henry Boulevard (HBK) [Added
8-30-1988]
Stop West on Henry Boulevard
Benjamin Street at Coates Avenue
(HBK)
Stop East on Benjamin Street
Benjamin Street at Fourth Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East on Benjamin Street
Benjamin Street at North Park
Avenue (BSR) [Added
10-18-1983; amended
6-11-2002]
Stop North on North Park
Avenue
Benjoe Drive at Candlewood Road
(BWD)
Stop North on Benjoe Drive
Bennett Avenue at Jefferson Street
(EIS) [Amended 4-7-1987;
4-2-2002]
Stop North/South on Bennett
Avenue
Bennett Avenue at Washington
Street (EIS) [Added 11-13-2001;
amended 4-2-2002]
Stop East/West on Washington
Street; South on Bennett
Avenue
+Benson Avenue at Jones Drive
(SVL)
Stop North/South on Benson
Avenue
Benton Place at Central Boulevard
(PRN) [Amended 1-5-1988]
Stop East/West on Benton
Place
Benton Place at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
2-26-2008]
Stop East/West on Benton
Place; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
Benton Place at North Gardiner
Drive (PNR) [Amended 1-2-1990]
Stop North/South on North
Gardiner Drive; West on
Benton Place
Benton Place at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1348
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Benton Place at Pine Grove
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop East/West on Benton
Place
Benton Place at Westwood
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North on Westwood
Boulevard
Berard Boulevard at Locust
Avenue (OKD) [Added 9-16-1986]
Stop East on Berard Boulevard
Berard Boulevard at Race Place
(OKD) [Added 1-2-1979;
amended 6-5-1990]
Stop East on Race Place;
North/South on Bernard
Boulevard
Bergen Street at Evergreen
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
1-24-2017]
Stop North/South on Bergen
Street; East/West on
Evergreen Avenue
Bergen Street at Glenmore Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 10-8-2013]
Stop North/South on Bergen
Street; East/West on
Glenmore Avenue
Bergen Street at Nostrand Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-2-1985]
Stop North/South on Bergen
Street
Bergen Street at Ocean Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ocean
Avenue
Bergen Street at Prospect Avenue
(BWD) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North of Bergen Street
Bergen Street at Ralph Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop North/South on Bergen
Street; East/West on
Ralph Avenue
Bergen Street/Silverleaf Lane at
Split Cedar Drive (CIS) [Added
4-4-1978]
Stop West on Bergen Street;
East on Silverleaf Lane;
North/South on Split
Cedar Drive
+Bergen Street at South Bedford
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Bergen Street
Bergold Street on Broadway(BWD) Stop East/West on Bergold
Street
Berkshire Drive at Northfield Road
(HPG) [Amended 3-15-1988;
2-27-2001]
Stop East on Berkshire Drive;
North/South on Northfield
Road
Berkshire Drive at Ridgefield Road
(HPG)
Stop West on Berkshire Drive
Bernice Drive at First Street (BPT) Stop West on First Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1349
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bernice Drive at Renee Drive
(north intersections) (BPT)
Stop Northwest on Bernice
Drive
Bernice Drive at Renee Drive
(south intersection) (BPT)
[Amended 7-18-1995]
Stop East on Renee Drive;
North/South on Bernice
Drive
Berrywood Court at Joselson
Avenue (WBW) [Added
7-11-1989]
Stop East on Berrywood Court
Bertram Street at Commack Road
(ISL)
Stop East on Bertram Street
Bethesda Lane at Broadway
Avenue (SVL) [Added
12-18-1990]
Stop East on Bethesda Lane
Bethesda Lane at Potomac Lane
(SVL) [Added 12-18-1990]
Stop West on Bethesda Lane
Betty Place at Gloria Boulevard
(HPG) [Added 7-2-1985]
Stop West on Betty Place
Betty Place at MacArthur
Boulevard (HPG) [Added
7-2-1985; amended 1-14-2014]
Stop East on Betty Place;
North/South on
MacArthur Boulevard
Beverly Road at Guilford Avenue
(OKD) [Added 3-19-2019]
Stop West on Beverly Road
Beverly Road at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD) [Added
2-23-1993; amended 9-29-2009]
Stop East on Beverly Road
North/South on Idle Hour
Boulevard
Beverly Street at Commack Road
(ISL)
Stop East on Beverly Street
Beverly Street at Grimsley Road
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Road
Beverly Street at Webster Road
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Beverly
Street
Biltmore Avenue at Connetquot
Drive (OKD)
Stop North on Connetquot
Drive
Biltmore Avenue at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop East/West on Biltmore
Avenue
Biltmore Avenue at Montauk Place
(OKD) [Amneded 12-2-2014]
Stop South on Montauk Place;
East/West on Biltmore
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1350
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Biltmore Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
5-20-1997; 12-14-2010]
Stop East/West on Biltmore
Avenue; North/South on
Woodlawn Avenue
Biltmore Avenue Extension at
Brookway Extension (OKD)
[Added 9-15-1987]
Stop North on Brookway
Extension
Birch Street at Boulevard Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Birch Street
Birch Street on Ferndale
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Birch Street
Birch Street at Highland Avenue
(WIS) [Added 1-29-2002;
amended 8-27-2013]
Stop South on Birch Street;
East/West on Highland
Avenue
Birch Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Birch Street
Birch Street at Nicoll Avenue (CIS) Stop East/West on Birch Street
Birch Street at Pinewood Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 1-16-1990]
Stop East on Birch Street;
North/South on Pinewood
Avenue
Birch Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Birch Street
Birch Street at Wavecrest Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Wavecrest
Avenue
Birch Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Birch Street
Birchgrove Drive at Nostrand
Avenue (CIS)
Stop South on Birchgrove
Drive
Birchgrove Drive at Prospect
Avenue (CIS) [Added
11-20-1990]
Stop East on Prospect Avenue
Birchgrove Drive at Ralph Avenue
(CIS) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop East on Ralph Avenue
Birchgrove Drive at Vanderbilt
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
5-1-1990]
Stop North/South on
Birchgrove Drive; East/
West on Vanderbilt
Avenue
Birchwood Court at Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Added 2-15-2005]
Stop East on Birchwood Court
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1351
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Birchwood Drive at Great River
Road (GRV) [Added 11-17-1981;
amended 2-24-2004]
Stop East on Birchwood Drive;
North/South on Great
River Road
Birchwood Drive at Woodhollow
Road (GRV)
Stop South on Birchwood Drive
Bishop Lane at Broadway Avenue
(HBK) [Added 6-6-1989]
Stop East on Bishop Lane
Bishop Road at Candlewood Road
(BWD) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop South on Bishop Road
Bittermint Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Bittermint
Street
Bittermint Street at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
5-4-2004]
Stop East on Bittermint Street
Black Pine Court at Waverly
Avenue (HTV) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop East on Black Pine Court
Blacker Street at Grand Boulevard
(BWD)
Stop West on Blacker Street
Blake Avenue at Lanson Street
(BHM) [Added 7-7-1987]
Stop North on Blake Avenue
Blossom Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop West on Blossom Street
Blue Jay Drive at Chapel Hill Drive
(BWD)
Stop East on Blue Jay Drive
Blue Jay Drive at Dicen Court
(BWD) [Amended 5-3-1988]
Stop East/West on Blue Jay
Drive; North on Dicen
Court
Blue Jay Drive at Swallow Lane
(BWD) [Added 8-22-2017]
Stop North on Blue Jay Drive
Blue Point Road (north) at
Greenbelt Parkway (HTV)
[Amended 4-15-1980;
8-19-1986]
Stop East/West on Blue Point
Road (north); North/South
on Greenbelt Parkway
Blue Point Road at Glide Road
(HBK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop South on Glide Road
Blue Point Road at Skylark Drive
(HBK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop South on Skylark Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1352
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Blue Point Road at Waverly Avenue
(HTV) [Added 6-2-1992;
amended 1-25-2005]
Stop West on Blue Point Road;
North/South on Waverly
Avenue
Blue Point Road West (south) at
Greenbelt Parkway (HTV)
[Amended 11-21-1978]
Stop East/West on Blue Point
Road West (south)
Blue Point Road West at Rudder
Drive (HTV) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North on Rudder Drive
Blue Point Road West at Spiral
Road (HTV) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop East/West on Spiral Road
Blue Point Road West at Waverly
Avenue (HTV)
Stop East on Blue Point Road
West
Blue Point Road at Lakeside Drive
(OKD) [Added 7-18-1995]
Stop North on Lakeside Drive
Bluff Circle at Terry Road (HPG)
[Added 12-6-1977]
Stop West on Bluff Circle
Blydenburgh Road at Estelle
Avenue (HPG) [Added 7-11-2000;
amended 2-14-2012]
Stop West on Estelle Avenue;
North/South on
Blydenburgh Road
Blydenburgh Road at Hadden
Court (HPG) [Added 9-19-1989]
Stop East on Hadden Court
Blydenburgh Road at Hauppauge
Landfill Access Road (HPG)
[Added 11-20-1979]
Stop East on Hauppauge
Landfill Access Road
Blydenburgh Road at Milmay
Avenue (HPG)
Stop West on Milmay Avenue
Blydenburgh Road at a curb cut
1,360 feet north of Motor Parkway
(HPG) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop West on the curb cut
Blydenburgh Road at Paul's Court
(HPG) [Added 1-20-1979]
Stop West on Paul's Court
Bohack Court at Garfield Avenue
(SVL) [Added 11-16-2010]
Stop West on Bohack Court
Bohack Street at Greeley Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Bohack Street
Bohemia Parkway at East Golf
Street (SVL) [Added 11-1-1988;
amended 1-28-1997]
Stop East on East Golf Street;
North/South on Bohemia
Parkway
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1353
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bohemia Parkway at Eleventh
Street (SVL) [Added 2-5-1991]
Stop West on Eleventh Street
Bohemia Parkway at Fulton
Avenue (BHM)
Stop North on Bohemia
Parkway
Bohemia Parkway at Karshick
Street (BHM) [Added 10-1-1991]
Stop North on Bohemia
Parkway
Bohemia Parkway at Terry's Road
(WSV) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on Bohemia
Parkway
Bohemia Parkway at Thirteenth
Street (BHM)
Stop West on Thirteenth Street
Bonaparte Avenue at Fuller Avenue
(ISL) [Added 4-5-1988]
Stop East on Bonaparte
Avenue
Bonaparte Avenue at Holmes
Avenue (ISL) [Added 1-1-1985]
Stop North on Holmes Avenue
Bonaparte Avenue at Peckham
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Peckham
Avenue; East/West on
Bonaparte Avenue
Bonaparte Avenue at Roosevelt
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Roosevelt
Avenue; East/West on
Bonaparte Avenue
Bonnie Road at Brook Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop South on Bonnie Road
Bonnie Road at Hilary Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop North on Bonnie Road
Bonniwell Place at Hemlock Lane
(BSR) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop East on Bonniwell Place
Bonniwell Place at Seafield Lane
(BSR) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop North on Seafield Lane
Bonniwell Place at Sunset Road
(BSR)
Stop West on Bonniwell Place
Booth Street at Peters Boulevard
(CIS) [Added 5-14-2019]
Stop West on Booth Street
Booth Street at Pineview
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East/West on Booth Street
Booth Street at Rossmore Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Booth Street
Booth Street at Woodlawn Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Booth Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1354
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Boston Avenue at Brook Street
(ISL) [Amended 5-27-2009]
Stop North/South on Boston
Avenue; East/West on
Brook Street
Boston Avenue at Geneva Street
(ISL) [Added 10-18-1988]
Stop East on Geneva Street
Boston Avenue at Harrisburg
Street (ISL) [Added 10-18-1988]
Stop East on Harrisburg Street
Boston Avenue at Sorowoc Lane
(ISL) [Added 10-18-1988]
Stop East on Sorowoc Lane
Boston Avenue at Spur Drive South
(ISL)
Stop North on Boston Avenue
Boulder Street at Flint Place (RNK)
[Added 7-11-1989]
Stop North on Flint Place
Boulder Street at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Boulder
Street
Boulder Street at Pine Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East on Boulder Street
Boulder Street at Port Avenue
(RNK) [Added 8-17-1982]
Stop West on Boulder Street
Boulevard Avenue at Clyde Street
(WIS) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop East on Clyde Street
Boulevard Avenue at Cranberry
Street (CIS) [Added 4-22-2003]
Stop South on Boulevard
Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at Cypress
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Cypress
Street
Boulevard Avenue at East Beech
Street (CIS)
Stop East on East Beech Street
Boulevard Avenue at East Cedar
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Cedar
Street
Boulevard Avenue at East Cherry
Street (CIS) [Added 8-21-1984]
Stop East/West on East Cherry
Street; North/South on
Boulevard Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at East Chestnut
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East
Chestnut Street
Boulevard Avenue at East Elm
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Elm
Street
Boulevard Avenue at East Locust
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Locust
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1355
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Boulevard Avenue at East Maple
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Maple
Street
Boulevard Avenue at East
Sycamore Street (CIS) [Amended
1-5-1982; 11-20-1990;
11-20-2018]
Stop East/West on East
Sycamore Street; North/
South on Boulevard
Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at East Walnut
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Walnut
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Hackmatac
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Hackmatac
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Harvest Lane
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Boulevard
Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at Hemlock
Street (CIS)
Stop East on Hemlock Street
Boulevard Avenue at Hickory
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Hickory
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Hunter
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Boulevard
Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at Juniper Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Juniper
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Kline Street
(WIS) [Added 10-6-1998]
Stop East on Kline Street;
North/South on Boulevard
Avenue
Boulevard Avenue at Magnolia
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Magnolia
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Orange
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Orange
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Poplar Street
(CIS) [Amended 4-4-1978;
11-17-2015
Stop North/South on Boulevard
Avenue; East/West on
Poplar Street
Boulevard Avenue at Rosewood
Street (CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Rosewood Street
Boulevard Avenue at Satinwood
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Satinwood
Street
Boulevard Avenue at Tamarack
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Tamarack
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1356
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Boulevard Avenue at Willow Street
(CIS) [Amended 12-6-1977]
Stop North/South on Boulevard
Avenue; East/West on
Willow Street
Bourne Boulevard at Evergreen
Avenue (BHM)
Stop South on Evergreen
Avenue
Bourne Boulevard at Locust
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
6-7-1988]
Stop West on Bourne
Boulevard; North/South
on Locust Avenue
Bourne Boulevard at Oak Avenue
and Edward J. Bosti School
driveway (OKD) [Added
1-5-1982; amended 12-16-1997]
Stop East/West on Bourne
Boulevard; North on
school driveway; South on
Oak Avenue
+Bourne Boulevard at Smithtown
Avenue (BHM)
Stop South on Smithtown
Avenue
Bourne Boulevard at Spruce
Avenue (BHM)
Stop South on Spruce Avenue
Bourne Boulevard at Terry Road
(BHM, SVL) [Amended 1-5-1982;
8-3-1988]
Stop East on Bourne
Boulevard; North/South
on Terry Road
Bourne Boulevard at Walnut
Avenue (BHM) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop South on Walnut Avenue
Bouy Lane at Cedar Point Drive
(WIS) [Added 7-16-2002]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Point Drive; West on Bouy
Lane
Bovie Court at Inverness Road
(HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop South on Bovie Court
Bovie Court at Joanne Drive (HBK)
[Added 8-17-1982; amended
10-12-2004]
Stop North on Bovie Court
Bow Lane at Gibbs Road (CIS)
[Added 6-2-1981]
Stop West on Bow Lane
Boyd Avenue at Degnon Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East on Boyd Lane
Boyd Avenue at Saxon Avenue
(ISL) [Added 10-6-1981;
amended 8-14-2007]
Stop West on Boyd Avenue;
North/South on Saxon
Avenue
Bradford Avenue at St. Charles
Street (HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Bradford
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1357
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bradford Place at Greenbelt
Parkway West (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop East on Bradford Place
Bradish Lane at Fairway Court
(WBS) [Added 9-7-1982]
Yield East/West on Fairway
Court
Bradish Lane at Long Drive Court
and Pearson Court (WBS) [Added
9-7-1982]
Yield East on Long Drive Court;
West on Pearson Court
Bradley Street at Eisenhower
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Bradley Street
Bradley Street at Marshall Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 10-1-1991]
Stop East/West on Bradley
Street; North/South on
Marshall Avenue
Bradley Street at Nimitz Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 5-1-2001]
Stop East/West on Bradley
Street; North/South on
Nimitz Avenue
Brancatelli Court at Patricia
Avenue (WIS) [Added 2-29-2000]
Stop East on Brancatelli Court
Branch Avenue at Brier Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Branch
Avenue
Branch Avenue at Brightside
Avenue (CIS)
Stop North/South on Branch
Avenue
Branch Avenue at Cinnamon Street
(CIS) [Amended 1-3-1989]
Stop North/South on Branch
Avenue; East/West on
Cinnamon Street
Branch Avenue at Palmetto Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Palmetto
Street
Branch Avenue at Sage Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Branch
Avenue
Branch Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Sassafras
Street
Brandt Court at Brook Street
(BSR) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop North on Brandt Court
Brandy Avenue at Railroad Avenue
(HBK) [Added 2-15-2005]
Stop North on Brandy Avenue
Breeze Avenue at Collington Drive
(RNK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop West on Collington Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1358
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Breeze Avenue at Deer Road (RNK)
[Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Deer Road
Breeze Avenue at Fir Grove Road
(RNK) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Fir Grove Road
Breeze Avenue at Hanson Place
(RNK) [Added 11-18-2008]
Stop South on Breeze Avenue
Breeze Avenue at Ontario Street
(RNK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop West on Ontario Stredt
Breeze Avenue at Parkwood Street
(RNK) [Added 11-18-2008]
Stop East on Parkwood Street;
North/South on Breeze
Breeze Avenue at Shelter Road
(RNK) [Amended 10-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Shelter
Road; North/South on
Breeze Avenue
Breeze Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Wildwood Road
Brentwood Parkway (east leg) at
Brentwood Parkway (west leg)
(200 feet north of Suffolk Avenue)
(BWD)
Yield North on Brentwood
Parkway (west leg)
Brentwood Parkway at Douglass
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Douglass Street
Brentwood Parkway at Flick Place
(BWD) [Added 1-7-1986]
Stop South on Brentwood
Parkway
Brentwood Parkway at Island
Boulevard (BWD)
Stop East on Island Boulevard
Brentwood Parkway at Loraine
Street (BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
Stop East/West on Loraine
Street
Brentwood Parkway at Merion
Road (BWD) [Added 2-1-1994]
Stop North/South on
Brentwood Parkway; East
on Merion Road
Brentwood Parkway at Oakland
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Oakland
Street
Brentwood Parkway at Oxford
Road (BWD) [Added 7-17-2018]
Stop North on Oxford Road
Brentwood Parkway at Pelham
Drive (BWD) [Amended
11-15-1983; 5-21-1996]
Stop East/West on Pelham
Drive; North/South on
Brentwood Parkway
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1359
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brentwood Parkway at
Pennsylvania Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Pennsylvania
Avenue
Brentwood Parkway at Prospect
Drive (BWD)
Stop West on Prospect Drive
Brentwood Parkway at Rita Drive
(BWD)
Stop East on Rita Drive
Brentwood Parkway at Rugby
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Rugby
Street
Brentwood Parkway at Stuyvesant
Street (BWD) [Amended
6-14-2005]
Stop East/West on Stuyvesant
Street; North/South on
Brentwood Parkway
Brentwood Parkway at Warren
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Warren
Street
Brentwood Parkway, at Winfield
Avenue (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Winfield
Avenue
Brentwood Parkway at Wyndham
Road (BWD) [Added 10-3-1978;
amended 1-16-1979]
Stop East on Wyndham Road
Brentwood Road at California
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on California
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Colorado
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Colorado
Avenue
*Brentwood Road at Commack
Road (BWD)
Stop North on Commack Road
Brentwood Road at Commack Road
(south spur) (BWD)
Yield North, turning east, on
Commack Road (south
spur)
Brentwood Road at Commack Road
(south spur) (BWD) [Added
4-5-1988]
Stop West, turning south, on
Brentwood Road (south
spur)
Brentwood Road at Delaware
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Delaware Avenue
Brentwood Road at Eighteenth
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Eighteenth
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Eighth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Eighth Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1360
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brentwood Road at Florida Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Florida
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Fourth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Fourth Street
(BWD)
Stop East on Fourth Street
Brentwood Road at Greg Lane
(BWD)
Stop West on Greg Lane
Brentwood Road at Gunther
Avenue (NBS)
Stop West on Gunther Avenue
Brentwood Road at Idaho Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 6-2-1981]
Stop East on Idaho Avenue
Brentwood Road at Kansas Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Kansas
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Kentucky
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Kentucky
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Louisiana
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Louisiana
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Maine Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Maine Avenue
Brentwood Road at Maryland
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Maryland Avenue
Brentwood Road at Massachusetts
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on
Massachusetts Avenue
Brentwood Road at Minnesota
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East on Minnesota
Avenue
Brentwood Road at a curb cut 90
feet south of Minnesota Avenue
(NBS) [Added 4-5-1983]
Stop West from curb cut
Brentwood Road at Mississippi
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Mississippi
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Missouri
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Missouri
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Moffitt
Boulevard (BSR)
Stop West on Moffitt Boulevard
Brentwood Road at Montana
Avenue (NBS)
Stop East/West on Montana
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1361
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brentwood Road at Nevada Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East on Nevada Avenue
Brentwood Road at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on New
Hampshire Avenue
*Brentwood Road at New Jersey
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on New Jersey
Avenue
+Brentwood Road at New York
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on New York
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Nineteenth
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Nineteenth
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Oregon Street
(NBS)
Stop East on Oregon Street
Brentwood Road at Pennsylvania
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Pennsylvania
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Redington
Street (BSR)
Stop East on Redington Street
Brentwood Road at Rhode Island
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Rhode
Island Avenue
Brentwood Road at Seventh
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Seventh Avenue
Brentwood Road (north of Second
Avenue) at shopping center
driveway (BWD)
Stop West on shopping center
driveway
Brentwood Road at Sixth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Sixth Avenue
Brentwood Road at Texas Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Texas
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Tillie Street
(BSR)
Stop East on Tillie Street
Brentwood Road at Twentieth
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Twentieth Avenue
Brentwood Road at Twenty-First
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Twenty-First
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Vermont
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Vermont
Avenue
Brentwood Road at Wisconsin
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Wisconsin Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1362
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brentwood Road at Wyoming
Street (NBS)
Stop East on Wyoming Street
Brentwood Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW)
Stop East on Brentwood Street
Brentwood Street at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW)
Stop East/West on Brentwood
Street
Brentwood Street at North
Thompson Drive (WBW) [Added
2-6-1979; amended 1-6-1981;
6-4-1996]
Stop East on Brentwood
Street; North/South on
North Thompson Drive
Brentwood Street at Nugent
Avenue (WBW) [Added
9-20-1983; amended 7-12-2005]
Stop East/West on Brentwood
Street; North/South on
Nugent Avenue
Brentwood Street/Brookdale
Avenue at Udall Road (WBW)
[Added 2-5-1991]
Stop West on Brentwood
Street; East on Brookdale
Avenue; North/South on
Udall Road
Breslau Street at Fire Island
Avenue (WIS) [Added 6-18-1996]
Stop North/South on Fire
Island Avenue
Breslau Street at Ocean Avenue
(WIS) [Added 10-8-1996]
Stop South on Ocean Avenue
Breslau Street at Udall Road (WIS) Stop West on Breslau Street
Bretton Road at Helen Marie Place
(HPG) [Added 4-4-1978;
amended 12-11-2012]
Stop East/West on Bretton
Road; North on Helen
Marie Place
Bretton Road at Kurt Lane (HPG) Stop North on Kurt Lane
Bretton Road at Queen Ann Place
(HPG) [Added 12-11-2012]
Stop North on Queen Ann
Place
Bretton Road and Stephens Drive
at Woodbury Road (HPG)
Stop North on Stephens Drive;
South on Woodbury Road
Bretton Road at Woodbury Road
(easternmost intersection) (HPG)
[Added 12-11-2012]
Stop East on Bretton Road
Brevoort Place at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Brevoort Place
Brewster Street at Park Avenue
(NBS) [Added 10-3-1978]
Stop East on Brewer Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1363
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brian Street at Kemp Street (EIS)
[Added 3-16-2010]
Stop East on Brian Street
Bridge Road at Gloria Boulevard
(CIS, HPG) [Added 11-18-1997]
Stop North/South on Gloria
Boulevard
Bridge Road at Hawthorne Avenue
(HPG) [Added 11-17-1987]
Stop North on Hawthorne
Avenue
Bridge Road at Helen Marie Place
(HPG) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop South on Helen Marie
Place
Bridge Road at Hoffman Lane
(CIS)
Stop South on Hoffman Lane
Bridge Road at Joyce Drive (HPG)
[Added 9-20-1988]
Stop South on Joyce Drive
Bridge Road at Lincoln Boulevard
(HPG)
Stop East/West on Bridge Road
Bridge Road at MacArthur
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop North/South on
MacArthur Boulevard
Bridge Road at Roosevelt
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop East/West on Bridge Road
Bridger Boulevard at Kelly Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North/South on Bridger
Boulevard
Bridger Boulevard at Potter
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Potter
Avenue
Bridger Boulevard at St. Johns
Street (Baldwin Avenue) (CIS)
Stop North/South on Bridger
Boulevard
Bridle Way at Lincoln Drive (OKD) Stop South on Bridle Way
Brier Street at Cone Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Brier Street at Ferndale Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 1-7-1986]
Stop East/West on Brier Street;
North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Brier Street at Leaf Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Brier Street at Root Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Brier Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 11-17-1987]
Stop East on Brier Street;
South on Wilson
Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1364
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brightshore Boulevard at Hemlock
Drive (PNR)
Stop North/South on
Brightshore Boulevard
Brightside Avenue at Cordello
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop North on Cordello Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Division
Avenue (CIS)
Stop South on Division Avenue
Brightside Avenue at East End
Avenue (CIS)
Stop South on East End
Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
4-17-2001]
Stop East/West on Brightside
Avenue North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Brightside Avenue at Hazel Street
(CIS)
Stop North on Hazel Street
Brightside Avenue at Leaf Avenue
(CIS) [Added 2-6-2007]
Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Brightside Avenue at North Peters
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
1-27-2004]
Stop East/West on Brightside
Avenue; South on North
Peters Boulevard
Brightside Avenue at Peters
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop North on Peters
Boulevard
Brightside Avenue at Pineview
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop North on Pineview
Boulevard
Brightside Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (CIS)
Stop South on Railroad Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Root Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North on Root Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Rossmore
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
1-27-2004]
Stop East/West on Brightside
Avenue; North/South on
Rossmore Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Tree Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Tree
Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Twig Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North on Twig Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East/West on Brightside
Avenue
Brightside Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (CIS)
Stop North on Woodlawn
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1365
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bristol Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop South on Bristol Street
Bristol Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Bristol Street
Broadlawn Drive at Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
3-1-1994]
Stop South on Broadlawn Drive
Broadway at Central Islip
Boulevard (RNK)
Stop West on Broadway
Broadway at Conerty Street (BWD) Stop West on Conerty Street
Broadway at Dickman Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-16-1981]
Stop East/West on Dickman
Street
Broadway at Dolce Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Dolce Street
Broadway at Elliot Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Elliot Street
Broadway at Fortieth Street (ISL)
[Amended 2-29-2000]
Stop East/West on Fortieth
Street; North/South on
Broadway
Broadway at Forty-First Street
(ISL) [Amended 5-6-1980]
Stop East/West on Forty-First
Street; North/South on
Broadway
Broadway at Forty-Second Street
(ISL) [Added 9-16-1986]
Stop West on Forty-Second
Street
Rroadway at Forty-Third Street
(ISL) [Amended 6-17-1980]
Stop South on Broadway; West
on Forty-Third Street
Broadway at Hilton Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Hilton
Street
Broadway at Loeffler Street (BWD)
[Amended 7-7-1992]
Stop North/South on
Broadway; East/West on
Loeffler Street
Broadway at Milandy Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Milandy
Street
Broadway at Mockingbird Place
(BWD)
Stop East on Mockingbird
Place
Broadway at Newberry Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Newberry Street
Broadway at Newman Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Newman
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1366
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Broadway at Noble Street (BWD)
[Amended 7-7-1992]
Stop North/South on
Broadway; East/West on
Noble Street
Broadway at Nolin Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Nolin Street
Broadway at Oray Street (BWD) Stop West on Oray Street
Broadway at O'Rourke Street
(BWD)
Stop West on O'Rourke Street
Broadway at Palmer Street (BWD) Stop West on Palmer Street
Broadway at Peterson Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Peterson
Street
Broadway at Plunkett Street
(BWD) [Amended 7-7-1992]
Stop North/South on
Broadway; East/West on
Plunkett Street
Broadway at Preston Street (BWD) Stop West on Preston Street
Broadway at Riddle Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Riddle
Street
Broadway at Rigney Street (BWD) Stop West on Rigney Street
Broadway at Sheridan Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Sheridan Street
Broadway at Spur Drive South
(ISL) [Amended 8-29-1989]
Stop North on Broadway; East/
West on Spur Drive South
Broadway at Stacom Street (BWD) Stop West on Stacom Street
Broadway at Stahley Street (BWD)
[Amended 5-1-1979; 7-7-1992]
Stop North/South on
Broadway; East/West on
Stahley Street
Broadway at Studley Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Studley
Street
Broadway at Stumpel Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Stumpel Street
Broadway at Tabor Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Tabor Street
Broadway at Thirty-Ninth Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Thirty-Ninth
Street
Broadway at Van Street (BWD) Stop West on Van Street
Broadway at West Fifth Street
(RNK) [Added 10-3-1978]
Stop South on West Fifth
Street
Broadway at West First Street
(RNK)
Stop North/South on West First
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1367
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Broadway at West Fourth Street
(RNK) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop South on West Fourth
Street
Broadway at West Second Street
(RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Second Street
Broadway at West Third Street
(RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Third Street
Broadway at Winston Drive (BWD) Stop East on Winston Drive
Broadway at Wittberg Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Wittberg
Street
Broadway at Wurz Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Wurz Street
Broadway Avenue at Brookeville
Court (HBK) [Added 2-26-2008]
Stop West on Brookville Court
Broadway Avenue at Budenos
Drive (SVL)
Stop East on Budenos Drive
Broadway Avenue at Camille
Street (HBK) [Added 9-19-1989]
Stop East on Camille Street
Broadway Avenue at Charlotte
Place (SVL) [Added 9-19-1989]
Stop West on Charlotte Place
Broadway Avenue at Church Street
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Church
Street
Broadway Avenue at driveway 200
feet south of Church Street
(Sunset Mall Shopping Center)
(HBK) [Repealed 11-20-2018]
Broadway Avenue at Dolce Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Dolce Street
Broadway Avenue at Ferraro Drive
(HBK) [Added 9-21-1993]
Stop East on Ferraro Drive
Broadway Avenue at Harley Court
(HBK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop West on Harley Court
Broadway Avenue at Hauser
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East on Hauser Avenue
Broadway Avenue at Henry Street
(HBK)
Stop East on Henry Street
Broadway Avenue at Karen Drive
(SVL)
Stop West on Karen Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1368
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Broadway Avenue at Lambeth
Street (HBK) [Added 7-15-1997]
Stop West on Lambeth Street
Broadway Avenue at Lilac Lane
(SVL)
Stop West on Lilac Lane
Broadway Avenue at Loop Drive
(SVL)
Stop East on Loop Drive
Broadway Avenue at Lumur Drive
(SVL)
Stop West on Lumur Drive
Broadway Avenue at Main Street
(HBK) [Amended 5-6-1986]
Stop South on Main Street
Broadway Avenue at Mollie
Boulevard (HBK)
Stop East on Mollie Boulevard
Broadway Avenue at Old Montauk
Highway (SVL)
Stop East/West on Old
Montauk Highway
Broadway Avenue at Opal Street
(HBK)
Stop East on Opal Street
Broadway Avenue at Paddock
Street (HBK) [Added 7-7-1992]
Stop West on Paddock Street
Broadway Avenue at Ronald Lane
(SVL)
Stop West on Ronald Lane
Broadway Avenue at Tremper
Street (HBK) [Added 3-19-2019]
Stop East on Tremper Street
Broadway Avenue at Westbridge
Drive (north leg) (HBK) [Added
3-19-2019]
Stop East on Westbridge Drive
Broadway Avenue at Val Court
(HBK) [Added 6-6-2000]
Stop West on Val Court
Broadway Avenue at Versa Place
(SVL)
Stop East on Versa Place
Broadway Avenue at driveway
1,420 feet north of Veterans
Highway (Fairfield Greens
Apartments north driveway) (HBK)
[Added 10-3-1978; amended
4-16-2002]
Stop West on driveway
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1369
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Broadway Avenue at driveway
1,200 feet north of Veterans
Highway (Fairfield Middle Greens
Apartments middle south
driveway) (HBK) [Added
10-3-1978; amended 4-16-2002]
Stop West on driveway
Broadway Avenue at driveway
1,000 feet north of Veterans
Highway (Fairfield Greens
Apartments south driveway) (HBK)
[Added 4-16-2002]
Stop West on driveway
Broadway Avenue at driveway
2,180 feet north of Veterans
Highway (Hillcrest Village
Apartments driveway) (HBK)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop West on driveway
Broadway Avenue at driveway
1,475 feet north of Veterans
Highway (Stonehurst Apartments
driveway) (HBK) [Added
10-3-1978]
Stop West on driveway
Bronx Avenue at Hawthorne
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Bronx Avenue
Brook Avenue at a driveway 725
feet north of Abrew Street (Bay
Shore Middle School) (NBS)
[Added 7-10-2001]
Stop West on school driveway
Brook Avenue at Chris-Matt Court
(BRS) [Added 7-13-1994]
Stop East on Chris-Matt Court
Brook Avenue at East Third Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 8-27-1991]
Stop North/South on East
Third Avenue; East/West
on Brook Avenue
Brook Avenue at Pacific Street
(NBS)
Stop North on Pacific Street
Brook Avenue at Princeton Street
(NBS)
Stop South on Princeton Street
Brook Avenue at Sylvan Street
(NBS)
Stop South on Sylvan Street
Brook Avenue at Third Avenue
(BSR) [Added 12-17-1985]
Stop North on Third Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1370
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brook Avenue at William Street
(NBS)
Stop South on William Street
Brook Street at Chicago Avenue
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Chicago
Avenue
Brook Street at Colony Drive
(WSV)
Stop North on Colony Drive
Brook Street at Commack Road
and Creekside Court (ISL)
[Amended 6-11-2002]
Stop East on Brook Street;
West on Creekside Court
Brook Street at Dale Drive (WSV)
[Amended 7-11-1989]
Stop North/South on Dale
Drive; East/West on Brook
Street
Brook Street at Division Avenue
(WSV)
Stop North/South on Division
Avenue
+Brook Street at First Avenue
(BSR)
Stop North/South on First
Avenue
Brook Street at Fremont Road
(WSV)
Stop South on Fremont Road
Brook Street at Garfield Avenue
(SVL)
Stop North/South on Garfield
Avenue
+Brook Street at Greeley Avenue
(WSV) [Amended 1-12-1994]
Stop East on Brook Street;
North/South on Greeley
Avenue
Brook Street at Lorraine Circle
(WSV)
Stop South on Lorraine Circle
Brook Street at Matthews Street
(OKD) [Added 12-16-1997]
Stop South on Matthews Street
Brook Street at Milton Street (ISL)
[Amended 3-1-1988]
Stop North on Milton Street;
East/West on Brook Street
Brook Street at Redington Street
(BSR)
Stop West on Redington Street
Brook Street at Rhodes Avenue
(BSR)
Stop South on Rhodes Avenue
Brook Street at Rollstone Avenue
(WSV)
Stop North/South on Rollstone
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1371
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brook Street at (Oakwood
Boulevard) and St. Louis Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 12-3-1996;
2-5-2008]
Stop East on Oakwood
Boulevard; North/South
on St. Louis Avenue
Brook Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 11-19-1985]
Stop East/West on Brook
Street; North/South on
Saxon Avenue
Brook Street at Saxton Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 4-9-2008]
Stop East/West on Brook
Street; North on Saxton
Avenue
Brook Street at Second Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 12-13-2011]
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue; East/West on
Brook Street
Brook Street at Washington
Avenue (WSV) [Amended
7-11-1989]
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue; East/
West on Brook Street
Brook Street at William Street
(BSR)
Stop East/West on William
Street
Brookdale Avenue at King Street
(WBW) [Amended 9-16-1986]
Stop West on King Street;
North/South on Brookdale
Avenue
Brookdale Avenue at Krause Street
(WBW) [Added 4-22-1986]
Stop West on Krause Street
Brookdale Avenue at Longshore
Street (WBW) [Added 4-22-1986]
Stop West on Longshore Street
Brookdale Avenue at Queen Street
(WBW) [Amended 6-24-2014]
Stop West on Queen Street;
North/South on Brookdale
Avenue
Brookdale Avenue at Toppy Lane
(WBW)
Stop West on Toppy Lane
Brookdale Avenue at West Belmont
Street (WBW) [Added 4-22-1986;
amended 9-16-1986]
Stop West on West Belmont
Street; North/South on
Brookdale Avenue
Brookdale Avenue at West
Lakeland Street (WBW) [Added
4-22-1986; amended
11-18-1986]
Stop West on West Lakeland
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1372
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Brookdale Avenue at West Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Added
11-17-1981]
Stop West on West Oakdale
Street
Brooklyn Boulevard at Chenango
Drive (NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Brooklyn Boulevard at Chestnut
Drive (NBS) [Amended
2-27-2001]
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Drive; North/South on
Brooklyn Boulevard
Brooklyn Boulevard at Garden
Court (NBS) [Amended
6-6-2000]
Stop East/West on Garden
Court; North/South on
Brooklyn Boulevard
Brooklyn Boulevard at Huron Drive
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Brooklyn
Boulevard
Brooklyn Boulevard at Ontario
Drive (NBS)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive
Brooklyn Boulevard at Oswego
Drive (NBS) [Amended
8-19-1986]
Stop North/South on Brooklyn
Boulevard
Brookville Avenue at Fortieth
Street (ISL)
Stop East on Fortieth Street
Brookville Avenue at Forty-Fourth
Street (ISL) [Added 6-6-1989]
Stop East on Forty-Fourth
Street
Brookville Avenue at Forty-Second
Street (ISL) [Added 5-2-1995]
Stop East on Forty-Second
Street
Browne Place at Wiechers Avenue
(RNK) [Added 6-6-1995]
Stop South on Browne Place
Browns River Road at Foster
Avenue (SVL) [Added
12-18-1990; amended 9-7-2011]
Stop West on Browns River
Road; South on Foster
Avenue; North from port
of call
Browns River Road at River Road
and Sayville Beach (Lot No. 3) Exit
(SVL) [Amended 4-9-2008]
Stop South on River Road;
Noth out of Sayville
Beach (Lot 3) exit
Browns River Road No. 2 at
Seaman Avenue (BPT) [Amended
4-5-1983; 10-21-2008]
Stop East on Browns River
Road No. 2; North/South
on Seaman Avenue
Bruce Lane at Commack Road
(BWD)
Stop North on Bruce Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1373
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bruce Lane at Greg Lane (BWD) Stop East on Greg Lane
Bruce Lane at Laurie Road (BWD) Stop East on Bruce Lane
Bruce Lane at Marsha Lane (BWD) Stop North on Marsha Lane
Bruce Lane at Pamela Read (BWD) Stop South on Pamela Road
Bryan's Court at Higbie Lane
(WIS) [Added 4-4-1995]
Stop East on Bryan's Court
Bryant Street at Montauk Avenue
(NGR)
Stop East on Bryant Street
Buckingham Drive at Somerset
Drive (HBK) [Added 12-13-2005]
Stop East on Buckingham
Drive
Buckingham Lane at Westminster
Drive (east intersection) (BHM)
[Added 12-6-1994]
Stop North on Westminster
Drive
Buckingham Lane at Westminster
Drive (midblock intersection)
(HBK) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop South on Westminster
Drive
Buckingham Lane at Westminster
Drive (west intersection) (BHM)
[Added 12-6-1994]
Stop West on Buckingham
Lane
Buckingham Road at Devon Road
(HBK) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop South on Devon Road
Buckingham Road at Somerset
Drive (HBK) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop East on Buckingham
Road; North/South on
Somerset Drive
Buckingham Road at Wyndham
Lane (HBK) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop North/South on
Buckingham Road; West
on Wyndham Lane
Bucknell Road at Fremont Road
(WSV) [Added 3-19-2019]
Stop East on Bucknell Road
Bucknell Road at Hilary Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop North on Bucknell Road
Budenos Drive at Versa Place
(SVL) [Added 11-17-1992;
amended 3-16-2010]
Stop East/West on Versa Place;
South on Budenos Drive
Buffalo Avenue at driveway of
Dorchester Village Apartment
parking lot (ISL) [Added
2-28-1978]
Stop West at driveway egress
from parking lot
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1374
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Buffalo Avenue at Moffit Boulevard
(ISL)
Stop South on Buffalo Avenue
Bunker Place at Fairway Lane
(RNK) [Added 6-9-1998]
Stop South on Bunker Place
Bunker Place at Johnson Avenue
(RNK) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 11-17-2009]
Stop North on Bunker Place
East/West on Johnson
Avenue
Burchell Boulevard at Garfield
Street (BSR)
Stop North/South on Burchell
Boulevard
Burchell Boulevard at Railroad
Plaza (BSR) [Added 1-16-1979]
Stop South on Burchell
Boulevard
Burleigh Drive at Singingwood
Drive (north intersection) (HBK)
[Added 4-15-1980; amended
10-6-1987]
Stop North on Burleigh Drive;
East/West on
Singingwood Drive
Burleigh Drive at Singingwood
Drive (south intersection) (HBK)
[Added 4-15-1980; amended
10-6-1987]
Stop East on Burleigh Drive;
North/South on
Singingwood Drive
Burleigh Drive at Sunny Glenn Way
(HBK) [Added 10-6-1987]
Stop West on Sunny Glenn
Way; North/South on
Burleigh Drive
Burling Lane at Everdell Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Burling Lane
Burling Lane at Keith Lane (WIS) Stop East on Burling Lane
Burling Lane North at Everdell
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Stop South on Everdell Avenue
Burling Lane South at Everdell
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Stop North on Everdell Avenue
Burma Road at Cedar Court and
West Lighthouse Walk (Kismet)
[Added 6-19-2012]
Stop East on Burma Road;
West on Cedar Court
Burnett Avenue at Lawrence
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North on Burnett Avenue
Busch Street at Parkway Gardens
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop East/West on Busch
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1375
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Bushwick Avenue at Caleb's Path
(BWD) [Amended 6-24-2014]
Stop East/West on Bushwick
Avenue; North/South on
Caleb's Path
Bushwick Avenue at Commercial
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
Stop East on Commercial
Boulevard
Bushwick Avenue at Fulton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Bushwick
Avenue
Butler Street at Keith Lane (WIS)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
Stop West on Butler Street;
North/South on Keith
Lane
Butler Street at Milligan Lane
(WIS) [Amended 8-30-1988;
5-11-2010]
Stop North/South on Milligan
Lane; East/West on Butler
Street
Butler Street at Pat Drive (WIS)
[Amended 8-12-1997]
Stop East on Butler Street;
North/South on Pat Drive
Butler Street at Pease Lane (WIS)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
Stop East/West on Butler
Street; North/South on
Pease Lane
Butler Street at Peter Paul Drive
(WIS) [Amended 1-3-1989]
Stop North/South on Peter Paul
Drive
Butler Street at Tanglewood Road
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Butler
Street
Byron Way at Lincoln Drive (OKD)
[Added 3-21-1989]
Stop West on Byron Way
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cadman Road at Clay Avenue
(WIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop East on Clay Avenue
Cadman Road at Douglas Avenue
(WIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop East/West on Douglas
Avenue
Cadman Road at Elward Avenue
(WIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop East on Elward Avenue
Cadman Avenue at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Cadman Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1376
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cadman Road at Kingsland Avenue
(WIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop East on Kingsland Avenue
Cadman Avenue at Roy Avenue
(WIS) [Added 9-1-1993]
Stop North/South on Cadman
Avenue; East on Roy
Avenue
Cadman Road at Van Buren
Avenue (WIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop East/West on Van Buren
Avenue
Cadman Avenue at Webster
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
6-18-1996]
Stop East/West on Webster
Avenue; North/South on
Cadman Road
Caleb's Path at Columbus Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Columbus
Avenue
Caleb's Path at Evergreen Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Evergreen
Avenue
Caleb's Path at Franklin Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Franklin Avenue
Caleb's Path at Gates Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Gates
Avenue
Caleb's Path (northbound) at
Highland Road (BWD) [Added
9-16-1980]
Stop East/West on Highland
Road
Caleb's Path (southbound) at
Highland Road (BWD) [Added
9-16-1980]
Stop East on Highland Road
Caleb's Path (north spur) at Motor
Parkway (HPG) [Added
1-21-1992]
Yield East on Caleb's Path
Caleb's Path at Myrtle Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 6-24-2014]
Stop East/West on Myrtle
Avenue; North/South on
Caleb's Path
Caleb's Path at Nostrand Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Nostrand
Avenue
Caleb's Path at Ocean Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ocean
Avenue
Caleb's Path at Prospect Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Prospect
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1377
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Caleb's Path at Ralph Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 6-24-2014]
Stop East/West on Ralph
Avenue; North/South on
Caleb's Path
Caleb's Path at Ridgewood Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ridgewood
Avenue
California Avenue at Junard Drive
(NBS) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop North/South on Junard
Drive
California Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on California
Avenue
Callahan Street at West Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop North on Callahan Street
Calvert Avenue at Hanson Place
(RNK) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Hanson Place
Calvert Avenue at Johnson Avenue
(RNK) [Amended 11-17-2009]
Stop South on Calvert Avenue;
East/West on Johnson
Avenue
Calvert Avenue at Springdale Drive
(RNK)
Stop West on Springdale Drive
Cambridge Avenue at East Third
Avenue (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991; amended
8-22-2017]
Stop East on Cambridge
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue at Lincoln
Avenue (HBK) [Added 2-1-1994]
Stop East on Cambridge
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue at Princeton
Street (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop West on Cambridge
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue at St. Charles
Street (HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop North/South on St.
Charles Street
Camille Lane at Cheril Drive (HBK)
[Added 2-14-2012]
Stop West on Camille Lane
Campbell Lane at Donna Place
(EIS) [Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East on Donna Place
Campbell Lane at Doris Place (EIS)
[Added 7-15-2003; amended
7-17-2018]
Stop West on Doris Place
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1378
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Campbell Lane at Judith Place
(EIS) [Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East on Judith Place
Campbell Lane at Mariana Place
(EIS) [Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East on Mariana Place
Campbell Lane at Melanni Place
(EIS) [Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East on Melanni Place
Campbell Lane at Rosemary Place
(EIS) [Amended 10-7-2003]
Stop East/West on Rosemary
Place; North/South on
Campbell Lane
Campbell Lane at Timber Point
Road (EIS) [Amended
8-30-1988]
Stop North on Campbell Lane;
East/West on Timber
Point Road
Campbell Lane at Valerie Place
[Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East on Valerie Place
Campbell Lane at Woodland Drive
(EIS)
Stop South on Campbell Lane
Campion Street at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD) [Added
7-16-2002]
Stop East on Campion Street;
North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Campion Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-7-1981]
Stop East on Campion Street
Candee Avenue at Edwards Street
(SVL)
Stop West on Edwards Street
Candee Avenue at Elm Street
(SVL) [Amended 1-3-1989]
Stop East/West on Elm Street;
North/South on Candee
Avenue
Candee Avenue at Maple Street
(SVL) [Amended 12-3-1996]
Stop North/South on Candee
Avenue; West on Maple
Street
Candee Avenue at Oversouth
Street (SVL) [Added 1-26-2010]
Stop East on Oversouth Street
Candee Avenue at Puritan Road
(SVL)
Stop East on Puritan Road
Candee Avenue at Wendover Road
(SVL)
Stop East on Wendover Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1379
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Candlewood Road at Carlton
Avenue (BWD) [Added
12-19-2000]
Stop South on Carlton Avenue
Candlewood Road at Churchill
Drive (BWD)
Stop South on Churchill Drive
+Candlewood Road at Commack
Road (BWD)
Stop South on Commack Road
Candlewood Road at Commack
Road and Commack Road (north
spur) (BWD)
Yield North on Commack Road
Candlewood Road at Connecticut
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Conneticut
Avenue
Candlewood Road at East Third
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on East Third
Avenue
Candlewood Road at First Street
(BWD)
Stop South on First Street
Candlewood Road at Harold Court
(BWD) [Added 5-22-2007]
Stop North on Harold Court
Candlewood Road at Heckscher
Avenue (PNR) [Amended
4-5-2005]
Stop East/West on Candlewood
Road; North/South on
Heckscher Avenue
Candlewood Road at Hyde Park
Avenue (BWD) [Added
11-16-2004]
Stop South on Hyde Park
Avenue
Candlewood Road at Illinois
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on Illinois Avenue
Candlewood Road at Indiana
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on Indiana Avenue
Candlewood Road at Lloyd Drive
(BWD) [Amended 4-23-2013]
Stop South on Lloyd Drive;
Northwest on
Candlewood Road
Candlewood Road at Marsha Lane
and Marsha Lane South (BWD)
Stop North/South on Marsha
Lane and Marsha Lane
South
Candlewood Road at
Massachusetts Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Massachusetts
Avenue
Candlewood Road at Michele Lane
(BWD)
Stop South on Michele Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1380
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Candlewood Road at Nebraska
Avenue (BWD) [Added
10-4-1994]
Stop East on Nebraska Avenue
Candlewood Road at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on New Hampshire
Avenue
Candlewood Road at New Jersey
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on New Jersey
Avenue
Candlewood Road at Ohio Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-23-2013]
Stop North on Ohio Avenue;
East/West on Candlewood
Road
Candlewood Road at Owens Street
(BWD)
Stop South on Owens Street
Candlewood Road at Peck Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Peck
Avenue
Candlewood Road at Pine Grove
Boulevard (PNR) [Added
4-2-1991]
Stop West on Candlewood
Road
Candlewood Road at Pineland
Place (BWD)
Stop South on Pineland Place
Candlewood Road at Rhode Island
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-23-2013]
Stop East on Rhode Island
Avenue; Southeast on
Candlewood Road
Candlewood Road at Second Street
(BWD)
Stop East on Second Street
Canoe Place at Cherokee Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Canoe
Place
Canoe Place at Iroquois Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981;
amended 12-19-2000]
Stop North on Canoe Place
Canoe Place at Ontario Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Canoe
Place
Canoe Place at Pawnee Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Canoe
Place
Canoe Place at Richmond
Boulevard (RNK) [Added
6-6-1978]
Stop North on Canoe Place
Canoe Place at Seminole Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Canoe
Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1381
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Canoe Place at Seneca Street
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Canoe
Place
Canterbury Court at Terry Road
and Townline Court (HPG) [Added
6-7-1988; amended 6-24-1997]
Stop East on Canterbury
Court; North/South on
Terry Road; West on
Townline Court
Canterbury Drive at Lincoln
Avenue (SVL) [Added 9-15-1987;
amended 9-12-2000]
Stop East on Canterbury Drive;
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Capri Road at Higbie Lane (WIS)
[Amended 1-19-1999]
Stop North/South on Higbie
Lane; West on Capri Road
Cardinal Court North at Cardinal
Court and South Prospect Place
(PNR)
Stop North on Cardinal Court
South; South on Cardinal
Court North
Cardinal Lane at Quail Run (EIS)
[Added 7-11-1989]
Stop South on Quail Run
Cardinal Lane at Woodland Drive
(EIS) [Amended 11-12-1996]
Stop East on Cardinal Lane
North/South on Woodland
Drive
Carey Street at Irish Lane (EIS)
[Added 10-19-1993]
Stop West on Carey Street
Carey Street at Third Avenue (EIS)
[Added 10-19-1993]
Stop East on Carey Street
Carl Avenue at Furrows Road
(HBK) [Added 12-18-1979]
Stop South on Carl Avenue
Carldon Lane at John Street (HPG)
[Added 4-5-1994]
Stop North on Carldon Lane
Carldon Lane at Radburn Drive
(HPG) [Added 3-15-1988;
amended 8-13-2002]
Stop West on Carldon Lane;
North/South on Radburn
Drive
Carleton Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(BWD)
Stop North on Carleton Avenue
Carley Drive at Joni Drive (WSV)
[Added 2-25-2003]
Stop South on Carley Drive
Carll Drive at Damon Street (WBS) Stop North/South on Carll
Drive
Carll Drive at Diamond Street
(WBS)
Stop North on Carll Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1382
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Carll Drive at Orinoco Drive (WBS) Stop South on Carll Drive
Carll Drive at Runyon Street
(WBS) [Amended 1-3-1984;
5-5-2015]
Stop East/West on Runyon
Street; North/South on
Carll Drive
Carnation Avenue at Florence
Street (CIS) [Added 4-7-1981]
Stop North/South on Florence
Street
Carnation Avenue at Gibbs Road
(CIS) [Added 6-2-1981;
amended 8-12-2003]
Stop North/South on Gibbs
Road; West on Carnation
Avenue
Carnation Avenue at Violet Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Violet
Street
Carnation Road at Foxglove Road
(WIS) [Added 11-20-1979]
Stop North on Foxglove Road
Carnation Road at Higbie Lane
(WIS)
Stop East on Carnation Road
Carnation Road at Pawmanake
Road (WIS) [Added 10-19-1993]
Stop West on Carnation Road
Carnegie Boulevard at Claas
Avenue (HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Carnegie Boulevard and Estelle
Avenue at Grundy Avenue (RNK)
Stop East/West on Carnegie
Boulevard and Estelle
Avenue
Carnegie Boulevard and Estelle
Avenue at Grundy Avenue (HBK)
Stop West on Carnegie
Boulevard; East on Estelle
Avenue
Carnegie Boulevard at Hiram
Avenue (HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
Carole Lane at Marilyn Street
(EIS) [Amended 4-17-2001]
Stop East/West on Marilyn
Street; North on Carole
Lane
Carole Lane at Timber Point Road
(EIS) [Amended 10-5-1999]
Stop East/West on Timber
Point Road; South on
Carole Lane
Carousel Court at Irish Lane (EIS)
[Added 5-2-2000]
Stop West on Carousel Court
Carrie Avenue at North Third
Street (SVL) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop West on North Third
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1383
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Carrie Avenue at Sterling Place
(SVL) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop East on Sterling Place
Carrie Avenue at Terry's Road
(SVL) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop West on Carrie Avenue
Carroll Street at Chapel Hill Drive
(BWD)
Stop North on Carroll Street
Carroll Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Carroll
Street
Carroll Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Carroll
Street
Carroll Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Carroll
Street
Carroll Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Carroll Street
Cartwright Loop at Church Street
(north intersection) (BPT) [Added
9-7-1999]
Stop North on Cartwright Loop
Cartwright Loop at Church Street
(south intersection) (BPT) [Added
9-7-1999]
Stop North on Cartwright Loop
Cassel Avenue at Diamond Street
(WBS)
Stop West on Diamond Street
Cassel Avenue at Orinoco Drive
(WBS) [Added 2-1-1994]
Stop South on Cassel Avenue
Cassel Avenue at Sachs Street
(WBS) [Added 1-25-2000;
amended 11-14-2000]
Stop North/South on Cassel
Avenue; West on Sachs
Street
Castle Lane at Hampshire Road
(WBS) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop West on Castle Lane
Cecil Avenue at Pine Aire Drive
(BWD) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop North on Cecil Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Cedar Avenue
Extension (ISL)
Stop North/South on Cedar
Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Easton Street
(LKL) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North on Cedar Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Maple Street
(ISL) [Amended 1-19-1999]
Stop East/West on Maple
Street; North/South on
Cedar Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1384
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cedar Avenue at Orowoc Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East on Orowoc Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Peconic Street
(BHM) [Added 11-16-1982]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Pond Road (RNK) Stop South on Cedar Avenue
Cedar Avenue at Raymond Street
(ISL) [Amended 12-6-1994]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Avenue; East/West on
Raymond Street
Cedar Avenue at Elder Road (ISL)
[Amended 11-17-2015]
Stop South on Cedar Avenue
Cedar Avenue Extension at Ocean
Avenue (ISL)
Stop West on Cedar Avenue
Extension
Cedar Avenue Extension at Smith
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
9-12-2000]
Stop East on Cedar Avenue
Extension; North/South
on Smith Avenue
Cedar Drive at Lincoln Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Boulevard
+Cedar Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop East/West on Cedar Drive
Cedar Drive at North Gardiner
Drive (PNR) [Amended 1-2-1990]
Stop North/South on North
Gardiner Drive; West on
Cedar Drive
Cedar Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
Cedar Drive at Potter Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop North/South on Potter
Boulevard
Cedar Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-2-1979]
Stop East on Cedar Lane
Cedar Lane South at
Springmeadow Drive (HBK)
[Added 3-20-1979]
Stop West on Cedar Lane
South
Cedar Place at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop West on Cedar Place
Cedar Point Drive at Clearwater
Lane (WIS) [Added 7-16-2002]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Point Drive; West on
Clearwater Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1385
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cedar Point Drive at Duck Lane
(WIS) [Added 7-15-2003]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Point Drive; West on Duck
Lane
Cedar Point Drive at Gate Lane
(WIS) [Added 7-14-1993]
Stop East on Gate Lane
Cedar Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
1-6-1979]
Stop East/West on Cedar
Street
Cedar Street at McKinney Street
(CIS) [Amended 3-3-1981;
6-2-1981; 4-16-1991]
Stop East/West on Cedar
Street; South on
McKinney Street
Cedar Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 2-26-1991]
Stop West on Cedar Street;
North/South on Wilson
Boulevard
Cedar Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 4-24-2012]
Stop East on Cedar Street
Cedarhurst Street at Connetquot
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Cedarhurst
Street
Cedarhurst Street at Greenlawn
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Cedarhurst
Street
Cedarhurst Street at Lowell
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Cedarhurst
Street
Cedarhurst Street at Montauk
Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Cedarhurst
Street
Cedarwood Street at Connetquot
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East on Cedarwood Street
Celia Street at Malts Avenue (WIS)
[Amended 9-1-1993]
Stop East/West on Celia Street;
North/South on Malts
Avenue
Celia Street at Minerva Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 9-12-2000]
Stop East/West on Celia Street;
North/South on Minerva
Avenue
Celia Street at Patricia Avenue
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop North on Patricia Avenue
Celia Street at Sandra Avenue
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop East on Celia Street
Center Avenue at Charles Street
(BSR) [Added 5-15-2018]
Stop West on Charles Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1386
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Center Avenue at Garfield Street
(BSR)
Stop North/South on Center
Avenue
Center Avenue at Oak Street (BSR)
[Amended 4-2-1985]
Stop South on Center Avenue
Center Avenue at Wilbur Street
(BSR) [Added 11-18-2014]
Stop West on Wilbur Street
Center Street at Greene Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Center Street
Center Street at Railroad Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East on Center Street
Center Bay Drive at East Bay Drive
and West Bay Drive (WIS) [Added
3-3-1981; amended 12-6-1988;
2-6-1990]
Stop South on Center Bay
Drive; North on West Bay
Drive
Central Avenue at Church Street
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Central
Avenue
Central Avenue at McCormick
Place (HBK) [Added 6-24-2008]
Stop South on Central Avenue;
East/West on McCormick
Place
Central Avenue at Pacific Street
(HPG) [Added 11-18-1997]
Stop North on Pacific Street
Central Avenue at Purick Street
(BPT)
Stop South on Central Avenue
Central Boulevard at Connetquot
Drive (OKD)
Stop South on Central
Boulevard
Central Boulevard at Elm Drive
(PNR) [Amended 7-2-1991]
Stop South on Central
Boulevard
Central Boulevard at Forrest Place
(PNR) [Amended 4-9-2008]
Stop North/South on Central
Boulevard
Central Boulevard at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop North on Central
Boulevard
Central Boulevard at Prospect
Place (PNR)
Stop North/South on Central
Boulevard
Central Islip Boulevard at Oakdale
Avenue (RNK) [Amended
9-19-1989]
Stop North on Oakdale Avenue;
East/West on Central Islip
Boulevard
Central Islip Boulevard at
Richmond Boulevard (RNK)
Stop West on Central Islip
Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1387
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Central Islip Boulevard at West
First Street (RNK) [Added
4-5-2005]
Stop South on West First
Street
Central Islip Boulevard at West
Sixth Street (RNK) [Added
7-11-2006]
Stop South on West Sixth
Street
Central Park Boulevard at Lincoln
Avenue (SVL) [Added 3-7-2006]
Stop East on Central Park
Boulevard
Centre Avenue at Jefferson Street
(EIS) [Amended 4-2-2002]
Stop East/West on Jefferson
Street; South on Centre
Avenue
Centre Avenue at Madison Avenue
(EIS) [Added 4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Madison
Avenue; North on Centre
Avenue
Cerny Place at Udall Road (WIS) Stop East on Cerny Place
Cerny Place at Ward Street (WIS)
[Added 8-16-2005]
Stop West on Cerny Place
Champlain Avenue at Hawthorne
Avenue (EIS) [Added 7-13-1994]
Stop North on Champlain
Avenue; East/West on
Hawthorne Avenue
Champlain Avenue at Woodland
Street (EIS) [Added 6-1-1993]
Stop West on Woodland Street
Chanel Drive at Chapel Hill Drive
(BWD) [Amended 1-14-2014]
Stop East on Chanel Drive;
North/South on Chapel
Hill Drive
Chanel Drive at Gull Lane (BWD) Stop West on Chanel Drive
Chanel Drive at Par Lane South
(BWD) [Added 9-20-2016]
Stop South on Par Lane South
Chapel Hill Drive at Franklin
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop West on Franklin Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Gull Lane
(BWD)
Stop South on Gull Lane
Chapel Hill Drive at Hale Street
(BWD) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Hale Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Harrison
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop West on Harrison Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1388
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Chapel Hill Drive at Hewes Street
(BWD) [Amended 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Hewes Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Heyward
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop East/West on Heyward
Street; North/South on
Chapel Hill Drive
Chapel Hill Drive at Morton Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Morton Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Pandora Drive
(BWD) [Amended 2-28-1978]
Stop East on Pandora Drive
Chapel Hill Drive at Perry Street
(BWD) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Perry Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Rutledge
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop West on Rutledge Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Stockton
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop West on Stockton Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Van Buren
Street (BWD) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Van Buren Street
Chapel Hill Drive at Walton Street
(BWD) [Amended 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Walton Street
Chapel Hill Drive at West White
Street (BWD) [Amended
11-17-1987; 8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on West White
Street; North/South on
Chapel Hill Drive
Chapel Hill Drive at Wilson Street
(BWD) [Amended 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Wilson Street
Chapin Court at Curtin Avenue
(WIS) [Added 5-2-1995]
Stop North on Chapin Court
Charles Avenue at Fischer Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 3-19-2002]
Stop East/West on Fischer
Avenue; North/South on
Charles Avenue
Charles Avenue at Manhattan
Boulevard (EIS) [Amended
3-15-1988]
Stop North on Charles Avenue;
East/West on Manhattan
Boulevard
Charles Avenue at Richard Avenue
(EIS)
Stop South on Charles Avenue
Charles Street at Fourth Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East on Charles Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1389
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Charney Lane at Cinque Lane
(BPT) [Added 11-1-1988]
Stop South on Cinque Lane
Charney Lane at Renee Drive
(BPT) [Added 4-5-1988;
amended 1-25-2005]
Stop East on Charney Lane;
North/South on Renee
Drive
Charney Lane at Stephen Road
(BPT) [Added 11-1-1988]
Stop North on Stephen Road
Charter Oaks Avenue at Jericho
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Jericho
Street
Charter Oaks Avenue at Medford
Street (BWD) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Medford
Street
Charter Oaks Avenue at Newberry
Street (BWD)
Stop South on Charter Oaks
Avenue
Charter Oaks Avenue at Newman
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Newman
Street
Charter Oaks Avenue at Pioneer
Street (BWD) [Amended
4-17-2001]
Stop East/West on Pioneer
Street; North/South on
Charter Oaks Avenue
Charter Oaks Avenue at Steuben
Street (BWD) [Amended
8-19-1980; 3-19-1991]
Stop East/West on Steuben
Street; North/South on
Charter Oaks Avenue
Chase Drive at Potomac Lane
(SVL) [Added 5-3-1983]
Stop North on Chase Drive
Chase Lane (north intersection) at
Loop Drive (SVL) [Added
5-6-1986]
Stop East on Loop Drive
Chase Lane (south intersection) at
Loop Drive (SVL) [Added
5-6-1986; amended 8-30-1988]
Stop South on Chase Lane;
East/West on Loop Drive
Chateau Drive at Fernwood Avenue
(OKD) [Amended 5-4-2004]
Stop East on Chateau Drive;
North/South on Fernwood
Avenue
Chateau Drive at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop East/West on Chateau
Drive
Chateau Drive at Van Bomel
Boulevard (OKD) [Added
2-25-1992]
Stop North on Van Bomel
Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1390
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Chateau Lane at St. Marks Lane
(ISL) [Added 12-19-2000]
Stop West on Chateau Lane
Chatham Road at Waterford Road
(OKD)
Stop North on Chatham Road
Chatham Drive at Wexford Drive
(east intersection) (OKD) [Added
5-26-2015]
Stop North on Chatham Drive
Chatham Drive at Wexford Drive
(west intersection) (OKD) [Added
5-3-2005; amended 5-26-2015]
Stop West on Wexford Drive
Chenango Drive at Gardiner Drive
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Chenango Drive at Lombardy
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East on Chenango Drive
+Chenango Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
9-19-1989]
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
Chenango Drive at Manor Lane
(NBS) [Amended 12-13-2005]
Stop West on Chenango Drive
Chenango Drive at Peters
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Chenango Drive at Pine Drive
(NBS) [Amended 9-11-2012]
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive; North/South on
Pine Drive
Chenango Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard; East/
West on Chenango Drive
Chenango Drive at Potter
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Chenango Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
8-27-2013]
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive; North/South on
Richland Boulevard
Chenango Drive at Windsor
Avenue North (Baldwin Boulevard)
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Chenango
Drive
Cheril Drive at Opal Street (HBK)
[Added 11-1-1988]
Stop North on Cheril Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1391
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cherokee Avenue at Third Street
(WBS) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop East on Third Street
Cherokee Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
12-13-2005]
Stop East on Cherokee Drive
Cherokee Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
11-15-1988]
Stop West on Cherokee Drive
Cherokee Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Cherokee
Drive
Cherokee Street at Mohican
Avenue (RNK) [Added 5-5-1981;
amended 10-13-2010]
Stop East/West on Cherokee
Street; South on Mohican
Avenue
Cherokee Street at Oakdale
Avenue (RNK) [Added 1-16-1979]
Stop East on Cherokee Street
Cherokee Street at Parkway
Boulevard (RNK)
Stop East/West on Cherokee
Street
Cherokee Street at Seminole
Street (RNK) [Added 1-6-1981]
Stop North on Seminole Street
Cherry Avenue at Easy Street and
a curb cut opposite Easy Street
(WSV) [Added 11-16-1982]
Stop West on Easy Street; East
on curb cut
Cherry Avenue at Tariff Street
(WSV) [Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop North on Cherry Avenue;
East/West on Tariff Street
Cherry Avenue at Tower Street
(WSV) [Added 2-23-1993]
Stop West on Tower Street
Cherry Avenue at Union Street
(WSV) [Added 4-6-1982]
Stop East on Union Street
Cherry Street at Fourth Avenue
(BSR)
Stop West on Cherry Street
Cherry Street at McFarland
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North/South on
McFarland Avenue
Cherry Street at McKinney Street
(CIS) [Amended 4-16-1991]
Stop East/West on Cherry
Street; North/South on
McKinney Street
Cherry Street at Oak Street (CIS)
[Added 4-16-1991]
Stop West on Oak Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1392
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cherry Street at O'Kane Street
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North on Cherry Street
Chester Road at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East on Chester Road
Chester Road at Marion Street
(SVL) [Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on Marion
Street; North/South on
Chester Road
Chester Road at North First Street
(SVL)
Stop East on North First Street
Chester Road at North Third
Street (SVL) [Amended
8-17-2010]
Stop North/South on Chester
Road; East on North East
Third
Chester Road at Tariff Street (SVL) Stop South on Chester Road
Chestnut Avenue at Easton Street
(LKL) [Added 11-21-1989]
Stop North on Chestnut
Avenue
Chestnut Avenue at Erie Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Erie Street
Chestnut Avenue at Johnson
Avenue (RNK)
Stop North/South on Chestnut
Avenue
Chestnut Avenue at Michigan
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on Michigan
Street
Chestnut Avenue at Paul Place
(RNK) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Paul Place
Chestnut Avenue at Peconic Street
(LKL) [Amended 4-28-2009]
Stop North/South on Chestnut
Avenue; East/West on
Peconic Street
Chestnut Avenue at Wiechers
Avenue (RNK) [Added 6-6-1995]
Stop West on Wiechers Avenue
Chestnut Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK) [Added
10-21-2008]
Stop North on Chestnut
Avenue
Chestnut Drive at Lincoln
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Boulevard
Chestnut Drive at Lombardy
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East on Chestnut Drive
Chestnut Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
2-5-2008]
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Drive; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1393
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Chestnut Drive at Peters Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Peters
Boulevard
Chestnut Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
+Chestnut Drive at Potter
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Potter
Boulevard
Chestnut Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Richland
Boulevard
Chestnut Drive at Windsor Avenue
North (Baldwin Boulevard) (NBS)
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Drive
Chestnut Place at Oakwood
Avenue (WIS) [Added
11-20-1979; amended
8-11-1998]
Stop East/West on Oakwood
Avenue; North on
Chestnut Place
Chestnut Place at Paprocki Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 11-20-1979;
8-14-2007]
Stop East/West on Paprocki
Avenue; North/South on
Chestnut Place
*Chestnut Place at Union
Boulevard (WIS)
Chestnut Place at West Islip
Boulevard (WIS) [Added
11-20-1979]
Stop South on Chestnut Place
Chestnut Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street at Freeman
Avenue (BWD) [Added
6-11-2002]
Stop West on Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street at Highland
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street at Locust Avenue
(ISL)
Stop West on Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street at Mayflower
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street at Nassau Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East on Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street at Prospect
Avenue (WIS) [Added 9-24-2019]
Stop North on Chestnut Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1394
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Chestnut Street at Wavecrest
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East/West on Wavecrest
Avenue
Chestnut Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East on Chestnut Street
Chevy Court at Waterford Road
(OKD) [Added 1-29-2002]
Stop North on Chevy Court
Cheyenne Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
12-13-2005]
Stop East on Cheyenne Drive
Cheyenne Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
11-15-1988]
Stop West on Cheyenne Drive
Cheyenne Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Cheyenne
Drive
Chicago Avenue at Chicago Avenue
Park driveway (NBS) [Added
6-19-2012]
Stop West on Chicago Avenue
Park driveway
Chicago Avenue at Cleveland
Street (NBS)
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
Chicago Avenue at Danbury Street
(NBS) [Added 8-10-2004]
Stop West on Danbury Street
Chicago Avenue at Fitchburg
Street (NBS)
Stop East/West on Fitchburg
Street
Chicago Avenue at Geneva Street
(NBS) [Amended 11-15-1988]
Stop East/West on Geneva
Street; North/South on
Chicago Avenue
Chicago Avenue at Harrisburg
Street (NBS) [Added 8-30-1983;
amended 4-24-2012]
Stop East on Harrisburg
Street; North/South on
Chicago Avenue
Chicago Avenue at Ithaca Street
(NBS) [Amended 2-5-2008]
Stop East/West on Ithaca
Street; North/South on
Chicago Avenue
Chicago Avenue at Jordan Street
(NBS) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop East on Jordan Street
Chicago Avenue at Roland Place
(NBS) [Added 8-15-2000]
Stop East on Roland Place
Chicago Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Chicago Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1395
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Chicago Avenue at Utica Street
(NBS) [Added 6-23-2015]
Stop East on Utica Street
Chimney Lane at Garden City
Street (WBW)
Stop South on Chimney Lane
China Road at Lincoln Avenue and
Partington Street (SVL)
Stop South on China Road;
North on Lincoln Avenue
Christopher Street at Fifth Avenue
(LKL) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop West on Christopher
Street
Christophers Court at Minerva
Avenue (WIS) [Added
11-15-1988]
Stop East of Christophers
Court
Church Avenue at Raymond Street
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Church
Avenue
Church Drive at Commercial
Boulevard (BWD)
Stop South on Church Drive
Church Drive at Highland Road
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Highland
Road
Church Drive at Lexington Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 1-3-1989]
Stop East/West on Lexington
Avenue; North/South on
Church Drive
Church Drive at Ridgewood
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Ridgewood
Avenue
Church Lane at Evelyn Road (WIS)
[Added 5-14-2019]
Stop West on Church Lane
Church Lane at Wilherm Lane
(WIS) [Amended 3-5-1985]
Stop East/South on Church
Lane; West on Wilherm
Lane
Church Road and Great River Dock
at Great River Road (GRV)
[Amended 1-5-1982;
12-17-1991]
Stop North/South on Great
River Road; East on
Church Road; West on
Great River Dock
Church Road at Woodhollow Road
(GRV) [Amended 11-14-2000]
Stop East/West on Church
Road North/South on
Woodhollow Road
Church Street at Coates Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 4-1-1986]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; East/West on
Church Street
Church Street at Dietz Street (CIS) Stop East/West on Dietz Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1396
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Church Street at Division Avenue
(BPT)
Stop South on Division Avenue
Church Street at Eatondale Road
(BPT) [Amended 2-16-1999]
Stop North/South on Eatondale
Road; East/West on
Church Street
Church Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Grundy
Avenue
Church Street at Halley Lane (CIS)
[Amended 11-20-1979;
5-21-1991]
Stop North/South on Church
Street; East/West on
Halley Lane
Church Street at Hilliard Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Hilliard
Avenue
Church Street at John Avenue
(BPT)
Stop South on John Avenue
Church Street at Knickerbocker
Avenue (HBK)
Stop South on Knickerbocker
Avenue
Church Street at McGrath Street
(CIS)
Stop East on McGrath Street
Church Street at Monsen Street
(CIS)
Stop East on Monsen Street
Church Street at Nicole Court
(BHM) [Added 10-13-2010]
Stop North on Nicole Court
Church Street at Normandie Drive
(HBK) [Added 7-17-1979]
Stop South on Normandie
Drive
Church Street at Oakdale Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 1-17-1989]
Stop East/West on Oakdale
Avenue
Church Street at Orville Drive
(BHM)
Stop South on Orville Drive
Church Street at Parkland Court
(BPT) [Added 10-12-2004]
Stop North on Parkland Court
Church Street at Raft Avenue
(HBK) [Added 4-1-1986]
Stop North/South on Raft
Avenue; East/West on
Church Street
Church Street at Storey Avenue
(CIS) [Added 6-6-1978;
amended 1-17-1989]
Stop North/South on Church
Street; East/West on
Storey Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1397
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Church Street at a curb cut 200
feet north of Suffolk Avenue (CIS)
[Added 1-18-1993]
Stop East/West on curb cut
+Church Street at Sylvan Avenue
(BPT)
Stop North/South on Sylvan
Avenue
Church Street at Vicksburg Drive
(HBK) [Added 1-28-1997]
Stop South on Vicksburg Drive
Church Street at William Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 5-18-1994]
Stop North/South on Church
Street; East/West on
William Avenue
Churchill Drive at Pineland Place
(BWD)
Stop West on Churchill Drive
Chute Lane at Cirrus Road (HTV) Stop West on Chute Lane
Chute Lane at Thunder Road
(HTV) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop East on Chute Lane
Cinnamon Street at Cone Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Cinnamon Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
1-7-1986]
Stop East/West on Cinnamon
Street; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Cinnamon Street at Leaf Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Cinnamon Street at Root Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 6-11-2002]
Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Cinnamon Street at Tree Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Tree
Avenue
Cinnamon Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
2-3-1981; 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Wilson
Boulevard; East on
Cinnamon Street
Cinque Lane at Renee Drive (BPT)
[Added 4-5-1988]
Stop East on Cinque Lane
Circle Lane/Les Street at Ohio
Avenue (NBS) [Added 9-7-1982;
amended 11-18-2003]
Stop East on Circle Lane West
on Les Street; North/
South on Ohio Avenue
Cirrus Road at Greenbelt Parkway
(HBK) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop West on Cirrus Road;
North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1398
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cirrus Road at Jet Lane (HBK)
[Added 11-16-2010]
Stop North/South on Cirrus
Road; West on Jet Lane
Cirrus Road at Nimbus Road (HBK)
[Added 11-16-2010]
Stop North on Nimbus Road
Cirrus Road at Rime Lane (HBK)
[Added 7-15-2008; amended
11-16-2010]
Stop North/South on Cirrus
Road; East on Rime Lane
Cirrus Road at Thunder Road
(HTV) [Added 10-2-1990]
Stop South on Cirrus Road
Claas Avenue at Clarice Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claas Avenue at Donald Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claas Avenue at Furrows Road
(HBK) [Added 1-15-1980]
Stop South on Claas Avenue
Claas Avenue at Halbert Drive
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claas Avenue at Lillian Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claas Avenue at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claas Avenue at Twin Bark Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Claas
Avenue
Claremont Avenue at East Third
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Claremont
Avenue
Claremont Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Claremont
Avenue
Clarice Boulevard at Grundy
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East/West on Clarice
Boulevard
Clarice Boulevard at Hiram Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
Clarice Boulevard at Hummel
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East/West on Clarice
Boulevard
Claridge Lane at Overlook Drive
(EIS) [Added 9-5-1978]
Stop East on Claridge Lane
Clarinet Street at Coates Avenue
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Clarinet
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1399
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Clarissa Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Added
2-23-1993]
Stop East on Clarissa Drive
Clark Street/Emjay Boulevard at
Eisenhower Avenue (BWD) [Added
9-21-1993]
Stop West on Clark Street;
East on Emjay Boulevard;
North/South on
Eisenhower Avenue
Clark Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Clark Street
Clark Street (MacArthur Avenue)
at Marshall Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Clark Street;
West on MacArthur
Avenue
Clarke Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Clarke
Street
Clarke Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Clarke
Street
Clarke Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Clarke Street
Clay Avenue at Toomey Road (WIS) Stop West on Clay Avenue
Clayton Street at Cordello Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 7-10-2001]
Stop East/West on Clayton
Street North/South on
Cordello Avenue
+Clayton Street at Kenmore
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
2-7-1989]
Stop North/South on Kenmore
Avenue; East/West on
Clayton Street
Claywood Drive at Fir Place (BWD) Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive
Claywood Drive at Melody Lane
(BWD) [Amended 2-7-1989]
Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive; East West on
Melody Lane
Claywood Drive at Mockingbird
Place (BWD)
Stop East/West on Mockingbird
Place
Claywood Drive at Oriole Place
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Oriole Place
Claywood Drive at Peacock Place
(BWD) [Amended 11-12-1996]
Stop East/West on Peacock
Place; North/South on
Claywood Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1400
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Claywood Drive at Pheasant Place
(BWD) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive
Claywood Drive at Robin Hill Place
(BWD) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive
Claywood Drive at Second Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive
Claywood Drive at Sparrow Place
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Sparrow
Place
Claywood Drive at Swan Place
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Claywood
Drive
Cleveland Avenue at Henry Street
(SVL) [Added 9-1-1993]
Stop South on Cleveland
Avenue
Cleveland Avenue at Manton
Street (SVL) [Amended
10-9-2001]
Stop East/West on Manton
Street; North/South on
Cleveland Avenue
Cleveland Avenue at North Fehr
Way (EDG)
Yield West on North Fehr Way
Cleveland Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG)
Stop North on Cleveland
Avenue
Cleveland Avenue at South Fehr
Way (EDG) [Amended 6-5-1979]
Stop East/West on South Fehr
Way
Cleveland Avenue at South Second
Street (EDG) [Added 5-6-2003]
Stop East on South Second
Street
Cleveland Street at Irish Lane
(EIS)
Stop West on Cleveland Street
Cleveland Street at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
Cleveland Street at Jefferson
Avenue (EIS) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 8-17-1999]
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
Cleveland Street at Monroe
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Cleveland Street
Cleveland Street at Saint Louis
Avenue (NBS) [Added 8-10-2004]
Stop West on Cleveland Street
Cleveland Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
Cleveland Street at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1401
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cleveland Street at Washington
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East/West on Cleveland
Street
Cleveland Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Added
11-17-1981]
Stop East on Cleveland Street
Cliff Avenue at Easy Street (SVL)
[Added 12-6-1983; amended
10-10-2000]
Stop South on Cliff Avenue;
East/West on Easy Street
Cliff Avenue/North Cliff Avenue at
Tariff Street (SVL) [Amended
11-15-2005; 7-17-2018]
Stop North on Cliff Avenue;
South on North Cliff
Avenue; East/West on
Tariff Street
Clifford Place at North Sixth Street
(RNK) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Clifford Place
Clift Street at Cordello Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 4-24-2012]
Stop East/West on Clift Street;
North/South on Cordello
Avenue
Clift Street at Kenmore Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Clift Street
Clift Street at McKinney Street
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop West on Clift Street
Clinton Avenue at Dowsing Avenue
(NBS) [Added 4-7-1987;
amended 11-21-1989]
Stop West on Dowsing Avenue;
North/South on Clinton
Avenue
Clinton Avenue at shopping center
driveway 625+ feet south of
Dowsing Avenue (NBS) [Added
3-7-2006]
Stop East on shopping center
driveway
Clinton Avenue at Linden Place
(BSR) [Amended 12-16-1997]
Stop East on apartment
complex driveway; North/
South on Clinton Avenue;
West on Linden Place
Clinton Avenue at Reil Place (BSR) Stop West on Reil Place
Clinton Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Clinton Avenue
Cloverdale Drive at Ocean Avenue
(OKD)
Stop East on Cloverdale Drive
Cloverdale Drive at Sycamore
Avenue (OKD)
Stop West on Cloverdale Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1402
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Cloverlook Lane at Half Mile Road
(CIS) [Added 8-27-2013]
Stop South on Cloverlook Lane
Cloverwood Place at Smith Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop East on Cloverwood
Place; North/South on
Smith Avenue
Coates Avenue at Church Street
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Church
Street
Coates Avenue at Columbia Street
(HBK) [Added 10-17-2006]
Stop West on Columbia Street
Coates Avenue at Donald
Boulevard (HBK) [Amended
9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; West on Donald
Boulevard
Coates Avenue at Dougherty
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East on Dougherty
Avenue
Coates Avenue at Elizabeth Avenue
(HBK) [Added 6-13-2006]
Stop West on Elizabeth Avenue
Coates Avenue at Ellsworth Street
(HBK) [Amended 7-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Ellsworth
Street; North/South on
Coates Avenue
Coates Avenue at First Street
(HBK) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop East on First Street
+Coates Avenue at Furrows Road
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop East/West on Furrows
Road; North/South on
Coates Avenue
Coates Avenue at Good Shepherd
Church driveway (one-way exit)
between Officials Avenue and Van
Horn Avenue (HBK)
Stop West on Good Shepherd
Church driveway
Coates Avenue at Huber Avenue
(HBK) [Added 6-13-2006]
Stop East on Huber Avenue
Coates Avenue at Kerry Street
(HBK) [Added 4-9-2008]
Stop West on Kerry Street
Coates Avenue at Lexington
Avenue (HBK) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop West on Lexington
Avenue
Coates Avenue at Littlewood Court
(HBK) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop West on Littlewood Court
Coates Avenue at Marvin Avenue
(HBK) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop West on Marvin Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1403
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Coates Avenue at Muriel Street
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Muriel
Street
Coates Avenue at Pauline Street
(HBK) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop East on Pauline Street
Coates Avenue at Perimeter Street
(HBK) [Added 11-16-1982;
amended 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; West on
Perimeter Street
Coates Avenue at Portside Drive
(HBK) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; West on Portside
Drive
Coates Avenue at Railroad Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 3-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Railroad
Avenue
Coates Avenue at Resiak Court
(HBK) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop East on Resiak Court
+Coates Avenue at Roberts Street
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop East/West on Roberts
Street; North/South on
Coates Avenue
Coates Avenue at Sheets Avenue
(HBK) [Added 7-2-1991]
Stop East on Sheets Avenue
Coates Avenue at South Roberts
Street (HBK)
Stop West on South Roberts
Street
Coates Avenue at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop West on Terry Boulevard
Coates Avenue at Trumpet Lane
(HBK) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Coates
Avenue; West on Trumpet
Lane
Cocoanut Street at Ferndale
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East/West on Cocoanut
Street
Cocoanut Street at Freeman
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Cocoanut Street
Cocoanut Street at Gervon Court
(BWD) [Added 6-7-2016]
Stop South on Gervon Court
Cocoanut Street at Mayflower
Avenue (BWD) [Added 6-7-2016]
Stop North on Mayflower
Avenue
Cocoanut Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
7-15-2008]
Stop East on Cocoanut Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1404
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Codman Street at Grand Boulevard
(BWD)
Stop West on Codman Street
Codman Street at Twin Lawns
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-7-1981]
Stop North on Twin Lawns
Avenue
Colin Drive at Greenbelt Parkway
West (HTV) [Added 6-5-1990;
amended 11-16-1993]
Stop East on Greenbelt
Parkway West
Collington Drive at Croaton Street
(RNK) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop West on Croaton Street
Collington Drive at Haven Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Collington
Drive
Collington Drive at Port Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Collington
Drive
Collington Drive at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK)
Stop East/West on Collington
Drive
Collins Avenue at Edwards Street
(SVL)
Stop South on Collins Avenue
Collins Avenue at a curb cut 150
feet south of Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added 3-5-1985]
Stop East on curb cut
Colony Drive at Furrows Road
(HBK) [Added 7-2-1991]
Stop North on Colony Drive
Colorado Avenue at Illinois Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Colorado
Avenue
Colorado Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 1-25-2011]
Stop East on Colorado Avenue
Colt Court at Remington Boulevard
(RNK) [Added 10-22-2019]
Stop South on Colt Court
Colton Avenue at Edwards Street
(SVL)
Stop North on Colton Avenue
Colton Avenue at Elm Street (SVL) Stop South on Colton Avenue
Columbia Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Added 7-11-2000]
Stop East on Columbia Street
Columbia Street at Locust Avenue
(ISL)
Stop North on Locust Avenue
Columbia Street at Nassau Avenue
(ISL) [Added 1-6-1981]
Stop East on Columbia Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1405
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Columbia Street at Watson Place
(ISL)
Stop West on Columbia Street
Columbine Avenue at Commack
Road and Franklin Street (ISL)
[Amended 12-18-2001]
Stop East on Franklin Street;
North/South on Commack
Street; West on
Columbine Avenue
Columbus Avenue at Commercial
Boulevard (BWD)
Stop East/West on Columbus
Avenue
Columbus Avenue at Fulton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Columbus
Avenue
Comac Loop (south intersection) at
Comac Street and Thirteenth
Avenue (LKL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East on Comac Street;
West on Comac Loop
(south intersection)
Comac Loop at Thirteenth Avenue
(north intersection) (LKL) [Added
10-6-1981]
Stop East on Comac Loop
(north intersection)
Comac Street on Fifth Avenue
(LKL) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop East/West on Comac
Street
Comac Street at Ninth Avenue
(RNK) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop North on driveway
opposite Ninth Avenue;
South on Ninth Avenue
Commack Road at Cumberland
Street (ISL)
Stop East on Cumberland
Street
Commack Road at Delaware
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Delaware Avenue
Commack Road at Fortieth Street
and Oxford Street (ISL) [Added
5-16-1989; amended
12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Fortieth
Street and Oxford Street;
North/South on Commack
Road
Commack Road at Forty-Fifth
Street (ISL)
Stop West on Forty-Fifth Street
Commack Road at Forty-First
Street (ISL)
Stop West on Forty-First Street
Commack Road at Forty-Fourth
Street (ISL)
Stop West on Forty-Fourth
Street
Commack Road at Forty-Seventh
Street (ISL) [Added 1-27-2004]
Stop West on Forty-Seventh
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1406
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Commack Road at Forty-Sixth
Street (ISL)
Stop West on Forty-Sixth
Street
Commack Road at Forty-Third
Street (ISL) [Amended
4-13-1993]
Stop West on Forty-Third
Street
Commack Road at Grant Avenue
and Wallace Street (ISL)
[Amended 1-17-1984]
Stop East on Grant Avenue;
West on Wallace Street
Commack Road at Hilltop Drive
(BWD)
Stop South on Hilltop Drive
Commack Road at James Street
(ISL) [Added 11-21-1978]
Stop West on James Street
Commack Road at Laird Place
(ISL) [Added 11-21-1978]
Stop South on Laird Place
Commack Road at Lake Street
(ISL)
Stop East on Lake Street
Commack Road at Langdon Street
(ISL)
Stop East on Langdon Street
Commack Road at Laurie Road
(BWD) [Amended 2-15-2005]
Stop North on Laurie Road;
East/West on Commack
Road
Commack Road at Lloyd Drive
(BWD)
Stop East on Lloyd Drive
Commack Road at Montauk
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop South on Montauk Avenue
Commack Road at Newham
Avenue (BWD)
Stop South on Newham Avenue
Commack Road at Pamela Road
(BWD) [Amended 10-3-1978]
Stop North on Pamela Road
Commack Road at Pineland Place
(BWD)
Stop North on Pineland Place
Commack Road at Richmond
Street (ISL)
Stop East on Richmond Street
Commack Road at Romaine
Avenue and Lake Street (ISL)
Stop North on Romaine Avenue
Commack Road at Romaine
Avenue and Lake Street (ISL)
Yield West on Commack Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1407
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Commack Road (west spur) at
Spur Drive North (BWD)
Yield South turning west on
Commack Road (west
spur)
Commack Road at Taft Avenue
Extension (ISL) [Added 1-5-1982;
amended 3-5-1985]
Stop South on Taft Avenue
Extension
Commack Road at Thirty-Eighth
Street (ISL) [Added 10-17-1995]
Stop West on Thirty-Eighth
Street
Commack Road at Thirty-Ninth
Street and Winthrop Street (ISL)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop East on Winthrop Street;
West on Thirty-Ninth
Street
Commack Road at Weldon Street
(ISL) [Added 4-16-1996]
Stop East on Weldon Street
Commack Road at Windsor Street
(ISL)
Stop East on Windsor Street
Commack Road at Winthrop Street
and Thirty-Ninth Street (ISL)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop East on Winthrop Street;
West on Thirty-Ninth
Street
Commerce Place at John Street
(EIS) [Added 3-19-2019]
Stop North on John Street
Commercial Avenue at Freeport
Street (EIS) [Added 1-5-1988]
Stop North on Commercial
Avenue
Commercial Avenue at Westbury
Street (EIS) [Added 1-5-1988]
Stop North/South on
Commercial Avenue
Commercial Avenue at East
Nassau Street (EIS) [Added
9-8-1998]
Stop North on Commercial
Avenue
Commercial Boulevard at Fulton
Street (BWD) [Amended
12-18-2018]
Stop East/West on Commercial
Boulevard; North/South
on Fulton Street
Commercial Boulevard at
Lexington Avenue (CIS)
Stop Northwest on Commercial
Boulevard
Commercial Boulevard at
Lexington Avenue (CIS) [Added
7-14-2015]
Stop Southeast on Commercial
Boulevard
Commercial Boulevard at Orient
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North on Orient Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1408
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Commercial Boulevard at
Ridgewood Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Commercial
Boulevard
Commercial Boulevard at
Vanderbilt Boulevard (OKD)
[Added 12-6-1977; amended
7-6-1982]
Stop East/West on Commercial
Boulevard
Commercial Place at East Roslyn
Street (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Commercial Place
Community Road at Cooper Lane
(BSR) [Amended 11-15-1988]
Stop East/West on Cooper
Lane; North/South on
Community Road
Cone Avenue at Date Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Cone Avenue at Lemon Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Cone Avenue at Olive Street (CIS) Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Cone Avenue at Palm Street (CIS) Stop South on Cone Avenue
Cone Avenue at Palmetto Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Palmetto
Street
Cone Avenue at Sage Street (CIS)
[Amended 9-9-2003]
Stop North/South on Cone
Avenue
Cone Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Sassafras
Street
Conlu Drive at Conlu Drive East/
Conlu Drive West (EIS) [Added
9-19-1995]
Stop South on Conlu Drive
Conlu Drive at Wantagh Avenue
South (EIS) [Added 8-14-2001]
Stop North on Conlu Drive
+Connecticut Avenue at East Forks
Road (BWD) [Amended
11-17-1998; 6-22-1999]
Stop East/West on Connecticut
Avenue; North/South on
East Forks Road
Connecticut Avenue at East Third
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-12-2002]
Stop East/West on Connecticut
Avenue; North/South on
East Third Avenue
Connecticut Avenue at Illinois
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Connecticut
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1409
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Connecticut Avenue at Ohio
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Connecticut
Avenue
Connecticut Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Amended 10-17-1989]
Stop East/West on Connecticut
Avenue; North/South on
Stein Drive
Connetquot Avenue at Baldwin
Street (EIS) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop East on Baldwin Street
Connetquot Avenue at East
Farmingdale Street (EIS)
Stop East on East Farmingdale
Street
Connetquot Avenue at East
Manhasset Street (EIS)
Stop East on East Manhasset
Street
Connetquot Avenue at East Nassau
Street (EIS)
Stop East on East Nassau
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Edgewood
Street (NGR)
Stop East on Edgewood Street
Connetquot Avenue at Elmwood
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Elmwood Street
Connetquot Avenue at Fifth
Avenue (NGR)
Stop West on Fifth Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Floral Park
Street (NGR)
Stop East on Floral Park Street
Connetquot Avenue at Freeport
Street (EIS) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop East on Freeport Street
Connetquot Avenue at Garden City
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Garden City
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Hawthorne
Avenue (EIS) [Added 8-15-2000]
Stop East on Hawthorne
Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Lynbrook
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Lynbrook Street
Connetquot Avenue at Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop East on Madison Street
Connetquot Avenue at Manhattan
Boulevard (NGR)
Stop East on Manhattan
Boulevard
Connetquot Avenue at Maplewood
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Maplewood
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Merrick
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Merrick Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1410
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Connetquot Avenue at Messina
Street (CIS) [Added 6-6-1978]
Stop East on Messina Street
Connetquot Avenue at Napoli
Street (CIS) [Added 6-6-1978]
Stop East on Napoli Street
Connetquot Avenue at Norwood
Street (NGR)
Stop East on Norwood Street
Connetquot Avenue at Oak Street
and Sportsmen Street (CIS)
[Amended 4-7-1981]
Stop East on Oak Street and
West on Sportsmen Street
Connetquot Avenue at Oceanside
Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Oceanside
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Otis Road
(NGR)
Stop West on Otis Road
Connetquot Avenue at Palermo
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Palermo
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Pinewood
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on Pinewood Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Ridge
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Ridge
Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Rock Road
(EIS)
Stop West on Rock Road
Connetquot Avenue at Rockaway
Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Rockaway
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Roma
Avenue (CIS) [Added 6-6-1978]
Stop West on Roma Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Seacliff
Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Seacliff
Street
Connetquot Avenue at Seley Cross
(NGR)
Stop West on Seley Cross
Connetquot Avenue at South Lawn
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on South Lawn
Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Woodcliff
Road (EIS)
Stop West on Woodcliff Road
Connetquot Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue
Connetquot Avenue at Woodmere
Street (NGR)
Stop East on Woodmere Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1411
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Connetquot Drive at Guilford
Avenue (OKD)
Stop West on Guilford Avenue
Connetquot Drive at Hollywood
Drive (OKD)
Stop North on Hollywood Drive
Connetquot Drive at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop East/West on Connetquot
Drive
Connetquot Road at Cross Road
(OKD) [Added 1-17-1978]
Stop North/South on
Connetquot Road
Connetquot Road at Harriett
Street (BPT)
Stop North/South on
Connetquot Road
Connetquot Road at Lincoln Drive
(OKD) [Added 7-10-2007]
Stop North on Connetquot
Road
Connetquot Road at Russell Road
(OKD) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop North/South on
Connetquot Road
Constance Court at DeForest
Avenue (WIS) [Added
10-18-2005]
Stop West on Constance Court
Consuelo Place at Shore Drive
(OKD)
Stop North on Consuelo Place
Cookie Lane at Irish Lane (EIS) Stop East on Cookie Lane
Cooper Lane at Hemlock Lane
(BSR) [Amended 3-3-1987]
Stop East/West on Cooper
Lane; North/South on
Hemlock Lane
Cooper Lane at Johnson Lane
(BSR)
Stop South on Johnson Lane
Cooper Lane at Lanier Lane (BSR)
[Amended 11-15-1988;
11-21-1989]
Stop North/South on Lanier
Lane; East/West on
Cooper Lane
Cooper Lane at Seafield Lane
(BSR) [Amended 10-19-1982;
2-5-1985; 11-15-1988;
9-9-2003]
Stop East/West on Cooper
Lane; North/South on
Seafield Lane
Cooper Lane at Sunset Road (BSR)
[Amended 11-15-1988]
Stop North/South on Sunset
Road; West on Cooper
Lane
Corbin Avenue at South First
Street (EDG) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop East/West on South First
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1412
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Corbin Avenue at South Fourth
Street (EDG) [Added
11-17-1981]
Stop East/West on South
Fourth Street
Corbin Avenue at South Third
Street (EDG) [Added 12-19-1978;
amended 6-5-1979; 7-12-2005]
Stop West on South Third
Street
Corcoran Road at Greenwood Road
(NBS) [Added 8-13-2002]
Stop South on Corcoran Road
Cordello Avenue at Earle Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Earle Street
Cordello Avenue at Elmore Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Elmore Street
Cordello Avenue at Irving Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Irving Street
Cordello Avenue at St. Johns Street
(CIS) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Cordello
Avenue; East/West on St.
Johns Street
Cordello Avenue at Smith Avenue
(CIS)
Stop South on Cordello Avenue
Cori Lane at Pond Road (BHM)
[Added 5-21-1991]
Stop West on Cori Lane
Cornell Street at Freeman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Cornell
Street
Cornell Street at Henry Place (ISL)
[Added 1-15-1980]
Stop North on Henry Place
Cornell Street at Taft Avenue (ISL)
[Added 1-19-1999]
Stop West on Cornell Street
Cornell Street at Whitman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East on Cornell Street
Coronado Street at Manhattan
Boulevard (EIS)
Stop North/South on Coronado
Street
Cottage Avenue at South Bay
Avenue (BSR) [Added 4-22-2003]
Stop North on Cottage Avenue
Cotter Avenue at Haynes Street
(WIS) [Added 8-21-2018]
Stop South on Cotter Street
Country Village Lane at Grenadier
Lane (EIS)
Stop North on Grenadier Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1413
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Country Village Lane at Keswick
Drive (EIS)
Stop East/West on Keswick
Drive
Country Village Lane at Marilyn
Street (EIS)
Stop East/West on Marilyn
Street
Country Village Lane at Maynard
Lane (EIS) [Added 11-20-1979]
Stop South on Maynard Lane
Country Village Lane at Overlook
Drive (EIS) [Amended
9-10-2002]
Stop East on Country Village
Lane; North/South on
Overlook Drive
Country Village Lane at Simmons
Drive (EIS) [Amended
1-30-2001]
Stop East/West on Simmons
Drive; North/South on
Country Village Lane
Country Village Lane at Timber
Point Road (EIS) [Amended
7-11-1978]
Stop North/South on Country
Village Lane; East/West
on Timber Point Road
Country Village Lane at Tracy Lane
(EIS)
Stop East/West on Tracy Lane
Country Village Lane at Wensly
Lane (EIS)
Stop East/West on Wensly Lane
Countryview Lane at Woodland
Drive (EIS)
Stop East on Countryview Lane
Court Street at First Avenue (EIS)
[Added 11-17-1981]
Stop East on Court Street
Court Street at Second Avenue
(BSR) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop North on Second Avenue
Court Street at Third Avenue (EIS)
[Added 12-6-1977; amended
8-5-2014]
Stop North/South on Third
Avenue; East/West on
Court Street
Courtland Drive at Penataquit
Drive (WBS) [Added 11-17-1981;
amended 10-13-2015]
Stop North on Courtland Drive
Courtland Drive at Wohseepee
Drive (WBS)
Stop South on Courtland Drive
Cove Walk at Lawrence Lane (BSR)
[Amended 3-10-2009]
Stop East on Cove Walk; North/
South on Lawrence Lane
Cove Walk at West Lane (BSR)
[Added 9-24-1996]
Stop North/South on West
Lane; West on Cove Walk
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1414
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Crager Street at Furrows Road
(HBK) [Added 1-15-1980]
Stop North on Crager Street
Craig Road at Rock Road (GRV)
[Added 1-6-1981]
Stop South on Rock Road
Craig Road at Woods Road (EIS)
[Added 5-2-2000]
Stop South on Woods Road
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at
Fairview Avenue (EIS)
Stop East on Fairview Avenue
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at Islip
Boulevard (EIS) [Added
6-16-1981]
Stop East on Islip Boulevard
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at Lincoln
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East on Lincoln Avenue
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at Nassau
Street (EIS)
Stop East on Nassau Street
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at
Redman Street (EIS) [Amended
1-19-1999]
Stop North/South on Craig B.
Gariepy Avenue; West on
Redman Street
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at
Richard Avenue (EIS)
Stop East on Richard Avenue
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue at Roslyn
Street (EIS) [Amended 2-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Roslyn
Street
Cranberry Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Cranberry Street
Cranberry Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop East on Cranberry Street
Cranberry Street at North
Greenlawn Avenue (CIS) [Added
7-10-2007]
Stop North on North
Greenlawn Avenue
Crescent Drive at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Crescent Drive
Croaton Street at Granby Place
(RNK)
Stop South on Granby Place
Croaton Street at Matice Place
(RNK)
Stop South on Matice Place
Croaton Street at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Pamlico
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1415
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Croaton Street at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK)
Stop East on Croaton Street
*Crooked Hill Road at Express
Drive North (EDG)
*Crooked Hill Road at Express
Drive South (EDG)
Crosby Street at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop East on Crosby Street
Cross Road at Vanderbilt
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop West on Cross Road
Cullen Avenue at Garretson
Avenue (ISL) [Added 3-3-1981;
amended 9-20-1994]
Stop East/West on Garretson
Avenue; North/South on
Cullen Avenue
Cullen Avenue at Maddox Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 2-27-2001]
Stop East/West on Maddox
Avenue
Cullen Avenue at Moffitt Boulevard
(ISL) [Amended 6-6-1995]
Stop East/West on Moffit
Boulevard; South on
Cullen Avenue
Cullen Avenue at Shaw Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-20-1994]
Stop West on Shaw Avenue
Cumberland Street at Grimsley
Road (ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Road
Curl Lane at Snedecor Avenue
(WIS) [Added 2-2-1993]
Stop East on Curl Lane
Cynthia Lane at Marilyn Street
(EIS)
Stop West on Cynthia Lane
Cynthia Lane at Sherry Street
(EIS) [Added 12-6-1983;
amended 4-18-2000]
Stop South on Cynthia Lane
Cypress Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Cypress Street
Cypress Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-21-2015]
Stop East on Cypress Street
Cypress Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Cypress
Street
Cyprus Avenue at Grove Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Grove Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1416
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Dakota Avenue at Illinois Avenue
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Illinois
Avenue
Dakota Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop East on Dakota Avenue
+Dakota Avenue at Penataquit
Avenue (NBS) [Amended
6-20-1978]
Stop North/South on
Penataquit Avenue; East/
West on Dakota Avenue
Dakota Street at Mohican Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Dakota
Street
Dakota Street at Richmond
Boulevard (RNK)
Stop East on Dakota Street
Dale Drive at Hillary Street (WSV) Stop West on Hillary Street
Dale Drive at Matthews Road
(OKD) [Amended 5-27-2009]
Stop North/South on Dale
Drive; East/West on
Matthews Road
Dale Drive at Mina Read (OKD) Stop East on Mina Road
Dale Lane at Hubbs Avenue (HPG) Stop North on Dale Lane
Dalton Road at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 11-17-1992]
Stop East on Dalton Road
Dame Street at Twin Lawns
Avenue (BWD) [Added
10-24-2017]
Stop West on Dame Street
Damyon Street at Hyman Avenue
(WBS) [Amended 1-27-1998]
Stop East/West on Damyon
Street; North/South on
Hyman Avenue
Damyon Street at Manor Lane
(WBS) [Added 3-15-1988,
amended 3-1-1994; 5-11-2010]
Stop East on Damyon Street;
North/South on Manor
Lane
Damyon Street at Namdac Avenue
(WBS) [Added 1-31-2012]
Stop East/West on Damyon
Street; North/South on
Namdac Avenue
Damyon Street at Thompson Drive
(WBS)
Stop North/South on
Thompson Drive
Danbury Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Danbury
Street
Darcy Circle at Meeks Lane (ISL) Yield West on Darcy Circle
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1417
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Dartmouth Drive at Princeton
Street (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop West on Dartmouth Drive
Dartmouth Street at Freeman
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
1-5-1982; 12-11-2012]
Stop East/West on Dartmouth
Street; North/South on
Freeman Avenue
Dartmouth Street at Taft Avenue
(ISL) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop West on Dartmouth Street
Dartmouth Street at Whitman
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
6-11-2002]
Stop East on Dartmouth
Street; North/South on
Whitman Avenue
Dashen Lane at Glenmere Way
(HBK) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop East on Dashen Lane
Dashen Lane at Glensummer Road
(HBK) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop West on Dashen Lane
Date Street at Ferndale Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Date Street
Date Street at Leaf Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Date Street at Root Avenue (CIS)
[Amended 2-15-2005]
Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Date Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Date Street
Davis Street at First Avenue (BPT)
[Added 9-11-2012]
Stop West on Davis Street
Davis Street at San Juan Drive
(HPG) [Amended 1-30-1996]
Stop East/West on Davis
Street; North/South on
San Juan Drive
Davis Street at Southern
Boulevard (HPG) [Amended
8-20-1996]
Stop West on Davis Street;
North/South on Southern
Boulevard
Davis Street at Wedgewood Drive
(HPG) [Added 6-19-2012]
Stop West on Davis Street
Davison Lane at Magoun Road
(WIS) [Added 7-1-1980]
Stop North on Davison Lane
Dawn Crescent (north intersection)
at Lowell Avenue (CIS) [Added
1-5-1982]
Stop East on Dawn Crescent
(north intersection)
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1418
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Dawn Crescent (south
intersection) at Lowell
Avenue(CIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Dawn Crescent
(south intersection)
Dean Street at Nichol's Road (CIS)
[Amended 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Dean Street
Debbie Street at Helene Street
(NGR) [Added 1-2-1991]
Stop West on Debbie Street
Debbie Street at Rockaway Street
(NGR) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop West on Rockaway Street
Debbie Lee Lane at Piper Lane
(BHM) [Added 9-19-1989]
Stop West on Piper Lane
Deer Road at Haven Avenue (RNK) Stop North/South on Haven
Avenue
Deer Road at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Deer Road
Deer Road at Pine Avenue (RNK) Stop East on Deer Road
Deer Road at Port Avenue (RNK) Stop East/West on Deer Road
Deer Park Street at Dolley-Cam.
Lane (WBW) [Added 8-31-1994]
Stop North on Dolley-Cam.
Lane
Deer Park Street at Fairbanks
Avenue (WBW) [Added
8-31-1994]
Stop North on Fairbanks
Avenue
Deer Park Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
3-19-2002]
Stop East on Deer Park Street;
North/South on Joselson
Avenue
Deer Park Street at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW) [Added
8-31-1994; amended 12-6-1994]
Stop East/West on Deer Park
Street; North on
Martinstein Avenue
Deer Park Street at Nugent Avenue
(WBW) [Added 6-4-1985]
Stop East/West on Deer Park
Street
Deer Path Road at Sportsmen
Street (CIS) [Added 10-20-1998]
Stop East on Sportsmen Street
Deerfield Court at Spence Avenue
(HTV) [Added 8-15-2006]
Stop West on Deerfield Court
DeForest Avenue at Frontage Road
(WIS) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop East on Frontage Road
DeForest Avenue at Oakley Place
(WIS) [Added 12-15-2015]
Stop West on Oakley Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1419
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
DeForest Avenue at Vera Court
(WIS) [Added 12-15-2015]
Stop West on Vera Court
DeForest Avenue at Willoughby
Avenue (WIS) [Added
12-15-2015]
Stop West on Willoughby
Avenue
Degnon Boulevard at Green
Avenue (ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East on Green Avenue
Degnon Boulevard at Kempster
Avenue (ISL) [Added 9-15-1981;
amended 8-15-2006]
Stop North/South on Degnon
Boulevard; East on
Kempster Avenue
Degnon Boulevard at Mallar
Avenue (ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East on Mallar Avenue
Degnon Boulevard at Wenman
Avenue (ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East on Wenman Avenue
DeKalb Avenue at Fulton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on DeKalb
Avenue
DeKalb Avenue (east leg) at
Highland Road (BWD) [Amended
3-20-2001]
Stop West on DeKalb Avenue
DeKalb Avenue (west leg) at
Highland Road (BWD)
Stop East on DeKalb Avenue;
South on High land Road
Delaware Avenue at Indiana
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
5-15-2001]
Stop East/West on Delaware
Avenue; North/South on
Indiana Avenue
Delaware Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Delaware
Avenue
Delaware Street at Saxon Avenue
(BSR) [Added 10-19-1999]
Stop East on Delaware Street
Delta Street at Penataquit Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East on Delta Street
Denise Lane at Dione Lane (HPG)
[Added 8-30-1983]
Stop West on Denise Lane
Denise Lane at Lori Way (HPG)
[Added 8-30-1983]
Stop North on Denise Lane
Dennard Road at Hubbs Avenue
(HPG) [Added 8-30-1983]
Stop West on Dennard Road
Denver Avenue at Harrisburg
Street (NBS)
Stop East/West on Harrisburg
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1420
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Denver Avenue at Ithaca Street
(NBS) [Amended 8-17-1999]
Stop East/West on Ithaca
Street; North/South on
Denver Avenue
Denver Avenue at Missouri Avenue
(NBS) [Added 11-21-1989]
Stop East on Missouri Avenue
Denver Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Denver Avenue
Denver Avenue at Utica Street
(NBS) [Added 6-5-1990]
Stop West on Utica Street
+Departure Drive at MacArthur
Memorial Highway (east roadway)
(HBK) [Amended 5-7-1985]
Stop West on Departure Drive
Departure Drive at a driveway 180
feet east of MacArthur Memorial
Highway (northbound roadway)
(HBK) [Added 7-6-1982;
amended 5-7-1985]
Yield North from driveway
Departure Drive at MacArthur
Memorial Highway (west roadway)
(HBK) [Amended 5-7-1985;
2-2-1988]
Stop West on Departure Drive
Depot Street (Railroad Street) at
Greeley Avenue (SVL)
Stop West on Depot Street
(Railroad Street)
Depot Street at Greene Avenue
(SVL) [Added 3-21-1978]
Stop North on Greene Avenue
Depot Street (Railroad Street) at
Railroad Avenue (SVL)
Stop East on Depot Street
(Railroad Street)
Devon Place at Secatogue Lane
West (WIS) [Added 1-16-1979]
Stop East on Devon Place
Devon Road at Orient Avenue (See
also Lexington Avenue at Orient
Avenue) (BWD)
Stop East on Devon Road
Devon Road at Orient Avenue
(BWD)
Stop South on Orient Avenue
Devon Road at Furrows Road and
Trailblazer Court (HBK) [Added
2-4-2003]
Stop North on Devon Road
South on Trailblazer
Court
Dewey Place at Koral Street (BSR)
[Added 11-21-1978]
Stop North on Dewey Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1421
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Diamond Street at Hyman Avenue
(WBS) [Amended 1-25-2000]
Stop East/West on Diamond
Street; North/South on
Hyman Avenue
Diamond Street at Namdac Avenue
(WBS)
Stop North on Namdac Avenue
Diamond Street at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Added 3-24-1992;
amended 2-26-2008]
Stop North on Thompson Drive
Dione Lane at Heller Place (HPG)
[Added 8-30-1983]
Stop South on Dione Lane
Division Avenue at Jefferson Street
(EIS) [Amended 12-2-2014]
Stop North/South on Division
Avenue; East/West on
Jefferson Street
Division Avenue at Second Street
(WSV) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop West on Second Street
Division Avenue at Third Street
(WSV) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop West on Third Street;
North/South on Division
Avenue
Division Avenue at Union Street
(WSV)
Stop South on Division Avenue
Division Avenue at Washington
Street (EIS) [Added 2-7-1989]
Stop South on Division Avenue
Dixie Lane at Matinecock Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 4-3-1990]
Stop East on Dixie Lane
Dixie Lane at Pauchogue Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 4-24-2007]
Stop North/South on
Pauchogue Avenue; East/
West on Dixie Lane
Dixie Lane at Secatogue Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 4-5-2005]
Stop East/West on Dixie Lane;
North/South on
Secatogue Avenue
Dixie Lane at Woodland Drive (EIS) Stop West on Dixie Lane
Dixie Lane at Wyandanch Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 4-5-2005]
Stop East/West on Dixie Lane;
North/South on
Wyandanch Avenue
Dock Road at Hollins Lane (EIS) Stop North on Hollins Lane
Dock Road at Huntting Lane (EIS)
[Amended 2-24-2009]
Stop North on Huntting Lane;
East/West on Dock Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1422
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Dock Road at Meadow Farm Road
(EIS)
Stop North on Meadow Farm
Road
Dock Road at Suffolk Lane (EIS) Stop South on Suffolk Lane
Dock Road (north spur) at Suffolk
Lane (EIS)
Yield West turning North
Dock Road (west spur) at Suffolk
Lane (EIS)
Yield South turning West
Dogwood Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop East on Dogwood Lane
Dogwood Road at Edelweiss Road
(WIS) [Added 3-21-2000]
Stop West on Edelweiss Road
Dogwood Road at Kurzon Road
(WIS) [Added 3-27-2007]
Stop West on Kurzon Road
Dogwood Road at Le-At Lane (WIS)
[Added 12-18-2001]
Stop East on Le-At Lane
Dogwood Road at Paumanake Road
(WIS) [Added 10-19-1993]
Stop West on Paumanake Road
Dolores Place at Forest Place (CIS)
[Added 9-10-2002]
Stop North on Forest Place
Don Lane at Jane Road (HPG) Stop South on Don Lane
Donald Boulevard at Grundy
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East/West on Donald
Boulevard
Donald Boulevard at Hiram Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
Donald Boulevard at Hummel
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East/West on Donald
Boulevard
Doncaster Avenue at Harvest Lane
(WIS) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop East on Doncaster Avenue
Doncaster Avenue at Hunter
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Doncaster
Avenue
Doncaster Avenue at Lamoka Place
(WIS) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop West on Lamoka Place
Donna Place at Quintuck Lane
(EIS) [Added 9-24-2013]
Stop West on Donna Place
Doolittle Street at Eisenhower
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Doolittle Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1423
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Doolittle Street at MacArthur
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Doolittle Street
Doolittle Street at Marshall Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 10-1-1991]
Stop East/West on Doolittle
Street; North South on
Marshall Avenue
Doolittle Street at Nimitz Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 12-17-2019]
Stop North/South on Nimitz
Avenue; East/West on
Doolittle Street
Dorothy Lane at Fulham Lane
(HBK) [Added 7-15-1997]
Stop East on Dorothy Lane
Dorothy Road at Jean Road (WIS)
[Added 11-15-1988]
Stop South on Dorothy Road
Dorothy Road (east leg) at Pine
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North on Dorothy Road
(east leg)
Dorothy Road (west leg) at Pine
Avenue (WIS)
Stop South on Dorothy Road
(west leg)
Dorothy Road at Spruce Avenue
(WIS) [Added 7-13-2004]
Stop North on Dorothy Road
Dorothy Road at Sylvia Drive (east
intersection) (WIS) [Added
10-4-1994]
Stop South on Dorothy Road
(east intersection)
Dorothy Road at Sylvia Drive (west
intersection) (WIS) [Added
10-4-1994]
Stop North on Dorothy Road
(west intersection)
Dorothy Street at Henry Boulevard
(HBK) [Added 3-3-1981]
Stop South on Dorothy Street
Dorothy Street at Mollie Boulevard
(HBK) [Added 3-3-1981]
Stop North on Dorothy Street
Dorset Lane at Marilyn Street
(EIS) [Added 4-3-2012]
Stop North on Dorset Lane
Dorset Lane at Timber Point Road
(EIS) [Amended 8-13-2002]
Stop East/West on Timberpoint
Road; South on Dorset
Lane
Dougherty Street at East Forks
Road (NBS)
Stop West on Dougherty Street
Douglas Avenue at Fairfax Road
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Fairfax
Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1424
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Douglas Avenue at Udall Road
(WIS)
Stop East on Douglas Avenue
Douglass Street at Winfield Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Winfield
Avenue
Dove Lane at Gardiner Drive
(WBS) [Added 5-18-2004;
amended 5-11-2010]
Stop East on Dove Lane;
North/South on Gardiner
Drive
Dove Lane at Manor Lane (WBS)
[Amended 4-23-2013]
Stop West on Dove Lane;
North/South on Manor
Lane
Dovecote Lane at Half Mile Road
(CIS) [Amended 8-19-1986]
Stop North on Dovecote Lane;
East/West on Half Mile
Road
Dovecote Lane at Kirby Lane (CIS)
[Added 9-15-1987; amended
9-20-1988]
Stop North/South at Dovecote
Lane; West on Kirby Lane
Dovecote Lane at Nagle Lane (CIS)
[Added 6-18-1996]
Stop East on Nagle Lane
Dover Court at Saxon Avenue (ISL)
[Added 10-8-2002]
Stop West on Dover Court
DPW Drive at driveway for DPW
Area "B" (CIS) [Added 5-6-1980]
Stop North on driveway for
DPW Area "B"
DPW Drive at K Road (CIS)
[Added 5-6-1980]
Yield North on DPW Drive
DPW Drive at salt pad east
driveway (CIS) [Added 5-6-1980]
Stop North on salt pad east
driveway
Drayton Avenue at East Forks
Road (BWD)
Stop East on Drayton Avenue
Drayton Avenue at East Third
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Drayton
Avenue
Drayton Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Stein
Drive
Drexel Avenue at Jefferson Street
(EIS)
Stop North on Drexel Avenue
Drexel Avenue at Washington
Street (EIS) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop South on Drexel Avenue
Driftwood Drive at Mariner Circle
(WIS)
Stop North on Mariner Circle
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1425
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Driftwood Drive at Snedecor
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East on Driftwood Drive
Driveway (shopping center) and
Sixth Street at Second Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on driveway
(shopping center) and
Sixth Street
Duffin Avenue at Higbie Lane
(WIS)
Stop West on Duffin Avenue
Duffy Court at Third Avenue (CIS) Yield South on Duffy Court
Duffy Place at Udall Road (WIS) Stop East on Duffy Place
Duke Street at King Street (WBW) Stop North on Duke Street
Duke Street at Queen Street
(WBW)
Stop North/South on Duke
Street
Duke Street at West Lakeland
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop South on Duke Street
Dunton Avenue at South Second
Street and a curb cut opposite
Dunton Avenue (WBW) [Added
4-16-1985; amended
10-19-1993]
Stop South on Dunton Avenue;
North on curb cut
Dunwoodie Road at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North on Dunwoodie
Road
Dunwoodie Road at Jackson
Avenue (WIS) [Added 9-18-1979]
Stop South on Dunwoodie
Road
Dunwoodie Road at Jefferson
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
12-6-1983]
Stop North/South on
Dunwoodie Road; East/
West on Jefferson Avenue
(traffic circle)
Dunwoodie Road at Madison
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East/West on Madison
Avenue
Dunwoodie Road at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
12-3-1996]
Stop East/West on North
Monroe Avenue; North/
South on Dunwoodie
Road
Dunwoodie Road at Washington
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East/West on Washington
Avenue
Durham Road at Marion Street
(SVL)
Stop East/West on Marion
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1426
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Durham Road at North First Street
(SVL)
Stop East on North First Street
Durham Road at North Third
Street (SVL)
Stop North/South on Durham
Road
Durham Road at Tariff Street (SVL) Stop South on Durham Road
Duval Street at Harrison Avenue
(EIS)
Stop South on Harrison Avenue
Duval Street at William Avenue
(EIS)
Stop South on William Avenue
Dwight Court at North Ocean
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
12-12-1995]
Stop West on Dwight Court;
North/South on North
Ocean Avenue
Dwight Court at Pardee Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 10-13-2010]
Stop East on Dwight Court;
North/South on Pardee
Avenue
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Eagle Circle at Pond Road (BHM)
[Added 8-15-2006]
Stop West on Eagle Circle
Earle Street at Kenmore Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Earle Street
East Drive and Forest Court at
Locust Boulevard (RNK) [Added
3-20-1979]
Stop East on Forest Court;
West on East Drive
East Bayberry Road at Elder Road
(ISL)
Stop North on East Bayberry
Road
East Beech Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Beech
Street
East Belmont Street at Howells
Road (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 12-16-2014]
Stop East/West on East
Belmont Street; North/
South on Howells Road
East Belmont Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
4-20-1999]
Stop East on East Belmont
Street; North/South on
Joselson Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1427
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
East Belmont Street at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop East/West on East
Belmont Street
East Belmont Street at Nugent
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
11-17-1981; 5-18-1982;
8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on Belmont
Street; North/South on
Nugent Avenue
East Belmont Street at Ocean
Avenue (WBW)
Stop East/West on East
Belmont Street
East Belmont Street at Udall Road
(WBW) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop West on East Belmont
Street
East Cedar Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-5-1983]
Stop West on East Cedar Street
East Cedar Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-21-2015]
Stop East on East Cedar Street
East Cedar Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Cedar
Street
East Cherry Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Cherry
Street
East Cherry Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
10-6-1981; 2-23-1988]
Stop North/South on Prospect
Avenue; East/West on
East Cherry Street
East Chestnut Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Chestnut
Street
East Chestnut Street at Nicoll
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-21-2015]
Stop East on East Chestnut
Street
East Chestnut Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East
Chestnut Street
East Elm Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on East Elm Street
East Elm Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 1-30-2001]
Stop East on East Elm Street
East Elm Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Elm
Street
East Farmingdale Street at Rocket
Drive (EIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop North/South on Rocket
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1428
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
East Farmingdale Street at
Satellite Drive (EIS) [Added
4-4-1978]
Stop North/South on Satellite
Drive
East Farmingdale Street at Spur
Drive North and pedestrian bridge
(EIS) [Amended 10-2-1990;
7-2-1991]
Stop West on East Farmingdale
Street; East on pedestrian
bridge; North/South on
Spur Drive North
East Farmingdale Street at Tellar
Drive (EIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop North/South on Tellar
Drive
East Forks Road at Frederick
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Frederick Avenue
East Forks Road at Greenwood
Road (NBS) [Amended
12-18-1990]
Stop East/West on Greenwood
Road; North/South on
East Forks Road
East Forks Road south of
Greenwood Road (driveway 600
feet south of Greenwood Road)
(South Shore Mall) (NBS)
Stop West on driveway 600
feet south of Greenwood
Road (South Shore Mall)
East Forks Road at Massachusetts
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
5-1-1979]
Stop East on Massachusetts
Avenue
East Forks Road at Millay Lane
(NBS)
Stop East on Millay Lane
East Forks Road at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
[Amended 2-14-2012]
Stop North on East Forks
Road; East/West on New
Hampshire Avenue
East Forks Road at North Fire
Road (BWD)
Stop East on North Fire Road
East Forks Road at driveways from
South Shore Mall (NBS) [Added
4-15-1980; amended 1-31-2006]
Stop North on driveway from
south parking field
East Forks Road at Spur Drive
North (BWD) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop North/South on East
Forks Road
East Forks Road at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on East Forks Road
East Forks Road at Walbridge
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Walbridge Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1429
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
East Golf Street at Spruce Avenue
(SVL) [Added 6-18-1991]
Stop North on Spruce Avenue
East Lakeland Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 4-22-1986]
Stop North/South on Joselson
Avenue; East/West on
East Lakeland Street
East Lakeland Street at
Martinstein Avenue (WBW) 1
[Amended 10-3-1978;
8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on East
Lakeland Street; North/
South on Martinstein
Avenue
East Lakeland Street at North
Thompson Drive (WBW) [Added
6-5-1979; amended 4-22-1986]
Stop East on East Lakeland
Street; North/South on
North Thompson Drive
East Lakeland Street at Nugent
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
12-15-1987]
Stop North/South on Nugent
Avenue
East Lakeland Street at Ocean
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop North/South on Ocean
Avenue
East Lakeland Street at Udall Road
(WBW) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop West on East Lakeland
Street; North/South on
Udall Road
East Locust Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Locust
Street
East Locust Street at Nicoll
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on East Locust
Street
East Locust Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Locust
Street
East Maple Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Maple
Street
East Maple Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS)
Stop South on Nicoll Avenue
East Maple Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Maple
Street
East Nassau Street at Pacific
Avenue (EIS) [Added 9-8-1998]
Stop North on Pacific Avenue
East Oakdale Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW)
Stop East on East Oakdale
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1430
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
East Oakdale Street at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 4-22-1986]
Stop North/South on
Martinstein Avenue
East Oakdale Street at Ocean
Avenue (WBW) [Added
10-3-1978; amended
11-15-1988]
Stop East/West on East
Oakdale Street; North/
South on Ocean Avenue
East Oakdale Street at Udall Road
(WBW) [Added 8-19-1986;
amended 5-27-2009; 6-23-2009]
Stop West on East Oakdale
Street; North/South on
Udall Road
East Orowoc Avenue at South
Ocean Avenue (ISL) [Added
12-10-2013]
Stop East on East Orowoc
Avenue
East Park Lane at Grady Street
(BPT) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop North on East Park Lane
East Roslyn Street at Pacific
Avenue (EIS)
Stop South on Pacific Avenue
East Sycamore Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Sycamore
Street
East Sycamore Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East
Sycamore Street
East Third Avenue at Farrington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Farrington
Avenue
East Third Avenue at Frederick
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Frederick
Avenue
East Third Avenue at
Massachusetts Avenue (BWD)
[Amended 4-5-1988]
Stop East/West on
Massachusetts Avenue
East Third Avenue at Michigan
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Michigan
Avenue
East Third Avenue at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on New
Hampshire Avenue
East Third Avenue at Oklahoma
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Oklahoma Avenue
East Third Avenue at Spur Drive
North (BWD) [Amended
2-24-2009]
Stop North/South on East
Third Avenue; East/West
on Spur Drive North
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1431
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
East Third Avenue at Walbridge
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
8-29-1989]
Stop East/West on Walbridge
Avenue; North/South on
East Third Avenue
+East Third Avenue at Wisconsin
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-5-1988]
Stop East/West on Wisconsin
Avenue; North/South on
East Third Avenue
East Third Avenue at Greenwood
Road (NBS)
Stop West on Greenwood Road
East Third Avenue at McClellan
Avenue (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop East on East Third
Avenue
East Third Avenue at Millay Lane
[Added 6-23-2015]
Stop West on Millay Lane
East Third Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on East Third
Avenue
East Third Avenue at Tudor Lane
(NBS) [Added 12-17-2002]
Stop East on Tudor Lane
East Walnut Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on East Walnut
Street
East Walnut Street at Nicoll
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on East Walnut
Street
East Walnut Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on East Walnut
Street
Eastern Avenue at Evergreen
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Evergreen
Avenue
Eastern Avenue at Glenmore
Avenue (BWD) [Added
1-30-2001]
Stop West on Glenmore Avenue
Eastern Avenue at Nostrand
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Nostrand Avenue
Eastern Avenue at Ocean Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 7-11-2006]
Stop West on Ocean Avenue;
South on Eastern Avenue
Eastern Avenue at Pinewild Road
(BWD) [Amended 3-20-2001;
7-11-2006]
Stop East on Pinewild Road;
North on Eastern Avenue
Eastern Avenue at Prospect
Avenue (BWD) [Added
9-12-2000]
Stop West on Prospect Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1432
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Eastern Avenue at Prospect Drive
(BWD)
Stop East on Prospect Drive
Eastern Avenue at Ralph Avenue
(BWD) [Added 10-10-2000;
amended 4-24-2012]
Stop West on Ralph Avenue;
North/South on Eastern
Avenue
Eastgate Drive at Elm Street (SVL) Stop North on Eastgate Drive
Easton Street at Elm Avenue (LKL)
[Added 5-18-1994]
Stop North on Elm Avenue
Easton Street at Feuereisen
Avenue (LKL)
Stop North on Feuereisen
Avenue
Easton Street at Fifth Avenue
(LKL) [Amended 5-7-1996]
Stop East/West on Easton
Street; North on Fifth
Avenue
Easton Street at First Avenue
(LKL) [Amended 5-16-1989]
Stop North on First Avenue;
East/West on Easton
Street
Easton Street at Julia Goldbach
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
12-13-2011]
Stop East/West on Easton
Street; North on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Easton Street at Louis Kossuth
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
5-16-1989]
Stop North on Louis Kossuth
Avenue; East/West on
Easton Street
Easton Street at Marion Street
(LKL) [Added 2-25-1992]
Stop North on Marion Street
Easton Street at Pine Avenue (LKL)
[Added 2-28-1978]
Stop North on Pine Avenue
Easton Street at Pond Road (LKL) Stop East/West on Easton
Street
Easton Street at Raynor Avenue
(RNK) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop East/West on Easton
Street; North on Raynor
Avenue
Easton Street at Seventeenth
Avenue (LKL) [Added 4-5-1994;
amended 10-7-2003]
Stop East/West on Easton
Street; North on
Seventeenth Avenue
Easton Street at Walnut Avenue
(LKL) [Added 7-11-1978]
Stop North on Walnut Avenue
Eastover Road at Johnson Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East on Eastover Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1433
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Eastover Road at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop West on Eastover Road
Easy Street at Greeley Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East/West on Easy Street
Easy Street at Hillside Avenue and
apartment exit (SVL) [Added
9-16-1986]
Stop North on apartment exit;
South on Hillside Avenue
Easy Street at Roosevelt Avenue
(SVL)
Stop South on Roosevelt
Avenue
Easy Street at Willett Avenue
(SVL) [Added 7-12-2005]
Stop South on Willett Avenue
Eaton Lane at Eaton Lane
Extension (WIS)
Stop East on Eaton Lane
Extension
Eaton Lane at Magoun Road (WIS) Stop North/South on Eaton
Lane; West on Magoun
Road
Eaton Lane at Seaspray Lane
(WIS) [Added 11-14-2000]
Stop East on Seaspray Lane;
North/South on Eaton
Lane
Eaton Lane at Sequams Lane East
(WIS) [Added 12-17-2019]
Stop East on Sequams Lane
East
Eaton Lane at Sequams Lane
North (WIS) [Added 2-29-2000]
Stop East on Sequams Lane
North
Eaton Lane Extension at Eaton
Lane Extension (west spur) (WIS)
Yield West turning south on
Eaton Lane Extension
Eatondale Avenue at Manny Rose
Court (BPT) [Added 1-25-2005;
amended 10-14-2009]
Stop North/South on
Eastondale Avenue; East
on Manny Rose Court
Eatondale Avenue at Purick Street
(BPT)
Stop South on Eatondale
Avenue
Eden Road at Wells Drive (BWD) Stop West on Eden Road
Edgewater Road at Forest Place
(OKD) [Added 6-16-1993]
Stop East on Forest Place
Edgewater Road at Harriet Road
(BPT) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop West on Harriet Road
Edgewood Road at Parkwood Road
(WIS)
Stop West on Edgewood Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1434
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Edgewood Avenue at Lockwood
Avenue (OKD)
Stop North/South on
Edgewood Avenue
Edgewood Avenue at Oakton
Avenue (OKD) [Added 2-14-2012]
Stop West on Oakton Avenue
Edgewood Avenue at Shelter Road
(RNK) [Amended 8-28-1990]
Stop North/South on
Edgewood Avenue; East/
West on Shelter Road
Edgewood Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
11-15-1988]
Stop North on Edgewood
Avenue
Edmore Lane at Everdell Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Edmore Lane
Edmore Lane at Keith Lane (WIS)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
Stop East on Edmore Lane;
North/South on Keith
Lane
Edmore Lane at South Chicot
Avenue (WIS) [Added 6-4-1996]
Stop North on South Chicot
Avenue
Edmore Lane North at Everdell
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986]
Stop South on Everdell Avenue
Edmore Lane South at Everdell
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
11-18-1986; 1-6-1887]
Stop North on Everdell Avenue
Edwards Avenue at Edwards Street
(SVL)
Stop North on Edwards Avenue
Edwards Avenue at Elm Street
(SVL)
Stop North/South on Edwards
Avenue
Edwards Street at Gillette Avenue
(SVL)
Stop South on Gillette Avenue
Edwards Street/Erwin Street at
Foster Avenue (SVL) [Added
11-15-1988]
Stop East on Edwards Street;
West on Erwin Street;
North/South on Foster
Avenue
Edwin Street at O'Neil Avenue
(BSR) [Added 1-30-1996]
Stop West on Edwin Street;
North/South on O'Neil
Avenue
Edwin Street at Penataquit Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East/West on Edwin
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1435
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Edwin Street at Redmond Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 1-30-1996]
Stop East/West on Edwin
Street; North/South on
Redmond Avenue
Ehler Street at Grand Boulevard
(BWD)
Stop West on Ehler Street
Ehler Street at Twin Lawns Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ehler Street
Eighteenth Avenue at Emkay
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Eighteenth
Avenue
Eighteenth Avenue at Peconic
Street West (LKL) [Added
4-30-1996]
Stop South on Eighteenth
Avenue
Eighteenth Avenue at Southport
Avenue [Added 11-16-2010]
Stop North on Eighteenth
Avenue
Eighth Avenue at First Street
(BWD) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop West on Eighth Avenue
Eighth Avenue at Fourth Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Street
Eighth Street at Elf Court (BHM)
[Added 10-18-1988; amended
2-28-1989]
Stop East/West on Eighth
Street; South on Elf Court
Eighth Street at Feuereisen
Avenue (BHM)
Stop North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue
Eighth Street at Julia Goldbach
Avenue (BHM)
Stop North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Eighth Street at Kenwood Drive
(BHM) [Amended 7-5-1988]
Stop East/West on Eighth
Street
Eighth Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BHM)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Eighth Street at Louis Kossuth
Avenue (BHM) [Amended
4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Eighth
Street; North/South on
Louis Kossuth Avenue
Eighth Street at Norman Drive
(BHM) [Added 11-18-1980;
amended 2-3-1981]
Stop South on Norman Drive
Eighth Street at Roosevelt Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 4-7-1987]
Stop North/South on Roosevelt
Avenue; East/West on
Eighth Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1436
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Eighth Street at a curb 250 feet
north of Second Avenue (BWD)
[Added 1-5-1988]
Stop East on curb cut
Eighth Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM)
Stop East on Eighth Street
Eighth Street at Third Avenue
(BWD) [Added 4-1-1986;
amended 12-18-2001]
Stop East on Third Avenue;
North from a private
driveway; South on
Eighth Street; West from
a private driveway
Eighth Street at Washington
Avenue (BHM) [Amended
2-11-2014]
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue; East/
West on Eighth Street
Eisenhower Avenue at McNair
Street (BWD)
Stop West on McNair Street
Eisenhower Avenue at Merrill
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Merrill Street
Eisenhower Avenue at
Montgomery Street (BWD)
Stop West on Montgomery
Street
Eisenhower Avenue at Patton
Street (BWD) [Amended
4-4-1989]
Stop North/South on
Eisenhower Street; West
on Patton Street
Eisenhower Avenue at St. Andrews
Drive (BWD)
Stop West on St. Andrews
Drive
Eisenhower Avenue at Somerville
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Somerville Street
+Eisenhower Avenue at Suffolk
Avenue (BWD)
Stop South on Eisenhower
Avenue
Eisenhower Avenue at Yarnell
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Yarnell Street
Elaine Drive at Johnson Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East on Elaine Drive
Elaine Drive and church exit at
Lakeland Avenue (SVL) [Amended
9-16-1986]
Stop East on church exit; West
on Elaine Drive
Elaine Place at Gertrude Lane
(HBK) [Added 2-25-2003]
Stop West on Gertrude Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1437
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Elaine Place at Terry Boulevard
(HBK) [Added 4-5-1988]
Stop North on Elaine Place
Elayne Avenue at Idaho Avenue
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Elayne
Avenue
Elder Lane at Hawthorne Avenue
(RNK) [Added 4-30-1996]
Stop West on Elder Lane
Elder Lane at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Elder Lane
Elder Road at Smith Avenue (ISL)
[Amended 4-8-2014]
Stop South on Smith Avenue;
East/West on Elder Road
Eldridge Street at Midwood Place
(BWD) [Added 10-15-1991]
Stop North on Midwood Place
Eldridge Street at Orient Avenue
(BWD)
Stop South on Orient Avenue
Eldridge Street at Pelham Drive
(BWD) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop West on Eldridge Street
Eldridge Street at Winfield Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Eldridge
Street
Eleventh Street at Lakeland
Avenue (SVL)
Stop East on Eleventh Street
Eleventh Street at Sayville Avenue
(SVL) [Added 8-17-1999]
Stop South on Sayville Avenue
Elf Court at Norman Drive (BHM)
[Added 10-18-1988; amended
2-28-1989]
Stop North on Elf Court; East/
West on Norman Drive
Elizabeth Avenue at Grundy
Avenue (HBK) [Added 6-6-1978;
amended 2-7-1989]
Stop East on Elizabeth Avenue;
South on Grundy Avenue
Ellen Street at Penataquit Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East/West on Ellen Street
Ellen Street at Redmond Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East/West on Ellen Street
Ellery Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 10-5-1999]
Stop East/West on Ellery
Street; North/South on
Jefferson Avenue
Ellery Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Ellery Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1438
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ellery Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 11-16-1993]
Stop East/West on Ellery
Street; North/South on
Madison Avenue
Ellery Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Ellery Street
Elliot Street at Gibson Avenue
(BWD) [Added 12-14-2004]
Stop East on Elliot Street
Elliot Street at Milton Street (ISL)
[Added 5-3-1988]
Stop North/South on Milton
Street
Elliot Street at Roman Street (ISL)
[Added 8-28-1990]
Stop East on Elliot Street
Ellis Street at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Ellis
Street
Elm Drive at Elsie Lane (PNR)
[Added 2-26-1991]
Stop North on Elsie Lane
+Elm Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
1-6-1981]
Stop East/West on Elm Drive;
North/South on Manatuck
Boulevard
Elm Drive at North Gardiner Drive
(PNR) [Amended 12-18-2001]
Stop North/South on North
Gardiner Drive; West on
Elm Drive
Elm Drive at Pine Acres Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop East/West on Elm Drive
Elm Drive at Pine Grove Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop South on Pine Grove
Boulevard
Elm Drive and Spence Street at
Heckscher Avenue (PNR)
[Amended 12-6-1977]
Stop North/South on
Heckscher Avenue; East
on Elm Street; West on
Spence Street
Elm Drive at Westwood Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop South on Westwood
Boulevard
Elm Lane at Springmeadow Lane
(HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Elm Lane
Elm Street at Ferndale Boulevard
(ISL) [Amended 1-27-1998]
Stop East/West on Elm Street;
North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Elm Street at Foster Avenue (SVL) Stop East on Elm Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1439
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Elm Street at Greene Avenue (SVL)
[Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop North/South on Greene
Avenue; East/West on Elm
Street
Elm Street at Greenway Terrace
(SVL)
Stop South on Greenway
Terrace
Elm Street at Handsome Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Elm Street
Elm Street at McFarland Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991;
amended 2-1-1994]
Stop East on Elm Street
Elm Street at McKinney Street
(CIS) [Amended 4-16-1991]
Stop East/West on Elm Street;
North/South on McKinney
Street
Elm Street at Norgate Drive (SVL) Stop North on Norgate Drive
Elm Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 12-8-1998]
Stop East on Elm Street;
North/South on Wilson
Boulevard
Elmore Street at Kenmore Street
(CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982;
6-19-2012]
Stop East/West on Elmore
Street; North/South on
Kenmore Street
Elroy Avenue at St. Charles Street
(HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Elroy
Avenue
Elsie Lane at Locust Drive (PNR)
[Added 2-23-1993]
Stop South on Elsie Lane
Elsmere Avenue at Guilford
Avenue (OKD)
Stop North on Guilford Avenue
Elsmere Avenue at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop East/West on Elsmere
Avenue
Ember Lane at Raleigh Lane (WIS)
[Added 12-18-2001]
Stop North on Ember Lane
Emily Drive at Rose Drive (RNK)
[Added 10-8-1996]
Stop West on Emily Drive
Emkay Street at New York Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North on Emkay Street
Emkay Street at Nineteenth
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Nineteenth
Avenue
Emkay Street at Spur Drive North
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Emkay
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1440
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Emkay Street on Twentieth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Twentieth
Avenue
Emkay Street at Twenty-First
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Twenty-First
Avenue
Erie Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Erie Street
Erie Street at Locust Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Erie Street
Erie Street at Pine Avenue South
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Pine
Avenue South
Erie Street at Pond Road (RNK) Stop East on Erie Street
Erie Street at Sycamore Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-18-1984;
amended 9-12-2000]
Stop North/South on Sycamore
Avenue; West on Erie
Street
Erin Court at Satellite Drive (EIS)
[Added 2-6-1979]
Stop North on Satellite Drive
Erwin Street at River Road (SVL)
[Added 8-28-1979]
Stop East on Erwin Street
Esplanade Way at Gerritsen
Avenue (BPT) [Added 9-16-1980;
amended 9-20-1988]
Yield South on Esplanade Way
Essex Drive at Parkwood Road
(WIS) [Added 9-20-1994]
Stop East on Essex Drive;
North/South on Parkwood
Road
Essex Drive at Plymouth Road
(HPG)
Stop South on Essex Drive
Essex Street at Saxon Avenue
(BSR) [Added 11-21-1978]
Stop East on Essex Street
Evelyn Road at Parkwood Road
(WIS)
Yield North on Evelyn Road
Everdell Avenue at Hall Street
(WIS) [Added 3-21-1989]
Stop North on Hall Street
Everdell Avenue at Keith Lane
(WIS)
Stop East on Everdell Avenue
Everdell Avenue at Merritt Street
(WIS) [Added 10-8-2013;
amended 1-14-2014; 5-27-2014]
Stop North/South on Everdell
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1441
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Everdell Avenue at South Chicot
Avenue (WIS) [Added 6-6-1978]
Stop South on South Chicot
Avenue
Evergreen Avenue at Fulton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Evergreen
Avenue
Evergreen Avenue at Island
Boulevard (BHM)
Stop North/South on
Evergreen Avenue
Evergreen Avenue at Oakland
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
5-3-1988]
Stop East/West on Evergreen
Avenue; North/South on
Oakland Avenue
Evergreen Avenue at Vita Drive
(CIS) [Added 3-16-2010]
Stop South on Vita Drive
Evergreen Avenue at Willoughby
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Evergreen
Avenue
Evy Court at Loop Drive (SVL)
[Added 1-31-2006]
Stop South on Evy Court
Evy Court at Lucille Drive (SVL)
[Added 1-31-2006]
Stop North on Evy Court
Executive Drive at Pineaire Drive
(EDG) [Added 8-25-1987]
Stop South on Executive Drive
Executive Drive at Rodeo Drive
(EDG) [Added 10-17-1995]
Stop East on Executive Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
FAA north driveway at Johnson
Avenue (HBK)
Stop West from FAA driveway
FAA south driveway at Johnson
Avenue (HBK)
Stop West from FAA driveway
Fairdale Drive at Ramm Court
(BWD) [Added 11-14-2000]
Stop North on Ramm Court
Fairdale Drive at Swallow Lane
(BWD) [Amended 3-9-1999]
Stop East/West on Fairdale
Drive; North/South on
Swallow Lane
Fairdale Drive at Willen Lane
(BWD) [Added 11-14-2000]
Stop East on Fairdale Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1442
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fairfax Avenue at Hunter Avenue
(WIS) [Added 5-12-2020]
Stop South on Fairfax Avenue
Fairfax Avenue at Van Buren
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North/South on Fairfax
Avenue
Fairfax Avenue at Webster Avenue
(WIS) [Added 4-6-1982]
Stop North/South on Fairfax
Avenue
Fairfax Road at Hunter Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 5-12-2020]
Stop North on Fairfax Road
Fairfax Road at Jefferson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Jefferson
Avenue
Fairfax Road at Madison Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 4-8-2014]
Stop North/South on Fairfax
Road; East/West on
Madison Avenue
Fairfax Road at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
4-5-1988]
Stop East/West on North
Monroe Avenue; North/
South on Fairfax Road
Fairfax Road at Washington
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North/South on Fairfax
Road
Fairlawn Drive at Sunburst
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
3-1-1994]
Stop North/South on Fairlawn
Drive; East/West on
Sunburst Boulevard
Fairtown Road at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop East on Fairtown Road
Fairview Avenue at Kunigunda
Place (EIS) [Amended 6-6-1995]
Stop East/West on Fairview
Avenue; North/South on
Kunigunda Place
Fairview Avenue at Meadow Lane
(north intersection) (BPT) [Added
1-3-1989]
Stop East on Meadow Lane
Fairview Avenue at Meadow Lane
(south intersection) (BPT) [Added
1-3-1989]
Stop West on Meadow Lane
Fairview Avenue at Park Place
(EIS) [Amended 7-7-1987;
10-7-2003]
Stop East/West on Fairview
Avenue; North/South on
Park Place
Fairview Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (BPT) [Added 2-5-1991]
Stop North on Fairview Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1443
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fairview Place at Woodcrest Drive
(HPG) [Added 9-16-1986;
amended 12-16-1986]
Stop North/South on Fairview
Place; West on Woodcrest
Drive
Fairway Street East at Wendover
Road (SVL) [Added 10-21-1997]
Stop South on Fairway Street
East
Fairway Street West at Wendover
Road (SVL) [Added 10-21-1997]
Stop South on Fairway Street
West
Fallen Leaf Road at Gainsborough
Road (HBK) [Added 1-25-2005]
Stop South on Fallen Leaf Road
Fallon Road at Nugent Avenue
(WBW) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop South on Nugent Avenue
Farm Lane at Udalia Road (WIS)
[Added 10-2-1990]
Stop South on Farm Lane
Farmardie Drive at Lake Shore
Drive (RNK) [Added 10-18-1988;
amended 8-11-1998]
Stop East/West on Farmardie
Drive; North on Lake
Shore Drive
Farmardie Drive at Rose Drive
(RNK) [Added 8-11-1998]
Stop West on Farmardie Drive
Farragut Avenue at Princeton
Street (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop North on Princeton Street
Farrington Avenue at North Fire
Road (BWD) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop East on Farrington
Avenue
Farrington Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Farrington
Avenue
Fawn Drive at Grenadier Lane
(EIS) [Added 5-7-1985]
Stop South on Grenadier Lane
Featherbed Lane at Oceanview
Avenue (OKD) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop West on Featherbed Lane
Feldman Street at Smithtown
Avenue (BHM) [Added
10-13-2015]
Stop West on Feldman Street
Fell Court at Rabro Drive (HPG)
[Added 12-17-2002]
Stop North on Fell Court
Feller Drive at Hawthorne Avenue
(CIS) [Added 5-1-1979]
Stop East on Feller Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1444
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fern Avenue at Hawthorne Avenue
(EIS) [Added 6-1-1993;
amended 1-12-1994]
Stop North on Fern Avenue;
East/West on Hawthorne
Avenue
Fern Avenue at Viola Place (EIS)
[Added 10-18-1994]
Stop West on Viola Place
Fern Avenue at Woodland Street
(EIS)
Stop East/West on Woodland
Street
Fern Place at Shore Drive (OKD)
[Added 6-24-1997]
Stop East/West on Shore Drive;
North on Fern Place
Ferndale Boulevard at Fig Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Fig Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Hemlock
Street (ISL)
Stop East/West on Hemlock
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Ironwood
Street (ISL)
Stop East/West on Ironwood
Street
+Ferndale Boulevard at Islip
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Islip
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Juniper
Street (ISL)
Stop East/West on Juniper
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Lemon
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Lemon
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Locust
Street (CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982;
9-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Locust
Street; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Moffitt
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Oak Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Oak Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Olive Street
(CIS) [Amended 2-9-2010]
Stop East/West on Olive Street;
North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Orange
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Orange
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Palm Street
(CIS) [Amended 7-14-1998]
Stop East/West on Palm Street;
North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Palmetto
Street
Stop East/West on Palmetto
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1445
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ferndale Boulevard at Peach
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Peach Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Pear Street
(CIS) [Amended 3-7-2006]
Stop East/West on Pear Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Pine Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Pine Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Plum Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Plum Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Poplar
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Poplar
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Sage Street
(CIS)
Stop East on Sage Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Sassafras
Street (CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Sassafras
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Spruce
Street (ISL)
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
+Ferndale Boulevard at Spur Drive
North (CIS) [Amended 5-7-1985]
Stop North/South on Ferndale
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (ISL)
Stop North on Ferndale
Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Sycamore
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Sycamore
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Tamarack
Street (ISL)
Stop East/West on Tamarack
Street
Ferndale Boulevard at Walnut
Street (ISL) [Amended
8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on Walnut
Street; North/South on
Ferndale Boulevard
Ferndale Boulevard at Willow
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Willow
Street
Fernwood Avenue at Lockwood
Avenue (OKD) [Added 2-27-2001]
Stop West on Lockwood
Avenue
Fernwood Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
11-18-1988; 12-6-1988]
Stop North on Fernwood
Avenue; East/West on
Woodlawn Avenue
Ferris Avenue at Fifth Street (LKL) Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Ferris Avenue at Noble Street
(BWD) [Added 8-28-1979]
Stop North on Ferris Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1446
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ferris Avenue at O'Rourke Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Ferris
Avenue
Ferris Avenue at Peterson Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Ferris
Avenue
Ferris Avenue at Plunkett Street
(BWD) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop East/West on Plunkett
Street
Ferris Avenue at Riddle Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Ferris
Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at Fifth Street
(LKL) [Added 3-20-2001]
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at First Street
(LKL) [Amended 9-11-2012]
Stop East/West on First Street;
North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at Fourth
Street (LKL) [Amended
5-3-1988; 3-20-2001]
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at Madison
Street (BHM) [Added
10-21-1997]
Stop East/West on Madison
Street; South on
Feuereisen Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at Peconic
Street West (LKL) [Amended
10-8-2013]
Stop North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue; East/
West on Peconic Street
Feuereisen Avenue at Seventh
Street (BHM) [Amended
3-20-1990]
Stop North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue; East/
West on Seventh Avenue
Feuereisen Avenue at Sixth Street
(LKL) [Amended 8-30-1988;
4-20-1994]
Stop North/South on
Feuereisen Avenue; East/
West on Sixth Street
Feuereisen Avenue at Sunrise
Road (BHM)
Stop East/West on Sunrise
Road
Feuereisen Avenue at Third Street
(LKL) [Amended 3-20-2001]
Stop East/West on Third Street
North/South on
Feuereison Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Joan Street (LKL)
[Added 5-18-1982]
Stop East/West on Joan Street
Fifth Avenue at Peconic Street
West (LKL) [Amended 1-5-1988]
Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue; East/West on
Peconic Street West
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1447
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fifth Avenue at Remington
Boulevard (LKL) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop West on Remington
Boulevard
Fifth Avenue at Southport Street
(LKL) [Amended 8-11-1998]
Stop East/West on Southport
Street; North/South on
Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Thrift Street (LKL)
[Amended 5-16-1989]
Stop East/West on Thrift
Street; North/South on
Fifth Avenue
Fifth Street at Gladstone Avenue
(WIS) [Added 12-16-1986;
amended 3-3-1987]
Stop East on Fifth Street;
North/South on Gladstone
Avenue
Fifth Street at Julia Goldbach
Avenue (LKL) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop East on Fifth Street;
North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Fifth Street at Louis Kossuth
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
3-20-2001]
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
North/South on Louis
Kossuth Avenue
Fifth Street at McCall Avenue
(WBS) [Amended 1-21-1992]
Stop East/West on Fifth Street;
North/South on McCall
Avenue
Fifth Street at Myrtle Avenue
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Oakneck Road
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Poet Place (HBK)
[Added 12-6-1994]
Stop East on Fifth Street
Fifth Industrial Court at Spur
Drive North (BWD)
Stop South on Fifth Industrial
Court
Fig Place at Lincoln Boulevard
(PNR) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Fig Place
Fig Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Fig Street
Fillmore Avenue at Monroe Avenue
(BWD) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop East on Fillmore Avenue
Fir Lane at Springmeadow Drive
(HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop South on Fir Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1448
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fir Place at Hilltop Drive (BWD) Stop North/South on Hilltop
Drive
Fir Place at Koehler Place (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1986]
Stop East on Fir Place
Fir Place at Meadowbrook Drive
(BWD) [Amended 6-11-2002]
Stop West on Fir Place
Fir Place at Timberline Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on
Timberline Drive
Fir Place at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Westwood
Drive
Fir Grove Road at Haven Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Fir Grove
Road
Fir Grove Road at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Fir Grove
Road
Fir Grove Road and Michigan
Street at Pine Avenue (RNK)
[Amended 7-7-1987]
Stop East on Fir Grove Road;
West on Michigan Street;
North/South on Pine
Avenue
Fir Grove Road at Port Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Fir Grove
Road
Fire Island Avenue at Ridgewood
Street (WIS) [Added 11-17-2015]
Stop North on Fire Island
Avenue
Fire Island Avenue at Rockaway
Street (WIS)
Stop North/South on Fire
Island Avenue
Fire Road Drive at Gardiner Drive
(NBS) [Amended 1-25-2005]
Stop East/West on Fire Road
Drive; North/South on
Gardiner Drive
Fire Road Drive at Lincoln
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop South on Lincoln
Boulevard
Fire Road Drive at Manor Lane
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Manor
Lane
Fire Road Drive at North Windsor
Avenue (NBS) [Amended
1-15-1980]
Stop North on North Windsor
Avenue
Fire Road Drive at Peters
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
10-24-2017]
Stop North/South on Peters
Boulevard; East/West on
Fire Road Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1449
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fire Road Drive at Pine Drive
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Pine
Drive
Fire Road Drive at Potter
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Potter
Boulevard
Fire Road Drive at Thompson Drive
(NBS) [Added 5-11-2010]
Stop West on Fire Road Drive
First Avenue at First Street (BPT)
[Amended 2-9-2010]
Stop East on First Street;
North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Fourth Street
(BWD) [Added 8-21-1984]
Stop West on First Street
First Avenue at Fourth Street
(Town Parking Field) (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984]
Stop East while leaving
parking field at First
Avenue
First Avenue at Joan Street (LKL)
[Amended 1-5-1982; 5-16-1989]
Stop East/West on Joan Street;
North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Lakeview Avenue
(BSR) [Added 2-9-2016]
Stop West on Lakeview Avenue
First Avenue at Mechanicsville
Road (BSR)
Stop East on Mechanicsville
Road
First Avenue at Peconic Street
West (LKL) [Amended
9-16-1980; 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Second Street
(BPT)
Stop East on Second Street
First Avenue at Southport Street
(LKL) [Amended 1-27-2004]
Stop East/West on Southport
Street; North/South on
First Avenue
First Avenue at Thrift Street (LKL)
[Amended 1-6-1981]
Stop East/West on Thrift Street
First Avenue at Watson Street
(EIS) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop West on Watson Street
First Court at Penataquit Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 4-16-2002]
Stop East on First Court;
North/South on
Penataquit Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1450
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
First Court at South Montgomery
Avenue (BSR) [Added 8-18-1981;
amended 2-15-2005]
Stop West on First Court;
North/South on South
Montgomery Avenue
First Place at Gibbs Road (CIS)
[Added 2-4-2003]
Stop East/West on First Place
First Street at Flaxwood Drive
(HBK) [Added 3-2-1982]
Stop South on Flaxwood Drive
First Street at Fourth Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 3-23-1993]
Stop East/West on Fourth
Avenue
First Street at Julia Goldbach
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
12-13-2011]
Stop East/West on First Street;
North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
First Street at Lincoln Avenue
(HBK) [Added 2-28-1978;
amended 1-17-1989]
Stop West on First Street;
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
First Street at Louis Kossuth
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
4-4-1989]
Stop North/South on Louis
Kossuth Avenue; East/
West on First Street
First Street at McCall Avenue
(WBS) [Added 8-13-2002]
Stop East on First Street
First Street at Monell Avenue (ISL) Stop East on First Street
First Street at Myrtle Avenue
(WBS) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop South on Myrtle Avenue
First Street on Ninth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on First
Street
First Street at Oakneck Road
(WBS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop West on First Street
First Street at Second Avenue
(BPT)
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue
First Street at Seventh Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Seventh Avenue
First Street at Sixth Avenue (BWD) Stop East/West on Sixth
Avenue
First Street at Smith Avenue (ISL) Stop West on First Street
*First Street at South Fifth Avenue
(BWD)
First Street at Tenth Avenue
(BWD) [Added 11-17-1981]
Stop East/West on Tenth
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1451
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
First Street at Third Avenue (BPT) Stop North/South on Third
Avenue
Fitchburg Street at St. Louise
Avenue (NBS)
Stop West on Fitchburg Street
Fitchburg Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Fitchburg
Street
Flaxwood Drive at Lincoln Avenue
(HKB) [Added 9-20-1988;
amended 1-17-1989]
Stop West on Flaxwood Drive
Fleetwood Court at Remington
Boulevard (RNK) [Added
10-22-2019]
Stop South on Fleetwood Court
Flint Place at Shelter Road (RNK)
[Added 11-18-2014]
Stop South on Flint Place
Flintridge Drive at Singingwood
Drive (east intersection) (HBK)
[Added 4-15-1980]
Stop South on Flintridge Drive
Flintridge Drive at Singingwood
Drive (west intersection) (HBK)
[Added 4-15-1980]
Stop South on Flintridge Drive
Flo Drive at Manatuck Boulevard
(PNR) [Added 2-23-1993]
Stop West on Flo Drive
Floral Park Street at North
Greenlawn Avenue (NGR)
Stop East/West on Floral Park
Florida Avenue at Illinois Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Florida
Avenue
Floyd Run at Locust Avenue (BHM)
[Added 8-27-2013]
Stop West on Floyd Run
Floyd Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Floyd Street
Floyd Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Floyd Street
+Floyd Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Madison
Avenue; East/West on
Floyd Street
Floyd Street at Washington Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-7-1981]
Stop East on Floyd Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1452
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Foil Lane at Greenbelt Parkway
(HBK) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop West on Foil Lane; North/
South on Greenbelt
Parkway
Foil Lane at Nimbus Road (HBK)
[Added 2-24-2004; amended
9-11-2012]
Stop East on Foil Lane; North/
South on Nimbus Road
Folger Street at Kensington
Avenue (BPT)
Stop North/South on
Kensington Avenue
Folger Street at Ocean Avenue
(BPT)
Stop East on Folger Street
Forest Avenue at Tower Mews
(OKD) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop West on Forest Avenue;
North/South on Tower
Mews
Forest Court at Locust Boulevard
and East Drive (RNK) [Added
3-20-1979]
Stop East on Forest Court;
West on East Drive
Forest Drive at Hanson Place
(RNK) [Added 6-10-2008]
Stop West on Hanson Place
Forest Drive at Johnson Avenue
(RNK) [Amended 11-17-2009]
Stop North/South on Forest
Drive; East/West on
Johnson Avenue
Forest Drive at Parkwood Street
(RNK) [Added 6-10-2008]
Stop North on Forest Drive
Forest Drive at Pearl Street (RNK)
[Added 3-21-1978]
Stop East/West on Pearl Street
Forest Drive at Pleasant Street
(RNK) [Added 3-21-1978;
amended 8-12-2008]
Stop North/South on Forest
Drive; East/West on
Pleasant Street
Forrest Place at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop East on Forrest Place
Fortieth Street at Grand Boulevard
(ISL)
Stop South on Grand
Boulevard
Forty-Fourth Street at Forty-Third
Street (ISL) [Added 6-11-2002]
Stop South on Forty-Third
Street
Forty-Fourth Street at Grand
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Forty-Fourth
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1453
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Forty-Fourth Street at Lyne Lane
(ISL) [Added 9-12-2000]
Stop South on Lyne Lane
Forty-Second Street at Lyne Lane
(ISL) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop North/South on Lyne
Lane
Forty-Sixth Street at Grand
Boulevard (ISL) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop South on Grand
Boulevard
Foster Avenue at Hamilton Street
(SVL) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop West on Hamilton Street
Foster Avenue at Hampton Street
(SVL) [Added 6-16-1993]
Stop West on Hampton Street
Foster Avenue at Pine Street (SVL)
[Added 4-7-1981]
Stop West on Pine Street
Foster Avenue at River Streets
(SVL)
Stop West on River Street
Foster Avenue at Terry Street
(SVL) [Amended 5-15-2018]
Stop West on Terry Street;
North/South on Foster
Avenue
Foster Avenue at Willow Street
(SVL)
Stop West on Willow Street
Fourteenth Street at Franklyn
Avenue (BHM)
Stop East/West on Fourteenth
Street
Fourteenth Street at Fulton
Avenue (BHM)
Stop West on Fourteenth
Avenue
Fourteenth Street at Lafayette
Avenue (BHM) [Added
10-8-2013]
Stop East on Fourteenth Street
Fourteenth Street at Sayville
Avenue (BHM) [Amended
10-8-2013]
Stop East/West on Fourteenth
Street; North/South on
Sayville Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Fourth Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Street
Fourth Avenue at Gail Street (BSR) Stop West on Gail Street
+Fourth Avenue at Garfield Street
(BSR) [Amended 2-29-2000]
Stop East/West on Garfield
Street; North/South on
Fourth Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Howells Road
(BSR)
Stop North on Fourth Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1454
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fourth Avenue at Mechanicsville
Road (BSR) [Amended
3-21-2017]
Stop East/West on
Mechanicsville Road;
North/South on Fourth
Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Railroad Plaza
(BSR)
Stop East on Railroad Plaza
Fourth Avenue at Second Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Second
Street
Fourth Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Added 6-18-2013]
Stop East on Fourth Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Third Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Third
Street
Fourth Avenue at Wilbur Street
(BSR)
Stop East on Wilbur Street
Fourth Street at Gladstone Avenue
(WBS) [Added 7-16-2002]
Stop West on Fourth Street
Fourth Street at Hyman Avenue
(WBS)
Stop East on Fourth Street
Fourth Street at Julia Goldbach
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
5-3-1988; 6-24-1997;
3-20-2001]
Stop East on Fourth Street;
North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Fourth Street at Louis Kossuth
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
5-3-1988]
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street (Comac Street);
North/South on Louis
Kossuth Avenue
Fourth Street at McCall Avenue
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at Myrtle Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 12-16-1986;
3-3-1987]
Stop North/South on Myrtle
Avenue
Fourth Street at Ninth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Ninth Avenue
+Fourth Street at Oakneck Road
(WBS) [Amended 8-28-1979]
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street; North-South on
Oakneck Road
Fourth Street at Seventh Avenue
(BWD) [Added 6-3-1980]
Stop South on Fourth Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1455
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fourth Street at Sixth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at South Fifth
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
7-18-1995]
Stop North/South on Fourth
Street; East/West on
South Fifth Avenue
Fourth Street at Third Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Street
Foxglove Road at Long Island
Railroad Parking Field exit 150
feet east of Paris Court (WIS)
Stop North from Long Island
Parking Field exit
Fran Street at Henderson Place
(BWD)
Stop North/South on
Henderson Place
Francisco Avenue at Hawthorne
Avenue and William Street (CIS)
[Amended 5-1-1991; 6-18-1991]
Stop North/South on
Hawthorne Avenue; West
on Francisco Avenue;
East on William Street
Francisco Avenue at Lurcott Lane
(CIS) [Added 5-2-1995]
Stop North on Lurcott Lane
Frank Street at Twin Lawns
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Frank Street
Franklin Road at Lincoln Drive
(OKD) [Added 9-21-1993]
Stop West on Franklin Road
Franklin Street at Fulton Street
(BWD) [Amended 5-16-2000]
Stop East/West on Franklin
Street; North/South on
Fulton Street
Franklin Street at Grimsley Road
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Road
Franklin Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Franklin
Street
Franklin Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Franklin
Street
Franklin Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Franklin
Street
Franklin Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Franklin Street
Franklin Street at Webster Road
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Franklin
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1456
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Franklyn Avenue at Karshick
Street (BHM) [Added
11-12-1996]
Stop North on Franklyn
Avenue
Franklyn Avenue at Thirteenth
Street (BHM)
Stop North/South on Franklyn
Avenue
Frederick Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Frederick
Avenue
Freeman Avenue at Gervon Court
(BWD) [Added 6-7-2016]
Stop East on Freeman Avenue
Freeman Avenue at Harvard Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Harvard
Street
Freeman Avenue at Locust Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop West on Locust Avenue
Freeman Avenue at O'Rourke
Street (BWD)
Stop East on O'Rourke Street
Freeman Avenue at Peach Street
(BWD) [Added 11-18-2014]
Stop West on Peach Street
Freeman Avenue at Pear Street
(BWD) [Added 3-21-1989]
Stop North on Freeman
Avenue; West on Pear
Street
Freeman Avenue at Peterson
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Peterson Street
Freeman Avenue at Plunkett Street
(BWD) [Amended 7-11-1989]
Stop East on Plunkett Street
Freeman Avenue at Poplar Street
(BWD) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop West on Poplar Street
Freeman Avenue at Princeton
Street (ISL) [Amended
1-25-2005]
Stop West on Princeton Street;
North/South on Freeman
Avenue
Freeman Avenue at Riddle Street
(BWD) [Added 3-21-1989]
Stop South on Freeman
Avenue; East on Riddle
Street
Freeman Avenue at Spur Drive
North (BWD)
Stop South on Freeman
Avenue
Freeman Avenue at Spur Drive
South (ISL)
Stop North on Freeman
Avenue
Freeman Avenue at Studley Street
(BWD) [Added 6-11-2002]
Stop East on Studley Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1457
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Freeman Avenue at Sycamore
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Sycamore Street
Freeman Avenue at West Orange
Street (BWD) [Amended
3-21-1989]
Stop North/South on Freeman
Avenue; East/West on
West Orange Street
Freeman Avenue at West Plum
Street (BWD) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop West on West Plum Street
Freeman Avenue at West Willow
Street (BWD) [Added 7-11-2006]
Stop West on West Willow
Street
Freeman Avenue at Wiley Street
(BWD) [Added 8-28-1990]
Stop East on Wiley Street
Freeman Avenue at Yale Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Yale Street
Freeman Avenue at Yankee Street
(BWD) [Added 12-13-2011]
Stop East on Yankee Street
Freeport Street at Pacific Avenue
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Pacific
Avenue
Fremont Road at Hilary Street
(WSV) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop North on Hilary Street
Front Avenue at Jericho Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Jericho
Street
Front Avenue at Medford Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-11-2002]
Stop East/West on Medford
Street; North/South on
Front Avenue
Front Avenue at Newberry Street
(BWD)
Stop South on Front Avenue
Front Avenue at Newman Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Newman
Street
Front Avenue at Pioneer Street
(BWD) [Amended 3-19-1991]
Stop East/West on Pioneer
Street; North/South on
Front Avenue
Front Avenue at Steuben Street
(BWD) [Amended 8-19-1980]
Stop East/West on Steuben
Street
Frontage Road at West Islip Road
(WIS) [Added 1-7-1992]
Stop North on West Islip Road
Fulham Lane at James Lane (HBK)
[Added 7-15-1997]
Stop East on James Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1458
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fulham Lane at Lambeth Street
(HBK) [Added 7-15-1997]
Stop South on Fulham Lane
Fulham Lane at Maria Court (HBK)
[Added 7-15-1997]
Stop North on Fulham Lane
Fulham Lane at Val Court (HBK)
[Added 7-15-1997]
Stop East on Val Court
Fuller Avenue at Jaycox Avenue
(ISL) [Added 4-21-2015]
Stop East on Jaycox Avenue
Fuller Avenue at Moody Avenue
(ISL) [Added 12-16-1986]
Stop North/South on Fuller
Avenue
Fuller Avenue at Root Avenue (ISL)
[Added 12-26-1986]
Stop North/South on Fuller
Avenue
Fuller Avenue at Shaw Avenue
(ISL) [Added 4-21-2015]
Stop East on Shaw Avenue
Fulton Avenue at Thirteenth Street
(BHM)
Stop North/South on Fulton
Avenue
Fulton Street at Gates Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Gates
Avenue
Fulton Street at Glenmore Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Glenmore
Avenue
+Fulton Street at Lexington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Lexington
Avenue; North/South on
Fulton Street
Fulton Street at Myrtle Avenue
(BWD)
Stop West on Myrtle Avenue
Fulton Street at Ocean Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ocean
Avenue
Fulton Street at Prospect Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Prospect
Avenue
Fulton Street at Ralph Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ralph
Avenue
Fulton Street at Ridgewood
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Ridgewood
Avenue
Fulton Street at Tremont Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Tremont Avenue
Fulton Street at Vanderbilt Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 3-21-2000]
Stop East/West on Vanderbilt
Avenue; North/South on
Fulton Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1459
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Fulton Street at West End Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on West End
Avenue
+Furrows Road at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop East/West on Furrows
Road; North/South on
Grundy Avenue
Furrows Road at Hiram Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
Furrows Road at Jeanna Court
(HBK) [Added 3-23-1993]
Stop South on Jeanna Court
+Furrows Road at Lincoln Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; West on Furrows
Road
Furrows Road at Lindsey Place
(HTV) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop North on Lindsey Place
Furrows Road at Mae Avenue
(HBK) [Added 1-15-1980]
Stop South on Mae Avenue
Furrows Road at Michael's Way
(HBK) [Added 10-6-1998]
Stop North on Michael's Way
Furrows Road at northbound exit
from Nicolls Road (HTV)
Stop North on northbound exit
from Nicolls Road
Furrows Road at southbound exit
from Nicolls Road (HTV)
Stop North on southbound exit
from Nicolls Road
Furrows Road at (Old) Patchogue-
Holbrook Road (HBK) [Added
1-16-1979]
Stop East/West on Furrows
Road
Furrows Road at Scopelitis Court
(HBK) [Added 7-11-1989]
Stop South on Scopelitis Court
Furrows Road at Singingwood
Drive (HBK) [Added 1-17-1978;
amended 10-9-2001]
Stop East/West on Furrows
Road; North on
Singingwood Drive
Furrows Road at Tanner Street
(HBK) [Added 1-15-1980]
Stop North on Tanner Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1460
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
G Road at K Road (CIS) [Added
5-6-1980]
Stop North/South on G Road
Gail Street at Howells Road (BSR) Stop East on Gail Street
Gainsborough Road at
Singingwood Drive (north
intersection) (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980; amended 6-7-1988]
Stop South on Gainsborough
Road; East/West on
Singingwood Drive
Gainsborough Road at
Singingwood Drive (south
intersection) (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980; amended 6-7-1988;
11-14-2000]
Stop East on Gainsborough
Road; North/South on
Singingwood Drive
Gale Road at Locust Avenue (OKD)
[Amended 5-3-1988; 6-7-1988]
Stop West on Gale Road;
North/South on Locust
Avenue
Gale Road at Matthews Road
(OKD) [Added 8-30-1983]
Stop East on Gale Road
Garden Court at Johnson Avenue
(RNK) [Added 12-15-2009]
Stop North on Garden Court
Garden Court at Lombardy
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East on Garden Court
Garden Court at Manatuck
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop West on Garden Court
Garden Court at North Brooklyn
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Garden
Court
Garden Path at Locust Street
(BHM) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop West on Garden Path
Garden Place at Hemlock Place
(BSR) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop East on Garden Place
Garden Place at Sunset Road
(BSR)
Stop West on Garden Place
Garden Street at Malts Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 9-1-1993]
Stop East/West on Garden
Street; North/South on
Malts Avenue
Garden Street at Pine Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Garden
Street; North/South on
Pine Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1461
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Garden Street at Sandra Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 8-12-2008]
Stop East on Garden Street;
North/South on Sandra
Avenue
Garden Street at Spruce Avenue
(WIS) [Added 8-21-1984]
Stop East/West on Garden
Street
Garden City Street at Howells
Road (WBW) [Amended
5-11-2010]
Stop East/West on Garden City
Street; North/South on
Howells Road
Garden City Street at Joselson
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
3-1-1994]
Stop East/West on Garden City
Street; North/South on
Joselson Avenue
Garden City Street at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW) [Amended
8-17-1999]
Stop East/West on Garden City
Street; North/South on
Martinstein Avenue
Garden City Street at Nugent
Avenue (WBW)
Stop East/West on Garden City
Street
Garden City Street at Ocean
Avenue (WBW)
Stop North on Ocean Avenue
Garden City Street at Udall Road
(WBW)
Stop West on Garden City
Street
Gardiner Drive at Huron Drive
(NBS) [Amended 1-7-1992]
Stop North/South on Gardiner
Drive; East/West on
Huron Drive
Gardiner Drive at Penataquit Drive
(WBS) [Added 10-15-1991;
amended 1-25-2000]
Stop North on Gardiner Drive
Gardiner Drive at Poplar Place
(NBS) [Amended 1-7-1992]
Stop North/South on Gardiner
Drive; East/West on
Poplar Place
Gardiner Drive at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Amended 12-16-1986]
Stop North/South on Gardiner
Drive
Gardiner Drive at Wohseepee
Drive (WBS) [Amended
6-24-1997]
Stop North/South on Gardiner
Drive
Garfield Avenue at Howells Road
(BSR) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop South on Howells Road
Garfield Avenue at Islip Boulevard
(EIS) [Added 8-27-2013]
Stop East on Islip Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1462
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Garfield Avenue at Jackson Street
(EIS) [Added 3-22-1995]
Stop East on Jackson Street;
South on Garfield Avenue
Garfield Avenue at Lincoln Street
(EIS) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop East on Lincoln Street
Garfield Avenue at Moffit
Boulevard (EIS) [Added
3-3-1981]
Stop North/South on Garfield
Avenue
Garfield Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG)
Stop North on Garfield Avenue
Garfield Avenue at Roosevelt
Street (EIS)
Stop North/South on Garfield
Avenue
Garfield Avenue at South First
Street (EDG) [Added 5-1-1984]
Stop East/West on South First
Street
Garfield Avenue at West Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 8-19-1980]
Stop East/West on West
Madison Street
+Garfield Street at North Park
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North/South on North
Park Avenue
Garfield Street at West Drive (BSR) Stop North on West Drive
Garner Lane at Manatuck Lane
(BSR) [Added 3-10-2009]
Stop North/South on Garner
Lane; East on Manatuck
Lane
Garretson Avenue at Holmes
Avenue (ISL) [Added 2-7-1984;
amended 12-18-1984]
Stop South on Holmes Avenue
Garretson Avenue at Peckham
Avenue (ISL)
Stop East/West on Garretson
Avenue
Garretson Avenue at Roosevelt
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
2-4-2003]
Stop East/West on Garretson
Avenue; North/South on
Roosevelt Avenue
Gaymor Road at John Street
[Added 4-5-1994]
Stop South on Gaymor Road
Gaymor Road at Marlon Lane
(HPG) [Added 5-15-1990]
Stop West on Marlon Lane
Geneva Street at St. Louis Avenue
(NBS) [Added 8-28-1979;
amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on St. Louis
Avenue; East/West on
Geneva Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1463
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Geneva Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 12-3-1996]
Stop East/West on Geneva
Street; North/South on
Saxon Avenue
George Street at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop West on George Street
George Street at Lawn Avenue
(WIS) [Added 11-15-1994]
Stop South on Lawn Avenue
George Street at Parkwood Road
(WIS) [Added 8-21-1984]
Stop East/West on George
Street; North/South on
Parkwood Road
Gerek Avenue at Higbie Lane and
Kobb Boulevard (WIS) [Amended
8-31-1994]
Stop West on Gerek Avenue;
East on Kobb Boulevard;
North/South on Higbie
Lane
Gerhardy Street at Third Avenue
(EIS) [Added 5-3-1983]
Stop East on Gerhardy Avenue
Gerritsen Avenue at Henry Street
(BPT) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop West on Henry Street;
North/South on Gerritsen
Avenue
Gerritsen Avenue at James Street
(BPT) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Gerritsen
Avenue; West on James
Street
Gianna Court at School House
Lane (HPG) [Added 8-12-2003]
Stop West on Gianna Court
Gibbs Road at Half Mile Road (CIS)
[Added 9-16-1980]
Stop East on Half Mile Road
Gibbs Road at Rose Avenue (CIS)
[Added 6-2-1981]
Stop West on Rose Avenue
Gibbs Road at Second Place (CIS)
[Added 3-21-1978]
Stop East/West on Second
Place
Gibbs Road at Sugarwood Lane
(CIS) [Added 6-2-1981]
Stop East on Sugarwood Lane
Gibbs Road on Whitetail Lane
(CIS) [Added 6-2-1981;
amended 8-19-1986]
Stop East on Whitetail Lane;
North/South on Gibbs
Road
Gibson Avenue at Jericho Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Jericho Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1464
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Gibson Avenue at Medford Street
(BWD) [Added 3-21-1989]
Stop North/South on Gibson
Avenue; West on Medford
Street
Gibson Avenue at Newberry Street
(BWD)
Stop South on Gibson Avenue
Gibson Avenue at Newman Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Newman
Street
Gibson Avenue at Pioneer Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Pioneer Street
Gibson Avenue at Second Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 3-21-1989]
Stop North/South on Gibson
Avenue; East on Second
Avenue
Gibson Avenue at Steuben Street
(BWD) [Added 12-14-2004]
Stop West on Steuben Street
Gibson Street at Homan Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 1-2-1979]
Stop North on Homan Avenue
Gibson Street at Maple Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East/West on Gibson
Street
+Gibson Street at Ocean Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 10-3-1978;
6-6-1989]
Stop North/South on Ocean
Avenue; East/West on
Gibson Street
Gibson Street at Shore Lane (BSR)
[Amended 9-9-1997]
Stop East/West on Gibson
Street; North/South on
Shore Lane
Gibson Street at South Clinton
Avenue and a curb cut opposite
Gibson Street (BSR) [Amended
2-23-1993; 4-26-2011]
Stop North on South Clinton
Avenue; West on Gibson
Street; East on a curb cut
opposite Gibson Street
Gibson Street at South Park
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North/South on South
Park Avenue
Gillette Avenue at Kent Court
(BPT) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop West on Kent Court
Gillette Avenue at Meadow Lane
(BPT) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop East on Meadow Lane
*Gillette Avenue at Middle Road
(BPT)
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1465
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Gillette Avenue at a curb cut 180
feet south of Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added 3-5-1985]
Stop West on curb cut
Gillette Avenue at a driveway 120
feet south of Montauk Highway
(SVL) [Added 9-15-1981]
Stop West on driveway
Gillette Avenue at Oversouth Lane
(SVL) [Added 3-5-1985]
Stop East on Oversouth Lane
Gillette Avenue at Purick Street
(BPT) [Added 11-14-1995]
Stop North on Gillette Avenue
Gillette Avenue at Railroad Street
(BPT) [Amended 10-24-2017]
Stop East/West on Railroad
Street; North/South on
Gillette Avenue
Gillette Avenue at Ridgewood
Court (BPT) [Amended 4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Ridgewood
Court; North/South on
Gillette Avenue
Gina Avenue at Opal Street (HBK)
[Added 12-3-1991]
Stop North on Gina Avenue
Ginger Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Ginger Lane
Girard Avenue at Linwood Court
(WBS)
Stop West on Linwood Court
Girard Avenue at Mackenzie Court
(WBS)
Stop North on Girard Avenue
Girard Avenue at Neptune Court
(WBS) [Added 9-7-1976]
Stop West on Neptune Court
Girard Avenue at Shore Road
(WBS)
Stop North/South on Girard
Avenue
Gladstone Avenue at Newton
Avenue (WBS) [Added
12-18-2001]
Stop South on Gladstone
Avenue
Gladstone Avenue at Seventh
Street (WBS) [Added
11-13-2001]
Stop West on Seventh Street
Gladstone Avenue at Skidmore
Place (WBS) [Added 12-18-2001]
Stop North on Gladstone
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1466
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Gladstone Avenue at Third Street
(WIS) [Added 8-31-1994]
Stop North/South on Gladstone
Avenue; West on Third
Street
Glenmere Way at Greenbelt
Parkway West (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop Northeast on Glenmere
Way
Glenmere Way at Inverness Road
(HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North on Glenmere Way
Glenmore Avenue at Willoughby
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Glenmore
Avenue
Glensummer Road at Greenbelt
Parkway West (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop North on Glensummer
Road
Glensummer Road at Inverness
Road (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North on Glensummer
Road
Gorgo Lane at Wagstaff Lane (WIS) Stop East/West on Gorgo Lane
Gorgo Lane at Willets Lane (WIS)
[Added 5-23-2017]
Stop East on Gorgo Lane
Grace Street at Grundy Avenue
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Grace Street
Grace Street at Second Avenue
(BSR)
Stop West on Grace Street
Grace Street at Snedecor Avenue
(BPT) [Added 6-18-1985]
Stop East on Grady Street
Grady Street at Snedecor Avenue
(BPT) [Added 2-5-2008]
Stop East on Grady Street
Grahn Drive at Hancock Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Grahn
Drive
Granby Place at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK) [Added 6-5-1979;
amended 12-11-2012]
Stop North/South on Woodlawn
Avenue; East on Granby
Place
Grand Boulevard at 42nd Street
(ISL) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop South on Grand
Boulevard
Grand Boulevard at Gray Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Gray Street
Grand Boulevard (south spur) at
Howells Road (EDG) [Added
2-24-2009]
Stop South on south spur
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1467
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Grand Boulevard at Ida Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Ida Street
Grand Boulevard at Jericho Street
(BWD)
Stop East on Jericho Street
Grand Boulevard at Jewel Street
(BWD)
Stop West on Jewel Street
Grand Boulevard at Kopf Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-3-1990]
Stop West on Kopf Street
Grand Boulevard at Medford
Street (BWD) [Amended
3-8-2011]
Stop East on Medford Street;
North/South on Grand
Boulevard
Grand Boulevard at Newberry
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Newberry Street
Grand Boulevard at Newman
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Newman Street
+Grand Boulevard at Noble Street
(BWD) [Amended 9-15-1981]
Stop North/South on Grand
Boulevard; East/West on
Noble Street
Grand Boulevard at O'Rourke
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on O'Rourke
Street
Grand Boulevard at Peterson
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Peterson
Street
Grand Boulevard at Pioneer Street
(BWD) [Amended 7-11-1989]
Stop East on Pioneer Street;
North/South on Grand
Boulevard
Grand Boulevard at Plunkett Street
(BWD) [Amended 8-28-1990]
Stop North/South on Grand
Boulevard; East/West on
Plunkett Street
Grand Boulevard at Riddle Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Riddle
Street
Grand Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (ISL)
Stop North on Grand
Boulevard
Grand Boulevard at Stahley Street
(BWD) [Amended 7-2-1991]
Stop East on Stahley Street
Grand Boulevard at Steuben Street
(BWD) [Amended 8-19-1980]
Stop East on Steuben Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1468
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Grand Boulevard at Studley Street
(BWD) [Amended 10-2-1990]
Stop North/South on Grand
Boulevard; East/West on
Studley Street
Grand Boulevard at Stumpel Street
(BWD)
Stop East on Stumpel Street
Grand Boulevard at Wiley Street
(BWD) [Amended 8-28-1990]
Stop West on Wiley Street
Grand Boulevard at Wurz Street
(BWD)
Stop South on Grand
Boulevard
Grant Avenue at Jackson Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 11-14-2000]
Stop West on Jackson Avenue
Grant Avenue at parking lot
driveway 175 feet north of Main
Street (ISL) [Added 1-16-1979;
amended 5-1-1984]
Stop East/West on driveway
Grant Avenue at McKinley Street
(BWD) [Amended 3-2-1982]
Stop East on McKinley Street
Grant Avenue at McKinley Street
(ISL) [Added 9-22-2015]
Stop West on McKinley Street
Grant Avenue at Mindres Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 11-16-1982;
12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Grant
Avenue; East on Mindres
Avenue
Grant Avenue at Nikia Drive (ISL)
[Added 7-15-1997]
Stop West on Nikia Drive
Grant Avenue at Oak Street (BWD)
[Amended 1-30-2001;
4-24-2012]
Stop West on Oak Street;
North/South on Grant
Avenue
Grant Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG)
Stop North on Grant Avenue
+Grant Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG)
Yield South on Grant Avenue
Grant Avenue at South Fehr Way
(EDG) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop South on Grant Avenue
Grant Avenue at South Second
Street (EDG) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop East/West on South
Second Street
Grant Avenue at South Third
Street (EDG)
Stop South on Grant Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1469
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Grant Avenue at Tex Court (ISL)
[Added 2-24-2004]
Stop North/South on Grant
Avenue; West on Tex
Court
Grant Avenue at Van Cedar Street
(BWD) [Amended 10-12-2004]
Stop West on Van Cedar Street
Grassmere Avenue at Middlesex
Avenue (OKD) [Added 1-28-1997]
Stop West on Middlesex
Avenue
Grassmere Avenue at Oceanview
Avenue (OKD) [Added 2-28-1978;
amended 1-5-1982]
Stop South on Grassmere
Avenue
Grassmere Avenue (east leg) at
Shore Drive (OKD) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop East on Grassmere
Avenue (east leg)
Grassmere Avenue (west leg) at
Shore Drive (OKD) [Amended
4-15-1980]
Stop North/South on
Grassmere Avenue (west
leg)
Gray Street at Twin Lawns Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Gray Street
Graywood Court at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Graywood Court
Great River Road at New Street
(GRV) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop South on New Street
Great River Road at O'Connell
Court (GRV) [Added 8-21-1984]
Stop East on O'Connell Court
Great River Road at Provost Street
(GRV) [Amended 2-24-2004]
Stop East/West on Great River
Road; North on Provost
Street
Great River Road at River Road
(GRV) [Amended 9-23-2014]
Stop North/South on Great
River Road; East on River
Road
Great River Road at Woodhollow
Road (GRV) [Amended 1-5-1982;
12-17-1991]
Stop North/South on Great
River Road; East on
Woodhollow Road
Greeley Avenue at Jefferson Street
(EIS)
Stop South on Greeley Avenue
Greeley Avenue at Manton Street
(SVL) [Amended 8-13-2002]
Stop North/South on Greeley
Avenue; West on Manton
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1470
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Greeley Avenue at Tariff Street
(SVL) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North on Greeley Avenue
Green Avenue at Saxon Avenue
(ISL) [Added 10-6-1980]
Stop West on Green Avenue
Greenbelt Parkway at Skylark
Drive (HTV)
Stop North on Skylark Drive
Greenbelt Parkway at Spence
Avenue (HTV) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 5-20-1997]
Stop East/West on Greenbelt
Parkway; South on
Spence Avenue
Greenbelt Parkway at Spiral Road
(HTV) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 8-19-1986]
Stop East/West on Spiral Road;
North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway
Greenbelt Parkway at Thunder
Road (north) (HTV)
Stop West on Thunder Road
(north)
Greennelt Parkway at Thunder
Road (south) (HTV)
Stop North on Thunder Road
(south)
Greenbelt Parkway at Waco Lane
(HBK) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop West on Waco Lane;
North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway
Greennelt Parkway West at a
bicycle path opposite Bradbury
Court (HBK) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop Northeast on bicycle path
Greenbelt Parkway West at a
bicycle path 350 feet east of
Glensummer Road (HBK) [Added
6-16-1981]
Stop North/South on bicycle
path
Greenbelt Parkway West at
Inverness Road (HBK) [Added
4-15-1980; amended 3-25-2003]
Stop East on Inverness Road;
North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway West
Greenbelt Parkway West at Joanne
Drive (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop East on Joanne Drive
Greenbelt Parkway West at a
bicycle path 200 feet south of
Shadow Grove Lane (HBK) [Added
6-16-1981]
Stop North/South on bicycle
path
Greenbelt Parkway West (north
intersection) at Shadow Grove
Lane (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 8-21-1984]
Stop North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway West; West on
Shadow Grove Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1471
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Greenbelt Parkway West (south
intersection) at Shadow Grove
Lane (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 3-21-1989]
Stop West on Shadow Grove
Lane; North/South on
Greenbelt Parkway West
Greenbelt Parkway West at
Springmeadow Drive (HBK)
[Added 3-20-1979; amended
9-21-1993; 7-15-2008]
Stop North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway West; East/West
on Springmeadow Drive
Greenbelt Parkway West at
Whitehall Court (HBK) [Added
11-15-1988]
Stop North/South on Greenbelt
Parkway West; East on
Whitehall Court
Greenbrier Lane/Marseille Path at
Lincoln Avenue (SVL) [Amended
9-15-1987; 3-19-1991]
Stop West on Greenbrier Lane;
East on Marseille Path;
North/South on Lincoln;
Avenue
Greene Avenue at Maple Street
(SVL) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop East/West on Maple
Street; North/South on
Greene Avenue
Greene Avenue and Orleans Street
at Saxon Avenue (ISL) [Amended
6-3-1980]
Stop East on Greene Street;
West on Orleans Street
Greene Avenue at Oversouth
Street (SVL) [Added 1-26-2010]
Stop West on Oversouth Street
Greene Avenue at Swayze Street
(SVL) [Amended 6-18-1991]
Stop West on Swayze Street;
North/South on Greene
Avenue
Greentree Drive at Riverdale
Avenue (OKD) [Added 4-7-1998]
Stop South on Greentree
Drive; East/West on
Riverdale Avenue
Greentree Street at Ocean Avenue
(WSV) [Added 7-5-1988]
Stop East on Greentree Street;
North/South on Ocean
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue at Jefferson
Street (EIS) [Amended 4-2-2002]
Stop East/West on Jefferson
Street; North/South on
Greenwood Avenue
Greenwood Avenue at Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 6-7-1988]
Stop North on Greenwood
Avenue; East/West on
Madison Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1472
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Greenwood Road at Meier Place
(NBS) [Added 5-15-1990]
Stop South on Meier Place
Greenwood Road at Penataquit
Avenue (NBS) [Added 1-6-1981]
Stop East on Greenwood Road
Greenwood Road at Woodlea
Avenue (NBS) [Added 1-2-1990]
Stop East/West on Greenwood
Road; North on Woodlea
Avenue
Gridley Street at West Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop North on Gridley Street
Grimsley Road at Langdon Street
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Road
Grimsley Road at Richmond Street
(ISL) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop South on Grimsley Road
Grimsley Road at Windsor Street
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Grimsley
Road
Grouse Drive at Swallow Lane
(BWD) [Added 8-22-2017]
Stop West on Grouse Drive
Grove Street at Hamilton Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Grove Street
Grove Street at Park Avenue
(BWD) [Added 1-25-2005;
amended 4-9-2008]
Stop North/South on Park
Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Halbert Drive
(HBK) [Added 2-7-1989]
Stop North on Grundy Avenue;
West on Halbert Drive
Grundy Avenue at Hauser Avenue
(HBK) [Added 9-20-1988;
amended 2-7-1989]
Stop West on Hauser Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Lillian
Boulevard (HBK) [Added
12-19-1978]
Stop West on Lillian Boulevard
Grundy Avenue at Loop Drive
(SVL) [Added 11-15-1988;
amended 8-15-2000]
Stop East/West on Loop Drive;
South on Grundy Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Marvin Avenue
(HBK) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop East on Marvin Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1473
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Grundy Avenue at Mollie
Boulevard (HBK) [Added
12-19-1978]
Stop West on Mollie Boulevard
Grundy Avenue at Namrof Lane
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Namrof Lane
Grundy Avenue at Old Pathchogue-
Holbrook Road (HBK) [Added
3-3-1981]
Stop North on Grundy Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Parkside Street
(HBK)
Stop West on Parkside Street
Grundy Avenue at Patrician Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Patrician Street
Grundy Avenue at Pearl Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Pearl Street
Grundy Avenue at Perimeter Street
(HBK) [Added 11-16-1982;
amended 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Grundy
Avenue; East on
Perimeter Street
Grundy Avenue at Potomac Avenue
(SVL) [Added 12-9-1997]
Stop West on Potomac Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Poulsen Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Poulsen Street
Grundy Avenue at Pringle Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Pringle Street
Grundy Avenue at Rachel's Way
(HBK) [Added 6-8-2004]
Stop East on Rachel's Way
Grundy Avenue at St. James Street
(HBK)
Stop East/West on St. James
Street
Grundy Avenue at Silva Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Silva Street
Grundy Avenue at Tate Street
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Tate Street
Grundy Avenue at Terry Boulevard
(HBK) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Grundy
Avenue; East/West on
Terry Boulevard
Grundy Avenue at Twin Bark
Avenue (HBK) [Added 4-20-1994]
Stop West on Twin Bark
Avenue
Grundy Avenue at Victor Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Victor Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1474
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Grundy Avenue at Wald Street
(HBK) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop West on Wald Street
Gull Lane at Heyward Street
(BWD)
Stop North on Gull Lane
Gull Lane at Pandora Drive (BWD) Stop West on Pandora Drive
Gull Haven Drive at Jansen Way
(CIS) [Added 6-14-2005]
Stop East/West on Gull Haven
Drive; North/South on
Jansen Way
Gull Haven Drive at Robbins Road
(CIS) [Added 7-10-2001]
Stop East/West on Gull Haven
Drive; North/South on
Robbins Road
Gunther Avenue at Jefferson
Avenue (NBS)
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Gunther Avenue at Madison
Avenue (NBS)
Stop North/South on Madison
Avenue
Gunther Avenue at Monroe Avenue
(NBS) [Added 7-5-1988]
Stop East on Gunther Avenue
Gunther Avenue at Washington
Avenue (NBS)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Gwendolyn Place at Quintuck Lane
(EIS)
Stop North on Quintuck Lane
Gwendolyn Place at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop East on Gwendolyn Place
Gwendolyn Place at Woodland
Drive (EIS) [Amended
2-16-1999]
Stop North/South on Woodland
Drive; West on Gwendolyn
Place
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
H Road at H Road (north spur)
(CIS) [Added 6-16-1981]
Yield North on H Road
H Road (north spur) at K Road
(CIS) [Added 6-16-1981]
Yield East on H Road (north
spur)
Hackmatac Street at Lowell
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Hackmatac
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1475
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hackmatac Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 2-9-2016]
Stop East on Hackmatac Street
Hackmatac Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Hackmatac
Street
Hagen Street at Strong Street
(BWD) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop North on Strong Street
Hagen Street at Twin Lawn Avenue
(BWD) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop West on Hagen Street
Haide Place/South Harrison
Avenue at Suffolk Lane (EIS)
[Amended 2-4-1992]
Stop East on Haide Place;
North/South on Suffolk
Lane; West on South
Harrison Avenue
Halbert Drive at Hiram Avenue
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Halbert
Drive
Hale Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hale Street
Hale Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hale Street
Hale Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hale Street
Hale Street at Washington Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 11-18-1980]
Stop East on Hale Street
Half Hollow Street at Lincoln
Avenue (HBK) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; West on Half
Hollow Street
Half Mile Road at Hoffman Lane
(CIS)
Stop South on Hoffman Lane
Half Mile Road at Holiday
Apartments driveway (CIS)
Stop South on Holiday
Apartments entrance/exit
Half Mile Road at east driveway of
Reed School (CIS)
Stop North on driveway
Half Mile Road at west driveway of
Reed School (CIS)
Stop North on driveway
Half Mile Road at Whitetail Lane
(CIS) [Added 7-2-1991]
Stop North on Whitetail Lane
Halley Lane at Hawthorne Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East on Halley Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1476
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Halsey Street at Nichol's Road
(CIS) [Amended 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Halsey Street
Halsey Street/Serpentine Lane at
South Bedford Avenue (CIS)
[Added 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Halsey Street;
West on Serpentine Lane;
North/South on South
Bedford Avenue
Hamilton Avenue at Maple Street
(BWD) [Added 7-17-2018]
Stop East on Maple Street
Hamilton Avenue at Pine Court
(BWD) [Amended 11-1-1988;
8-27-1991]
Stop West on Pine Court
Hamilton Avenue at Wood Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Wood Street
Hamilton Place at Jackson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Jackson
Avenue
Hamilton Place at Martin Drive
(WIS) [Amended 2-2-1988]
Stop West on Martin Drive
Hamilton Place at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
4-3-2012]
Stop North on Hamilton Place;
West on North Monroe
Avenue
Hamilton Place at Scott Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Scott
Avenue
Hamilton Street at River Road
(SVL) [Added 1-2-1979]
Stop North on River Road
Hampshire Road at Hother Lane
(WBS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop North on Hampshire Road
Hampshire Road at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Added 12-16-1986]
Stop West on Seventh Street;
North/South on
Hampshire Road
Hampshire Road at Sunny Lane
(WBS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop North/South on
Hampshire Road; West on
Sunny Lane
Hancock Road at Hunter Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North on Hancock Road
Hancock Road at Jackson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Hancock Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1477
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hancock Road at Jefferson Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 12-13-2011]
Stop North/South on Hancock
Road; East/West on
Jefferson Avenue
Hancock Road at Madison Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Madison
Avenue
Hancock Road at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
4-24-2012]
Stop East/West on North
Monroe Avenue; North/
South on Hancock Road
Hancock Road at Scott Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Scott Avenue
Hancock Road at Washington
Avenue (WIS)
Stop East/West on Washington
Avenue
Hancock Street at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
7-14-1998]
Stop East/West on Hancock
Street; North/South on
Jefferson Avenue
Hancock Street at Knoll Place
(BWD) [Added 8-21-2018]
Stop North on Knoll Place
Hancock Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-5-2005]
Stop East/West on Hancock
Street; North/South on
Lincoln Avenue
Hancock Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 7-17-1979]
Stop East/West on Hancock
Street; North South on
Madison Avenue
Hancock Street at Nichol's Road
(CIS) [Amended 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Hancock Street
Hancock Street at Voorhis Drive
(BWD) [Added 4-7-1981;
amended 4-8-2014]
Stop North on Voorhis Drive;
East/West on Hancock
Street
Hancock Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Hancock Street
Handsome Avenue at Jones Drive
(SVL) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Jones Drive
Handsome Avenue at Maple Street
(SVL) [Amended 10-7-1997]
Stop North/South on
Handsome Avenue; West
on Maple Street
Hansen Street at North Park
Avenue (NBS) [Added 9-15-1992]
Stop East on Hansen Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1478
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hanson Place at Terry Road (RNK) Stop East/West on Hanson
Place
Harding Street at Smithtown
Avenue (BHM) [Added
11-20-2018]
Stop West on Harding Street
Harrisburg Street at St. Louis
Avenue (NBS) [Amended
8-30-1995]
Stop North/South on St. Louis
Avenue; East/West on
Harrisburg Street
Harrisburg Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Harrisburg
Street
Harrison Avenue at Kings Road
(Conklin Road) (HPG)
Stop South on Harrison Avenue
Harrison Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG) [Amended 2-16-1999]
Stop North on Harrison Avenue
Harrison Avenue at Second Avenue
(BSR)
Stop West on Harrison Avenue
Harrison Avenue at South First
Street (EDG) [Added 7-11-2000;
amended 3-25-2003]
Stop East on South First Street
Harrison Street at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Harrison
Street
Harrison Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Harrison
Street
Harrison Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Harrison
Street
Harrison Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-18-1980]
Stop East on Harrison Street
Harvard Street at Whitman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East on Harvard Street
Harvest Lane at Hunter Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 2-24-2009]
Stop South on Harvest Lane;
East/West on Hunter
Avenue
Harvest Lane at Kildare Place
(WIS) [Added 2-26-1991]
Stop East on Kildare Place
Harvest Lane at Lamoka Place
(WIS) [Amended 12-16-1986]
Stop East on Lamoka Place;
North/South on Harvest
Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1479
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Harwood Avenue at Hawthorne
Avenue (EIS) [Added 6-1-1993;
amended 1-12-1994]
Stop North on Harwood
Avenue; East/West on
Hawthorne Avenue
+Harwood Avenue at exit from
southbound Southern State
Parkway (EIS)
Stop South on Parkway exit
Harwood Avenue at Woodland
Street (EIS)
Stop South on Harwood
Avenue
Hauppauge Road at Nichol's Road
(RNK)
Stop East on Hauppauge Road
Hauppauge Road at San Juan Drive
(HPG) [Amended 3-20-1979]
Stop South on San Juan Drive
Hauppauge Road at Southern
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop South on Southern
Boulevard
Hauppauge Road at Terry Road
(HPG) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop West on Hauppauge Road
Hauser Avenue at Hiram Avenue
(HBK) [Amended 12-3-1991]
Stop East/West on Hauser
Avenue; North/South on
Hiram Avenue
Hauser Avenue at Hummel Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Hummel
Avenue
Haven Avenue at Johnson Avenue
(RNK)
Stop South on Haven Avenue
Haven Avenue at Ontario Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Street
Haven Avenue at Shelter Road
(RNK) [Amended 7-7-1987]
Stop North/South on Haven
Avenue; East/West on
Shelter Road
Haven Avenue at Springdale Drive
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Haven
Avenue
Haven Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Wildwood
Road
Hawkeye Street at Mohican
Avenue (RNK)
Stop East/West on Hawkeye
Street
Hawthorn Avenue at Johnson
Avenue (RNK)
Stop South on Hawthorn
Avenue
Hawthorn Avenue at Springdale
Drive (RNK)
Stop East/West on Springdale
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1480
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hawthorne Avenue at Hilliard
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on Hilliard Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Laurel
Avenue (EIS) [Added 6-1-1993;
amended 11-18-2003]
Stop East/West on Hawthorne
Avenue; North on Laurel
Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Lenox
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Lenox Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Milano
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Milano Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Naples
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Naples Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Oakdale
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on Oakdale Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue at Storey
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East on Storey Avenue
Haynes Avenue at Horton Street
(WIS) [Amended 11-17-1998]
Stop East/West on Haynes
Avenue; North/South on
Horton Street
Haynes Avenue at Kime Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 1-7-1986]
Stop North on Kime Avenue;
East on Haynes Avenue
Haynes Avenue at Penney Street
(WIS)
Stop South on Penney Street
Haynes Avenue at Reilly Street
(WIS) [Added 3-22-1995]
Stop South on Reilly Street
Haynes Avenue at Ward Street
(WIS) [Amended 8-28-1990]
Stop North/South on Ward
Street; East/West on
Haynes Avenue
Haynes Avenue at Watts Place
(WIS)
Stop East on Watts Place
Hazel Street at Saint Johns Street
(CIS) [Added 2-16-1999]
Stop South on Hazel Street
Hazel Street at South Road (CIS) Stop West on South Road
Heckscher Avenue at Locust Drive
(PNR) [Amended 2-24-2009]
Stop East/West on Locust
Drive; North/South on
Heckscher Avenue
Heckscher Boulevard at Hemlock
Drive (PNR) [Amended
1-21-1992]
Stop East on Hemlock Drive;
North/South on
Heckscher Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1481
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Heckscher Boulevard at Pineaire
Drive (PNR)
Stop North on Heckscher
Avenue
Heckscher Boulevard at Prospect
Place (PNR) [Amended 5-1-1990]
Stop North/South on
Heckscher Avenue; East/
West on Prospect Place
Heckscher Boulevard at Spence
Street (Elm Drive) (PRN)
Stop East/West on Spence
Street (Elm Drive)
Heckscher Boulevard at Spur
Drive North (PNR)
Stop South on Heckscher
Avenue
Heckscher Spur Drive at Jefferson
Street (EIS) [Amended 4-7-1987]
Stop South on Heckscher Spur
Drive; East/West on
Jefferson Street
Heidi Court at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 3-19-1991]
Stop West on Heidi Court
Helen Marie Place at Jane Road
(HPG)
Stop West on Jane Road
Helene Street at Rockaway Street
(NGR) [Added 9-19-1989;
amended 1-2-1991; 10-15-1991]
Stop East/West on Rockaway
Street; North/South on
Helene Street
Heller Place at Schneider Lane
(HPG) [Amended 11-17-2009]
Stop East/West on Schneider
Lane South on Heller
Place
Helmig Street at Melody Lane
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
Stop West on Melody Lane
Hemlock Drive at Lincoln
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Boulevard
+Hemlock Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
1-6-1981]
Stop East/West on Hemlock
Drive; North South on
Manatuck Boulevard
Hemlock Drive at North Gardiner
Drive (PNR) [Amended
12-18-2001]
Stop North/South on North
Gardiner Drive; West on
Hemlock Drive
Hemlock Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
Hemlock Drive at Plume Court
(PNR) [Added 12-11-2012]
Stop North on Plume Court
Hemlock Drive at Potter Boulevard
(PNR)
Stop North on Potter
Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1482
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hemlock Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop South on Hemlock Lane
Hemlock Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Hemlock Street
Hemlock Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Hemlock
Street
Hemlock Street at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
5-4-2004]
Stop East on Hemlock Street
Henry Avenue at Higbie Lane
(WIS)
Stop East on Henry Avenue
Henry Street at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Henry Street
Henry Street/Missouri Avenue at
Ohio Avenue (NBS) [Amended
1-29-2002]
Stop East on Missouri Avenue;
West on Henry Street;
North/South on Ohio
Avenue
Henry Street and Overton Street at
Lincoln Avenue (SVL) [Added
9-18-1979]
Stop East on Henry Street;
West on Overton Street
Henry Street at Paulanna Avenue
(BPT) [Added 9-9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Paulanna
Avenue; East on Henry
Street
Herbert Street at Roman Street
(ISL) [Added 4-4-1995]
Stop East on Herbert Street
Heritage Lane at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-15-1987;
amended 6-6-2000]
Stop East on Heritage Lane;
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Heritage Lane at Marseille Path
(SVL) [Added 11-15-2005]
Stop West on Heritage Lane
Herkimer Street at Saxon Avnue
(BSR)
Stop East on Herkimer Street
Hewes Street at Jefferson Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hewes
Street
Hewes Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hewes
Street
Hewes Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Hewes
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1483
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hewes Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Hewes Street
Heyward Street at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-4-1989]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue; East/West on
Heyward Street
Heyward Street at Lincoln Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 9-20-1988]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Heyward Street
+Heyward Street at Madison
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
11-20-1979]
Stop East/West on Heyward
Street; North/South on
Madison Avenue
Heyward Street at Par Lane North
(BWD)
Stop South on Par Lane North
Heyward Street at Par Lane South
(BWD)
Stop North on Par Lane South
Hiawatha Drive at Ridgeway
Boulevard (WBS) [Added
4-15-1980]
Stop East/West on Hiawatha
Drive
Hickory Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Hickory Street
Hickory Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 8-20-1985;
amended 10-17-1989]
Stop East on Hickory Street
Hickory Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Hickory
Street
Hiddink Street at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 12-14-2010]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Hiddink Street
Hiddink Street at Railroad Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Hiddink Street
Higbie Drive at Jean Road (WIS)
[Added 1-3-1984]
Stop East on Higbie Drive
Higbie Lane at Independence
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
1-26-2010]
Stop North/South on Higbie
Lane; East on
Independence Avenue
Higbie Lane at Jackson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Jackson Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1484
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Higbie Lane at Jefferson Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Jefferson Avenue
Higbie Lane at Kimberly Place
(WIS)
Stop West on Kimberly Place
Higbie Lane at Kline Street (WIS)
[Added 12-6-1994; amended
9-12-2000]
Stop North/South on Higbie
Lane; West on Kline
Street
Higbie Lane at driveway 50 feet
south of Kobb Boulevard
(Westbrook Elementary School)
(WIS) [Added 1-17-1978]
Stop East on driveway
Higbie Lane at Kurzon Road (WIS) Stop East on Kurzon Road
Higbie Lane at Madison Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Madison Avenue
Higbie Lane at Martin Drive (WIS)
[Amended 8-17-2010;
12-14-2010]
Stop West on Martin Drive;
North/South on Higbie
Lane
Higbie Lane at Monroe Avenue
(WIS) [Added 9-13-2005]
Stop East on Monroe Avenue
Higbie Lane at North Street (WIS) Stop East on North Street
Higbie Lane at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
11-17-1981; 4-13-2004]
Stop West on North Monroe
Avenue; North/South on
Higbie Lane
Higbie Lane at Raleigh Lane (WIS) Stop East on Raleigh Lane
Higbie Lane at Ruth Street (WIS) Stop West on Ruth Street
Higbie Lane at Washington Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Washington
Avenue
High Street at Johnson Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 10-2-1990]
Stop North/South on Johnson
Avenue; East/West on
High Street
High Street at Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 3-24-1992]
Stop West on High Street
Highland Road at West End Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on West End Avenue
Hilary Street at Jeffery Road (WSV)
[Added 9-16-1980]
Stop North on Jeffery Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1485
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hilary Street at Washington
Avenue (WSV) [Added
9-16-1980]
Stop North on Washington
Avenue
Hilary Stret at Weaver Road (WSV)
[Added 7-2-1985]
Stop South on Weaver Road
Hill Drive (east leg) at Nathan
Drive (BHM) [Added 7-2-1991]
Stop East on Hill Drive
Hilliard Avenue at Pineville Road
(CIS) [Added 5-5-2015]
Stop North on Pineville Road
Hilliard Avenue at Rose Street
(CIS)
Stop North on Rose Street
Hillside Avenue at Tower Street
(WSV)
Stop East/West on Tower
Street
Hilltop Drive at Melody Lane
(BWD) [Amended 1-5-1982;
9-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Melody
Lane; North/South on
Hilltop Drive
Hilltop Drive at Mockingbird Place
(BWD) [Amended 5-18-1982]
Stop East/West on Mockingbird
Place
Hilltop Drive at Oriole Place (BWD)
[Amended 1-5-1982; 10-8-2002]
Stop East/West on Oriole
Place; North/South on
Hilltop Drive
Hilltop Drive at Peacock Place
(BWD) [Amended 9-5-1978;
9-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Peacock
Place; North/South on
Hilltop Drive
Hilltop Drive at Pheasant Place
(BWD) [Amended 5-18-1982]
Stop East/West on Pheasant
Place
Hilltop Drive at Robin Hill Place
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Robin Hill
Place
Hilltop Drive at Sparrow Place
(BWD) [Amended 5-18-1982]
Stop East/West on Sparrow
Place
Hilltop Drive at Swan Place (BWD)
[Amended 9-5-1978]
Stop East/West on Swan Place
Hiram Avenue at Lillian Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Lillian
Boulevard
Hiram Avenue at Mohawk Place
(HBK)
Stop East/West on Mohawk
Place
Hiram Avenue at Terry Boulevard
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1486
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hiram Avenue at Twin Bark
Avenue (HBK)
Stop North/South on Hiram
Avenue
Hobart Street at Manistee Lane
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Hobart
Street
Hobart Street at Sherry Street
(EIS) [Added 4-2-2002]
Stop North on Hobart Street
Hoffman Lane at Newton Place
(HPG) [Added 12-18-1984]
Yield West on Newton Place
Hoffman Lane at Woods Edge
Court (HPG)
Stop West on Woods Edge
Court
Hollins Lane at Midwood Court
(EIS) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop North/South on Hollins
Lane; West on Midwood
Court
Hollister Lane at St. Marks Lane
(ISL) [Added 9-18-1984]
Stop East on Hollister Lane
Hollister Lane at South Bay
Avenue (ISL) [Added 3-1-1988]
Stop West on Hollister Lane
Holly Drive at Johnson Avenue
(SVL)
Stop West on Holly Drive
Holly Drive West at Johnson
Avenue (SVL)
Stop East on Holly Drive West
Hollywood Drive at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Stop South on Idle Hour
Boulevard
Hollywood Drive at Idle Hour
Boulevard (OKD)
Yield West turning north on
north spur of Hollywood
Drive
Hollywood Drive at Jade Street
(OKD)
Stop North on Jade Street
Hollywood Drive at Middlesex
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
9-19-1989]
Stop East/West on Middlesex
Avenue North/South on
Hollywood Drive
Hollywood Drive at Shore Drive
(OKD)
Stop East/West on Shore Drive
Holmes Avenue at Jaycox Avenue
(ISL) [Added 2-7-1984; amended
12-18-1984]
Stop West on Jaycox Avenue
Holmes Avenue at Moody Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop West on Moody Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1487
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Holmes Avenue at Root Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-20-1988]
Stop West on Root Avenue
Holmes Avenue at Shaw Avenue
(ISL) [Added 3-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Shaw
Avenue
Holmes Street at Macon Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 1-27-1998]
Stop East on Holmes Street;
North/South on Macon
Avenue
Holmes Street/Manton Street at
Lincoln Avenue (SVL) [Added
7-11-1989]
Stop East on Manton Street;
West on Holmes Street
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Homestead Road at Oakwood
Avenue (BPT) [Added 8-10-2004]
Stop East on Homestead Road
Hopkins Street at Johnson Avenue
(SVL) [Added 2-7-1984;
amended 10-2-1990]
Stop North/South on Johnson
Avenue; West on Hopkins
Street
Hopkins Street at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL) [Added 2-7-1984;
amended 7-11-1989]
Stop East on Hopkins Street;
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Hopkins Street at Nell Court (SVL)
[Added 8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on Hopkins
Street; South on Nell
Court
Hopkins Street at Timber Ridge
Court (SVL) [Added 4-2-1991;
amended 8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on Hopkins
Street; South on Timber
Ridge Court
Horton Street at Kime Avenue
(WIS) [Added 1-12-1994]
Stop South on Horton Street;
East/West on Kime
Avenue
Howells Road at Hyman Avenue
(WBS) [Added 1-17-1978]
Stop North/South on Hyman
Avenue
Howells Road at Manor Lane
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Howells
Road
Howells Road at Martinstein
Avenue (WBW)
Stop North/South on
Martinstein Avenue
Howells Road at Merriam Road
(WBW)
Stop South on Merriam Road
Howells Road at Stewart Street
(WBW)
Stop East on Stewart Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1488
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Howells Road at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Added 8-28-1979]
Stop North/South on
Thompson Drive
Howells Road at Winifred Street
(BSR)
Stop West on Winifred Street
Hubal Street at Locust Avenue
(BHM) [Added 10-10-2000]
Stop East on Hubal Street
Hubal Street at Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 9-16-1986]
Stop East/West on Hubal
Street; North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Hubal Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop West on Hubal Street
Hubbs Avenue at Lori Way (HPG)
[Added 8-30-1983]
Stop South on Hubbs Avenue
Hubbs Avenue at Wenwood Road
(HPG) [Added 8-30-1983;
amended 7-7-1987]
Stop East on Wenwood Road;
North/South on Hubbs
Avenue
Hudson Avenue at Loraine Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Loraine
Street
Hudson Avenue at Oakland Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Hudson
Avenue
Hudson Avenue at Rugby Street
(BWD) [Added 5-1-1979]
Stop North/South on Hudson
Avenue
Hudson Avenue at Stuyvesant
Street (BWD) [Added 1-5-1991]
Stop South on Hudson Avenue
Hudson Avenue at Thirteenth
Street (BHM) [Added 4-16-1985]
Stop North on Hudson Avenue
Hudson Avenue at Warren Street
(BWD) [Added 6-9-1998]
Stop East on Warren Street
Hummel Avenue at Lillian
Boulevard (HBK)
Stop East/West on Lillian
Boulevard
+Hummel Avenue at Terry
Boulevard (HBK)
Stop North/South on Hummel
Avenue
Hummel Avenue at Twin Bark
Avenue (HBK)
Stop East/West on Twin Bark
Avenue
Hunter Avenue at Morris Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North on Morris Avenue
Hunter Avenue at Toomey Road
(WIS)
Stop South on Toomey Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1489
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Huron Drive at Lombardy
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
6-7-1988]
Stop East on Huron Drive;
North/South on Lombardy
Boulevard
Huron Drive at Manatuck Drive
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Manor Lane (NBS)
[Amended 10-18-1988;
5-16-1989]
Stop North/South on Manor
Lane; East/West on Huron
Drive
Huron Drive at North Windsor
Avenue (NBS) [Added 8-28-1979]
Stop East/West on Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Peters Boulevard
(NBS) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Peters
Boulevard; East/West on
Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Pine Drive (NBS)
[Amended 4-5-1988]
Stop East/West on Huron
Drive; North/South on
Pine Drive
Huron Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Potter Boulevard
(NBS) [Amended 11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Potter
Boulevard; East/West on
Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Richland Boulevard
(NBS) [Amended 11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Richland
Boulevard; East/West on
Huron Drive
Huron Drive at Thompson Drive
(NBS) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop West on Huron Drive
Hyde Park Avenue at Pineaire
Drive (BWD)
Stop North on Hyde Park
Avenue
Hyman Avenue at Muncey Road
(WBS) [Amended 5-15-1990]
Stop North/South on Hyman
Avenue; East/West on
Muncey Road
Hyman Avenue at Orinoco Drive
(WBS)
Stop South on Hyman Avenue
Hyman Avenue at Runyon Street
(WBS) [Amended 11-17-1981]
Stop North/South on Hyman
Avenue
Hyman Avenue at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Amended 2-29-2000]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Hyman Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1490
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Hyman Avenue at Third Street
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Third Street
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
I Road at K Road (north
intersection) (CIS) [Added
5-6-1980]
Stop West on I Road
I Road at K Road (south
intersection) (CIS) [Added
5-6-1980]
Stop West on I Road
+Idaho Avenue at Illinois Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Idaho
Avenue; North/South on
Illinois Avenue
Idaho Avenue at Penataquit Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 2-4-2003]
Stop North/South on
Penataquit Avenue; West
on Idaho Avenue
Idle Hour Boulevard at Middlesex
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
12-6-1988]
Stop East/West on Middlesex
Avenue; North/South on
Idle Hour Boulevard
Idle Hour Boulevard at Quality
Street (OKD)
Stop West on Quality Street
Idle Hour Boulevard at Shore
Drive (OKD) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Shore Drive
Idle Hour Boulevard at Woodlawn
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
6-4-1996]
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue; North/South on
Idle Hour Boulevard
Illinois Avenue at Kentucky Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Kentucky
Avenue
+Illinois Avenue at Louisiana
Avenue (NBS) [Amended
5-1-1979]
Stop East/West on Louisiana
Avenue; North/South on
Illinois Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Massachusetts
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
5-27-2009; 6-23-2009]
Stop East/West on
Massachusetts Avenue;
North/South on Illinois
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1491
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Illinois Avenue at Missouri Avenue
(NBS)
Stop West on Missouri Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Montana Avenue
(NBS) [Added 9-24-2019]
Stop West on Montana Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Nevada Avenue
(NBS) [Added 3-28-2006]
Stop West on Nevada Avenue
+Illinois Avenue at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
[Amended 8-19-1980]
Stop East/West on New
Hampshire Avenue;
North/South on Illinois
Avenue
Illinois Avenue at New York Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 8-19-1980]
Stop South on Illinois Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Oregon Avenue
(NBS) [Added 2-4-2003]
Stop West on Oregon Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Rhode Island
Avenue (BWD) [Added
10-18-1988]
Stop West on Rhode Island
Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Spur Drive South
(NBS)
Stop North on Illinois Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Wisconsin
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
8-29-1989]
Stop North/South on Illinois
Avenue; East/West on
Wisconsin Avenue
Illinois Avenue at Wyoming Avenue
(NBS) [Added 2-4-2003]
Stop West on Wyoming Avenue
Inca Drive at Manatuck Boulevard
(NBS) [Added 12-13-2005]
Stop East on Inca Drive
Inca Drive at Pine Acres Boulevard
(NBS) [Added 11-15-1988]
Stop West on Inca Drive
Inca Drive at Richland Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Inca Drive
Inchcape Road at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Added 11-17-1992]
Stop East on Inchcape Road
+Indiana Avenue at New Jersey
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
5-15-2001]
Stop East/West on New Jersey
Avenue; North/South on
Indiana Avenue
Indiana Avenue at New York
Avenue (BWD) [Added
12-12-1995]
Stop East on New York Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1492
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Indiana Avenue at Pennsylvania
Avenue (BWD) [Added
6-13-2006]
Stop East on Pennsylvania
Avenue
Indiana Avenue at Spur Drive
North (BWD)
Stop South on Indiana Avenue
Inez Drive at Spence Street and a
curb cut opposite Inez Drive
(BWD) [Added 3-9-1999]
Stop North on curb cut South
on Inez Drive
Ingrid Court at Terry Road (HPG)
[Added 7-7-1992]
Stop East on Ingrid Court
Inlet Court at Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop West on Inlet Court
Ira Place at Renee Drive (north
intersection) (BPT) [Amended
8-30-1983]
Stop North on Ira Place
Ira Place at Renee Drive (south
intersection) (BPT) [Added
8-30-1983]
Stop South on Ira Place
Irish Lane at a drive 120 feet north
of Carey Street (EIS) [Added
5-5-1981]
Stop East on driveway
Irish Lane at Irving Place (EIS) Stop West on Irving Place
+Irish Lane at Islip Boulevard
(EIS) [Amended 4-15-1980]
Stop East/West on Islip
Boulevard
Irish Lane at Jackson Street (EIS)
[Added 8-29-1989]
Stop West on Jackson Street
Irish Lane at Karp Place (EIS) Stop West on Karp Place
Irish Lane at Madison Street (EIS) Stop West on Madison Street
Irish Lane at McKinley Street (EIS) Stop West on McKinley Street
Irish Lane at Roosevelt Street
(EIS) [Amended 4-15-1980]
Stop East/West on Roosevelt
Street; North/South on
Irish Lane
Irish Lane at driveways 250 feet
south of Union Boulevard
(Brookwood Hall) (EIS)
Stop East on driveways
Ironwood Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Ironwood Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1493
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ironwood Street at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Amended
7-18-1995]
Stop East/West on Ironwood
Street; North/South on
Wilson Boulevard
Iroquois Street at Mohican Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Iroquois
Street
Iroquois Street at Parkway
Boulevard (RNK)
Stop East/West on Iroquois
Street
Irving Street at Kenmore Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Irving Street
Irving Street at McKinney Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Irving Street
Irving Street at Peters Boulevard
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop South on Peters
Boulevard
Isabelle Street at North Park
Avenue (NBS) [Added 6-10-2003]
Stop East on Isabelle Street
Island Avenue at Pelham Drive
(BWD) [Added 10-22-2019]
Stop North on Island Avenue
Island Avenue at Roslyn Road
(BWD) [Amended 6-13-2006]
Stop East on Roslyn Road
Island Avenue at Winthrop Road
(BWD) [Amended 6-13-2006]
Stop North on Winthrop Road
Island Boulevard at Locust Avenue
(BHM)
Stop West on Island Boulevard
Island Boulevard at Oak Avenue
(BHM)
Stop North on Oak Avenue
Island Boulevard at Spruce Avenue
(BHM) [Added 1-17-1978;
amended 3-21-2000]
Stop East/West on Island
Boulevard; North/South
on Spruce Avenue
Island Boulevard at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Walnut
Avenue; East/West on
Island Boulevard
Islip Boulevard at Jefferson Avenue
(EIS)
Stop South on Jefferson Avenue
Islip Boulevard at Kunigunda Place
(EIS) [Amended 12-18-1984]
Stop North/South on
Kunigunda Place; East/
West on Islip Boulevard
Islip Boulevard at Park Place (EIS)
[Amended 12-18-1984]
Stop East/West on Islip
Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1494
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Islip Boulevard at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop South on Stellenwerf
Avenue
Islip Boulevard at Washington
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Islip Boulevard at Wilson Street
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Wilson
Street
Islip Parking Lot No. 1 exit onto
Grant Avenue (ISL) [Added
11-12-1996]
Stop East on parking lot exit
Islip Parking Lot No. 1 exit onto
Town Hall West (401 Main Street)
(ISL) [Added 11-12-1996]
Stop West on parking lot exit
into Town Hall west
Islip Parking Lot No. 3 Extension
at Islip Parking Lot No. 3 (40
Nassau Avenue) (ISL) [Added
10-5-1999]
Stop North on Lot No. 3
Extension; North exit/
entrance
Islip Parking Lot No. 3 Extension
at South Service Road (ISL)
[Added 10-5-1999]
Stop South on Lot No. 3
Extension; South exit/
entrance
Ithaca Street at St. Louis Avenue
(NBS) [Amended 1-25-2000]
Stop East/West on Ithaca
Street; North/South on St.
Louis Avenue
Ithaca Street at Saxon Avenue
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Ithaca
Street
Ivy Hill Road at Locust Avenue
(OKD) [Added 8-20-1985]
Stop East on Ivy Hill Road
Ivy Hill Road at Ocean Avenue
(OKD) [Added 8-20-1985]
Stop West on Ivy Hill Road
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
+Jackson Avenue at Jefferson
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
12-5-1987]
Stop East/West on Jackson
Avenue; North/South on
Jefferson Avenue
Jackson Avenue at Kimberly Place
(WIS)
Yield East on Kimberly Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1495
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Jackson Avenue at Lukens Avenue
(BWD)
Yield North on Lukens Avenue
Jackson Avenue at Madison Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Jackson
Avenue
Jackson Avenue at Monroe Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North on Monroe Avenue
Jackson Avenue at Quincy Place
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Quincy
Place
Jackson Avenue at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Jackson Avenue
Jackson Street at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS) [Amended
1-19-1993]
Stop North/South on
Stellenwerf Avenue; East/
West on Jackson Street
Jackson Avenue at Washington
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Jade Street at Quality Street (OKD)
[Added 11-17-2009]
Stop East on Quality Street
James Avenue at Princeton Street
(NBS) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop East on James Avenue
James Avenue at Sylvan Street
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Sylvan
Street
James Avenue at William Street
(NBS) [Added 4-7-1981]
Stop East/West on James
Avenue
James Street at Paulanna Avenue
(BPT) [Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on James
Street; North/South on
Paulanna Avenue
James Street at Winganhauppauge
Road (ISL) [Added 6-18-2013]
Stop East on James Street;
North/South on
inganhauppauge Road
Jamie Street at Montauk Avenue
(NGR)
Stop East on Jamie Street
Jane Road at Joyce Drive (HPG) Stop East on Jane Road
Jane Road at Queen Anne Place
(HPG)
Stop South on Queen Anne
Place
Jane Road at Woodbury Road
(HPG)
Stop South on Woodbury Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1496
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Janet Court/Janet Court East at
School House Lane (HPG) [Added
12-12-1995]
Stop East on Janet Court; West
on Janet Court East
Janice Lane at Oakland Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Janice Lane
Jay Court at Tom Farino Drive
(BHM) [Added 9-29-2009]
Stop East on Tom Farino Drive
Jaycox Avenue at Peckham Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Jaycox
Avenue
Jaycox Avenue at Roosevelt Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Jaycox
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at LeGrand
Street (BWD) [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 10-19-1993]
Stop South on Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at McKinley
Street (BWD) [Added
11-17-1981; amended
7-11-1989]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue; East/West on
McKinley Street
Jefferson Avenue at McKinley
Street (EIS)
Stop East/West on McKinley
Street
Jefferson Avenue at McWhorter
Street (BWD) [Added 7-16-2002]
Stop West on McWhorter
Street
Jefferson Avenue at Moffit
Boulevard (EIS) [Added
5-5-1981]
Stop South on Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Morris Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 9-7-1982]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Morris Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-16-1993]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue; East/West on
Morris Street
Jefferson Avenue at Morton Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-16-1996]
Stop East/West on Morton
Street; North/South on
Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Perry Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Perry Street
Jefferson Avenue at Pine Aire Drive
(EDG)
Stop North on Jefferson
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1497
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Jefferson Avenue at Roosevelt
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Roosevelt Street
Jefferson Avenue at Rutledge
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Rutledge
Street
Jefferson Avenue at Seymour
Avenue (EIS)
Stop South on Seymour Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Sherman
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Sherman
Street
Jefferson Avenue at South Second
Street (NBS) [Added
11-18-1986]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Stockton
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Stockton
Street
Jefferson Avenue at Taft Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-16-2002]
Stop West on Taft Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Thomas Street
(BWD) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop East/West on Thomas
Street
Jefferson Avenue at Udall Road
(WIS)
Stop East on Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Van Buren
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Van Buren
Street
Jefferson Avenue at Van Cedar
Street (BWD) [Amended
8-15-2000]
Stop East/West on Van Cedar
Street; North/South on
Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Walton Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-7-1981;
6-16-1993]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue; East/West on
Walton Street
Jefferson Avenue at West Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 5-5-1981;
amended 7-11-1989]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Whipple Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Whipple
Street
Jefferson Avenue at White Street
(BWD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue; East/West on
White Street
Jefferson Avenue at Wilson Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Wilson
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1498
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Jenkins Street at Robbins Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Jenkins
Street
Jensen Road at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 11-17-1992; amended
4-4-2000]
Stop East on Jensen Road;
North/South on Stein
Drive
Jensen Road at Wells Drive (BWD)
[Added 1-30-2001]
Stop West on Jensen Road;
North/South on Wells
Drive
Jericho Street at Pacific Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 6-18-2013]
Stop North/South on Pacific
Avenue; East/West on
Jericho Street
Jet Lane at Thunder Road (HTV)
[Added 1-2-1991; amended
5-4-2004]
Stop East on Jet Lane North/
South on Thunder Road
Jewel Street at Strong Street
(BWD) [Added 4-5-1983; added
12-18-2001]
Stop South on Strong Street
Jewel Street at Twin Lawns Avenue
(BWD) [Added 12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Jewel
Street; South on Twin
Lawns Avenue
Joan Road at Martinstein Avenue
(WIS) [Added 2-26-2008]
Stop South on Martinstein
Avenue
Joan Street at Ninth Avenue (LKL)
[Amended 5-16-1989]
Stop North/South on Ninth
Avenue; East/West on
Joan Street
Joan Street at Seventeenth Avenue
(RNK) [Added 10-21-1997;
amended 12-10-2013]
Stop West on Joan Street
Joan Street at Thirteenth Street
(RNK) [Amended 12-10-2013]
Stop North/South on
Thirteenth Street; East/
West on Joan Street
Joanne Drive at a bicycle path
opposite Bovie Court (HBK)
[Added 6-16-1981]
Stop South on the bicycle path
Joanne Drive at Windemere Road
(HBK) [Added 4-24-2007]
Stop South on Windemere
Road
John Street at MacArthur
Boulevard (HPG) [Amended
1-19-1999]
Stop North/South on
MacArthur Boulevard;
West on John Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1499
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
John Street at Radburn Drive
(HPG) [Added 1-3-1989]
Stop North on Radburn Drive
John Street at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM) [Added 6-18-1985]
Stop West on John Street
John Street at Village Lane (HPG)
[Added 2-1-1994]
Stop East on John Street
Johnson Avenue at Joseph Street
(SVL) [Added 5-16-1989]
Stop West on Joseph Street
Johnson Avenue at Juniper Avenue
(RNK)
Stop South on Juniper Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Laurel Drive
(SVL)
Stop West on Laurel Drive
Johnson Avenue at Locust Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Locust
Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Maria Court
(SVL) [Added 6-13-2006]
Stop East on Maria Court
Johnson Avenue at May Court
(RNK) [Added 12-15-2009]
Stop North on May Court
Johnson Avenue at Nichols Road
(ILN) [Amended 3-4-1986]
Stop East/West on Johnson
Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Nichols Road
(ILN) [Added 3-4-1986]
Yield North on north spur of
Johnson Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Pine Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Pine
Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Port Avenue
(RNK)
Stop South on Port Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Sampson
Avenue (RNK)
Stop South on Sampson
Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Sycamore
Avenue (RNK) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on Sycamore
Avenue
Johnson Avenue at Van Schack
Place (RNK) [Added 12-15-2009]
Stop South on Van Schack
Place
Johnson Avenue at Winmar Lane
(SVL) [Added 6-13-2006]
Stop East on Winmar Lane
Jones Drive at Palmer Drive (SVL) Stop North/South on Palmer
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1500
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Jones Drive at Sunset Drive (SVL) Stop East/West on Jones Drive
Joni Drive at Weaver Road (east
intersection) (SVL) [Added
2-9-2016]
Stop North on Joni Drive
Joni Drive at Weaver Road (west
intersection) (SVL) [Added
2-9-2016]
Stop West on Joni Drive
Jordan Street at St. Louis Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Jordan
Street
Joselson Avenue at Merriam Road
(WBW)
Stop South on Joselson Avenue
Joselson Avenue at Sonia Road
(EDG)
Stop North on Joselson Avenue
Joseph Avenue at Third Avenue
(NBS) [Added 3-28-2006]
Stop East on Third Avenue
Joseph Street at Lincoln Avenue
(SVL)
Stop East on Joseph Street
Joyce Drive at Woodbury Road
(HPG)
Yield West on Joyce Drive
Julbet Drive at Ort Court (SVL)
[Added 1-2-1979; amended
9-19-1989]
Stop East/West on Ort Court;
North/South on Julbet
Drive
Julbet Drive at Sunrise Drive (SVL)
[Added 9-15-1987]
Stop South on Julbet Drive;
East on Sunrise Drive at
east leg of Julbet Drive;
West on Sunrise Drive at
east leg of Julbet Drive
Julia Goldbach Avenue at Madison
Street (BHM) [Added 1-2-1990]
Stop East/West on Madison
Street; South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Julia Goldbach Avenue at Peconic
Street West (LKL)
Stop North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Julia Goldbach Avenue at Seventh
Street (BHM)
Stop North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
Julia Goldbach Avenue at Sixth
Street (LKL) [Added 3-16-1994;
amended 3-20-2001]
Stop East on Sixth Street;
North/South on Julia
Goldbach Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1501
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Julia Goldbach Avenue at Third
Street (LKL) [Amended
8-20-1996]
Stop East/West on Third
Street; North/South on
Julia Goldbach Avenue
Julie Crescent (north intersection)
at Lowell Avenue (CIS) [Added
1-5-1982]
Stop East on Julie Crescent
(north intersection)
Juniper Avenue at Springdale Drive
(RNK) [Amended 7-7-1987]
Stop North/South on Juniper
Avenue; East/West on
Springdale Drive
Juniper Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Juniper Lane
Juniper Street at Lowell Avenue
(CIS)
Stop West on Juniper Street
Juniper Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 8-14-2001]
Stop East on Juniper Street
Juniper Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Juniper
Street
Juniper Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop North on Wilson
Boulevard
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
K Road at S Road (south
intersection) (CIS) [Added
5-6-1980]
Yield East on S Road (south
intersection)
Kahle Street at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM) [Added 9-18-1984]
Stop West on Kahle Street
Kane Street at Martin Drive (WIS) Stop North on Kane Street
Kane Street at Ruth Street (WIS)
[Amended 3-6-1984]
Stop East on Ruth Street South
on Kane Street
Kane Street at shopping center
driveway located 225 feet north of
Sunrise Highway (WIS) [Added
8-27-2013]
Stop West on driveway
Karen Drive at Ronald Lane (SVL)
[Added 12-13-2005]
Stop South on Karen Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1502
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Karshick Street at Lafayette
Avenue (BHM) [Added
10-8-2013]
Stop North on Lafayette
Avenue
Karshick Street at Locust Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 5-6-1986]
Stop East/West on Karshick
Street; North/South on
Locust Avenue
Karshick Street at Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 5-6-1986]
Stop East/West on Karshick
Street; North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Karshick Street at Pond Road
(BHM) [Amended 9-20-1983;
11-20-1984]
Stop West on Karshick Street;
North/South on Pond
Road
Karshick Street at Sayville Avenue
(BHM) [Added 11-12-1996]
Stop North on Sayville Avenue
+Karshick Street at Smithtown
Avenue (BHM) [Amended
2-23-1988]
Stop East/West on Karshick
Street; North/South on
Smithtown Avenue
Karshick Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 12-3-1991]
Stop East/West on Karshick
Street; North/South on
Walnut Avenue
Katherine Place at Locust Avenue
(OKD) [Added 7-6-1982]
Stop East on Katherine Place
Katherine Place at Race Place
(OKD) [Added 12-6-1988]
Stop West on Katherine Place
Kathy Lane at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM) [Added 5-2-2001]
Stop East on Kathy Lane
Keith Lane at McElroy Street
(WIS) [Amended 1-3-1984;
11-18-1986; 8-27-2013]
Stop West on McElroy Street;
North/South on Keith
Lane
Keith Lane at Merritt Street (WIS) Stop East/West on Merritt
Street
Keith Lane at Ryan Street (WIS) Stop East on Ryan Street
Kelly Avenue at Peters Boulevard
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991;
amended 3-7-1995]
Stop East/West on Kelly
Avenue; North/South on
Peters Boulevard
Kelly Avenue at Pineview
Boulevard (CIS) [Added
4-16-1991]
Stop South on Pineview
Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1503
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Kelly Avenue at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop West on Kelly Avenue
Kempster Avenue at Saxon Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-15-1981]
Stop West on Kempster Avenue
Kenmore Street at St. Johns Street
(CIS) [Amended 7-10-2001]
Stop East/West on St. Johns
Street; North on Kenmore
Street
Kenmore Street and Parkview Lane
at Smith Street (CIS) [Amended
9-20-1988; 8-12-1997]
Stop East/West on Smith
Street; North on Parkview
Lane South on Kenmore
Street
Kensington Avenue at Railroad
Street (BPT) [Added 8-15-2006]
Stop North on Kensington
Avenue
Kenwood Drive at Norman Drive
(BHM) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop East on Norman Drive
Kenwood Drive at Seventh Street
(BHM) [Amended 10-18-1983;
7-5-1988]
Stop North/South on Kenwood
Drive; East/West on
Seventh Street
Kenwood Drive at Sunrise Road
(BHM) [Added 11-18-1980;
amended 4-7-1987]
Stop West on Sunrise Road;
North/South on Kenwood
Drive
Keswick Drive at Manistee Lane
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Keswick
Drive
Kime Avenue at Ward Street (WIS)
[Added 5-16-2000; amended
11-14-2000]
Stop East/West on Kime
Avenue; South on Ward
Street
King Street at Udall Road (WBW) Stop East on King Street
Kingdom Court at North First
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on North
First Street
Kingdom Court at North Second
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on North
Second Street
Kingdom Court at North Third
Street (RNK) [Added 9-7-1982]
Stop West on Kingdom Court
Kings Court/Kings Highway at
Ridgefield Road (HPG) [Added
4-12-1995]
Stop South on Ridgefield Road
Kings Road at Plymouth Road
(HPG)
Stop South on Plymouth Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1504
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Kingsland Avenue at Toomey Road
(WIS) [Added 1-14-2003]
Stop West on Kingsland
Avenue
Kirk Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop South on Kirk Avenue
Kirk Road at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 11-17-1992]
Stop East on Kirk Road
Kirkup Street at Tillie Street (BSR) Stop South on Kirkup Street
Kittyhawk Drive at Wilbur Place
(BHM) [Added 7-6-1982;
amended 5-3-1988]
Stop East on Kittyhawk Drive;
North/South on Wilbur
Place
Knickerbocker Avenue at
McCormick Drive (BHM) [Added
1-5-1988; amended 6-18-2013]
Stop North/South on
Knickerbocker Avenue;
East/West on McCormick
Drive
Knickerbocker Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (HBK) [Amended
3-19-2019]
Stop South on Knickerbocker
Avenue
Knob Hill Development access
roads at Richmond Boulevard
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Knob Hill
Development access
roads
Knoll Place at Voorhis Drive (BWD)
[Added 5-26-2015]
Stop South on Knoll Place
Knot Court at Saxon Avenue (NBS)
[Added 5-5-2015]
Stop West on Knot Court
Kobb Boulevard at Madison Street
(WIS) [Added 2-29-2000]
Stop West on Kobb Boulevard
Koehler Avenue at Locust Avenue
(RNK) [Added 4-10-2007]
Stop East on Koehler Avenue
Koehler Avenue at Ocean Avenue
(RNK) [Added 4-10-2007]
Stop West on Koehler Avenue
Korol Street at Perkal Street and
Third Avenue (BSR) [Amended
8-30-1995]
Stop East on Korol Street; West
on Perkal Street; North/
South on Third Avenue
Krause Street at Riley Street
(WBW) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop East/West on Krause
Street
Krause Street at Udall Road
(WBW)
Stop East on Krause Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1505
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Kristan Court at North Clinton
Avenue (NBS) [Added 9-19-1995]
Stop West on Kristan Court;
North/South on North
Clinton Avenue
Kukui Lane at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Kukui Lane
Kunigunda Place at Lincoln Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 12-19-1978]
Stop North/South on
Kunigunda Place; East/
West on Lincoln Avenue
Kunigunda Place at Nassau Street
(EIS) [Amended 6-2-1981;
12-12-1995]
Stop North/South on
Kunigunda Place; East/
West on Nassau Street
Kunigunda Place at Richard
Avenue (EIS) [Amended
3-3-1987]
Stop North/South on
Kunigunda Place; East/
West on Richard Avenue
Kunigunda Place at Roslyn Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 10-8-2013]
Stop North/South on
Kunigunda Place; East/
West on Roslyn Avenue
Kunigunda Place at Wantagh
Avenue South (EIS) [Amended
1-29-2002]
Stop East/West on Wantagh
Avenue South; South on
Kunigunda Place
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lafayette Avenue at St. Charles
Street (HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop North/South on St.
Charles Street
Lafayette Avenue at Thirteenth
Street (BHM)
Stop North/South on Lafayette
Avenue
Lagoon Place at Moffitt Boulevard
(ISL)
Stop South on Lagoon Place
Laird Place at Wallace Street (ISL) Stop West on Wallace Street
Lake Drive at North Washington
Avenue (RNK) [Added 7-6-1982]
Stop North on Lake Drive
Lake Street at Milton Street (ISL) Stop North/South on Milton
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1506
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lake Street at Roman Street (ISL)
[Added 4-4-1995; amended
2-27-2001]
Stop East/West on Lake Street;
North on Roman Street
Lake Street at South Shore Court
(ISL) [Added 9-7-2011]
Stop North on South Shore
Court
Lakeland Avenue (CR 93)
(southwest leg) at Ocean Avenue
(RNK) [Added 5-12-2020]
Stop South on Ocean Avenue
Lakeland Avenue at Manton Street
(SVL)
Stop East/West on Manton
Street
Lakeland Avenue at Marion Street
(SVL)
Stop East/West on Marion
Street
Lakemont Street at Saint Louis
Avenue (NBS) [Added 8-10-2004]
Stop West on Lakemont Street
Lake Shore Drive at Rosevale
Avenue (RNK)
Stop North/South on Lake
Shore Drive
Lake Shore Drive at Spruce Drive
(RNK) [Added 12-3-1991]
Stop West on Spruce Drive
Lake Shore Drive at Valley Drive
(RNK) [Added 9-19-1995]
Stop East on Valley Drive
Lake Shore Drive at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK) [Added 9-19-1995]
Stop South on Lake Shore
Drive
Lakeside Drive at Lincoln Drive
(OKD) [Added 7-18-1995;
amended 10-8-1996]
Stop East/West on Lincoln
Drive; South on Lakeside
Drive
Lakeside Drive at Russell Road
(OKD) [Added 7-7-1981;
amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Russell Road
Lakeview Avenue at Second Street
(WBS) [Added 5-15-1990]
Stop North on Lakeview
Avenue
Lakeview Avenue at entrance to
Senior Citizen complex 400 feet
north of Union Boulevard (BSR)
Stop North on Lakeview
Avenue
Lakeview Court at West First
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on West First
Street
Lakeview Court at West Second
Street (RNK) [Added 1-17-1978]
Stop North/South on West
Second Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1507
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lakeview Court at West Third
Street (RNK) [Added 1-27-2004]
Stop North/South on West
Third Street; West on
Lakeview Court
Languth Street at Sayville
Boulevard (SVL) [Added
10-10-2000]
Stop East on Languth Street
Languth Street at Sunrise Avenue
(SVL) [Added 6-5-1990]
Stop South on Sunrise Avenue
Lanson Street at Pond Road (BHM)
[Added 7-17-1979]
Stop West on Lanson Street
Lanson Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 7-17-1979]
Stop East on Lanson Street
Laurel Avenue at Woodland Drive
(EIS)
Stop East/West on Woodland
Avenue
Laurel Boulevard at West Fifth
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West Fifth
Street
Laurel Boulevard at West First
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West First
Street
Laurel Boulevard at West Fourth
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Fourth Street
Laurel Boulevard at West Second
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Second Street
Laurel Boulevard at West Sixth
Street (RNK)
Stop West on Laurel Boulevard
Laurel Boulevard at West Third
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Third Street
Laurel Drive at Logan Road (BWD)
[Added 2-25-1992]
Stop South on Logan Road
Laurel Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop East on Laurel Drive
Laurel Drive at Washington Avenue
(BWD)
Stop West on Laurel Drive
Laurie Road at Marsha Lane
(BWD)
Stop West on Laurie Road
Laurie Road at Michele Lane
(BWD)
Stop North on Michele Lane
Lawn Avenue at Parkwood Road
(WIS) [Added 2-26-1991]
Stop North on Lawn Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1508
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lawrence Avenue at Lee Street
(HPG)
Stop East/West on Lee Street
Lawrence Avenue at Nelson Street
(HPG) [Added 12-3-1991]
Stop North on Lawrence
Avenue
Lawrence Avenue at Ocean Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East on Lawrence Avenue
Lawrence Avenue at South Clinton
Avenue (BSR) [Added 4-24-2012]
Stop East on Lawrence
Avenue; North/South on
South Clinton Avenue
Lawrence Avenue at Terry Road
(HPG) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop South on Terry Road
Lawrence Lane at Manatuck Lane
(BSR) [Amended 4-24-2012]
Stop North/South on Lawrence
Lane; East/West on
Manatuck Lane
Lawrence Lane at O'Co-Nee Walk
(BSR)
Stop East on O'Co-Nee Walk
Lawrence Lane at West Lane (BSR) Stop East on West Lane
Leaf Avenue at Lemon Street (CIS) Stop East/West on Lemon
Street
Leaf Avenue at Olive Street (CIS)
[Amended 2-15-2005]
Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Leaf Avenue at Palm Street (CIS) Stop South on Leaf Avenue
Leaf Avenue at Palmetto Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Palmetto
Street
Leaf Avenue at Sage Street (CIS)
[Amended 9-9-2003]
Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Leaf Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS) [Amended 9-9-2003]
Stop North/South on Leaf
Avenue
Leeside Drive at New Street (GRV)
[Added 11-12-1996]
Stop West on New Street
Leeside Drive at River Road (GRV)
[Added 8-21-1984; amended
1-24-2017]
Stop South on Leeside Drive;
East/West on River Road
Leeside Drive at Timber Point
Road (GRV) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop South on Leeside Drive
Lee Street at Wedgewood Drive
(HPG) [Added 6-19-2012]
Stop East on Lee Street; North/
South on Wedgewood
Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1509
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
LeGrand Street at Madison Avenue
(BWD) [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 4-3-1990]
Stop East/West on LeGrand
Street; South on Madison
Avenue
Lemon Street at Root Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Lemon Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Lemon Street
Leopold Avenue at Muncey Avenue
(WIS)
Stop South on Leopold Avenue
Leopold Avenue at Norma Avenue
(WIS)
Stop West on Norma Avenue
Leopold Avenue at Rockaway
Street (WIS) [Amended
6-6-1978]
Stop North/South on Leopold
Avenue; East/West on
Rockaway Street
Lewis Place at Oakneck Road
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 12-12-1995]
Stop East on Lewis Place;
North/South on Oakneck
Road
Lexington Avenue at Orient Avenue
(See also Devon Road at Orient
Avenue) (BWD)
Stop West on Lexington
Avenue
Liberty Street at North Equestrian
Court and South Equestrian Court
(HPG) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop West on Liberty Street
Lilac Lane at Lumur Drive (SVL)
[Added 9-7-1999]
Stop East on Lilac Drive
Lincoln Avenue at Lincoln Avenue
Elementary School driveway 450
feet west of China Road (SVL)
[Added 1-15-1980]
Stop East on driveway
Lincoln Avenue at Ludlow Way
(OKD)
Stop West on Ludlow Way
Lincoln Avenue at McCormick
Drive (HBK) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop East on McCormick Drive
Lincoln Avenue at Morris Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-16-1993]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Morris Street
Lincoln Avenue at Morton Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-6-1978;
9-25-2012]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Morton Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1510
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lincoln Avenue at Ort Court (SVL)
[Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on Ort Court
Lincoln Avenue at Park Place (EIS)
[Amended 12-19-1978]
Stop North/South on Park
Place; East/West on
Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Paul Drive
(HBK) [Added 2-4-1997]
Stop West on Paul Drive
Lincoln Avenue at Peachtree Court
(HBK) [Added 6-23-2009]
Stop West on Peachtree Court
Lincoln Avenue at Perry Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Perry Street
Lincoln Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(EDG)
Stop North on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Railroad Avenue
(HBK)
Stop North on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Regina Drive
(SVL) [Added 8-21-2018]
Stop West on Regina Drive
Lincoln Avenue at Revere Drive
(SVL) [Added 5-16-1989]
Stop East on Revere Drive
+Lincoln Avenue at Roberts Street
(HBK) [Amended 12-18-1979]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; West on Roberts
Street
Lincoln Avenue at Rose Street
(SVL) [Amended 11-18-2014]
Stop West on Rose Street;
North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Rutledge Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Rutledge
Street
Lincoln Avenue at Schmidt Avenue
(HBK) [Added 1-17-1989]
Stop East on Schmidt Avenue;
South on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Seventh Street
(BHM)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Sherman Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Sherman
Street
Lincoln Avenue at South First
Street (EDG)
Stop East/West on South First
Street
Lincoln Avenue at Stockton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Stockton
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1511
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lincoln Avenue at Thomas Street
(BWD) [Added 4-7-1981;
amended 6-6-1989]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
Thomas Street
Lincoln Avenue at Van Buren
Street (BWD) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on Van Buren
Street
Lincoln Avenue at driveways 300
feet south of Veterans Highway
(SVL) [Added 1-17-1989;
amended 6-7-1994]
Stop East/West from driveways
Lincoln Avenue at Walton Street
(BWD) [Amended 9-20-1988]
Stop East/West on Walton
Street
Lincoln Avenue at Whipple Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Whipple
Street
Lincoln Avenue at White Street
(BWD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue; East/West on
White Street
Lincoln Avenue at Wilson Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Wilson
Street
Lincoln Boulevard at Locust Drive
(PNR)
Stop North on Lincoln
Boulevard
Lincoln Boulevard at Peach Place
(PNR) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Peach Place
Lincoln Boulevard at Richwood
Court (HPG) [Added 4-20-1999]
Stop West on Richwood Court
Lincoln Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Lincoln
Boulevard
Lincoln Drive at Lockwood Avenue
(OKD) [Amended 3-21-1989]
Stop East on Lockwood
Avenue; North/South on
Lincoln Drive
Lincoln Drive at Stuyvesant Road
(OKD)
Stop East/West on Stuyvesant
Road
Lincoln Place at West Fifth Street
(WIS) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop South on Lincoln Place
Lincoln Street at Muncey Road
(WIS)
Stop North on Lincoln Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1512
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Linden Place at Ocean Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 12-16-1997]
Stop East on Linden Place;
North/South on Ocean
Avenue
Linden Place at Ocean Avenue
(BPT)
Stop East on Linden Place
Lisa Lane at Marilyn Street (EIS) Stop West on Lisa Lane
Lisa Lane at Sherry Street (EIS)
[Added 4-18-2000; amended
9-12-2000]
Stop East on Lisa Lane; North/
South on Sherry Street
Live Oak Drive at a bicycle path
300 feet west of Acacia Drive
(HBK) [Added 6-16-1982]
Stop North/South on bicycle
path
Live Oak Drive at San Rafael
Avenue (east leg) (HBK) [Added
5-1-2001]
Stop East/West on Live Oak
Drive; South on San
Rafael Avenue
Live Oak Drive at San Rafael
Avenue (west leg) (HBK) [Added
5-1-2001]
Stop South on San Rafael
Avenue
Live Oak Drive at Singingwood
Drive (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop West on Live Oak Drive
Live Oak Drive at Springmeadow
Drive (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 2-23-1988]
Stop East on Live Oak Drive;
North/South on
Springmeadow Drive
Lockwood Avenue at Vanderbilt
Boulevard (OKD) [Added
11-20-1979; amended
3-15-1988]
Stop East/West on Lockwood
Avenue; North/South on
Vanderbilt Boulevard
Locust Avenue at McKinley Street
(ISL)
Stop East on McKinley Street
Locust Avenue at Michigan Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Michigan
Street
Locust Avenue at Ocean Avenue
and a driveway opposite Ocean
Avenue (OKD) [Added 6-7-1988]
Stop East on Ocean Avenue
West on BOCES driveway;
North/South on Ocean
Avenue
Locust Avenue at Peconic Street
(LKL) [Added 8-15-2006;
amended 2-24-2009]
Stop North/South on Locust
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1513
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Locust Avenue at Public Parking
Lot driveways 300 feet north of
Montauk Highway (ISL)
Stop East/West on Public
Parking Lot driveways
300 feet north of Montauk
Highway
Locust Avenue at Race Place and
Windmill Gate (OKD) [Added
7-10-2007]
Stop North/South on Locust
Avenue; West on Windmill
Gate; East on Race Place
Locust Avenue at Riverdale
Avenue/Meadow Court (OKD)
[Added 6-7-1988; amended
8-12-2003; 1-31-2012]
Stop East on Riverdale Avenue;
West on Meadow Court;
North/South on Locust
Avenue
Locust Avenue at St. John's Circle
(OKD) [Added 1-27-2004]
Stop East on St. John's Circle
Locust Avenue at South Friedner
Lane (BHM) [Added 7-13-1994]
Stop West on South Friedner
Lane
Locust Avenue at Union Street
(BHM) [Amended 5-6-1986]
Stop West on Union Street;
North/South on Locust
Avenue
Locust Avenue at Wall Street
(BHM) [Added 3-3-2015]
Stop West on Wall Street
Locust Avenue at Weichers Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Weichers
Avenue
Locust Avenue at West Golf Street
(BHM)
Stop West on West Golf Street
Locust Avenue at Wichard Drive
(OKD) [Added 6-7-1988]
Stop East on Wichard Drive
Locust Avenue at Windwood Road
(BHM) [Added 9-20-1983]
Stop East on Windwood Road
Locust Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK)
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue
Locust Boulevard at Oak Drive
(RNK) [Added 1-17-1978;
amended 11-20-1990]
Stop East/West on Oak Drive;
North/South on Locust
Boulevard
Locust Boulevard at Rosedale
Avenue (RNK) [Amended
9-21-1993]
Stop South on Locust
Boulevard
Locust Boulevard at Spruce Drive
(RNK) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop East/West on Spruce
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1514
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Locust Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
3-27-2007]
Stop East/West on Locust
Drive; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
Locust Drive at North Gardiner
Drive (PNR) [Amended 1-2-1990]
Stop North/South on North
Gardiner Drive; West on
Locust Drive
Locust Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
5-16-1989]
Stop East/West on Locust
Drive; North/South on
Pine Acres Boulevard
Locust Street at Mayflower Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 9-20-1983]
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue
Locust Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 2-26-1991]
Stop East on Locust Street;
North/South on Wilson
Boulevard
Lodi Street at Manhattan
Boulevard (EIS)
Stop South on Lodi Street
Lodi Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 2-9-2010]
Stop North/South on Olean
Street
Lodi Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Lodi Street
Lombardy Boulevard at Ontario
Drive (NBS) [Amended
6-18-2013]
Stop East on Ontario Drive;
North/South on Lombardy
Boulevard
Lombardy Boulevard at Oswego
Drive (NBS) [Amended 6-7-1987]
Stop East on Oswego Drive;
North/South on Lombardy
Boulevard
Long Island Avenue at Rodeo Drive
(EDG) [Added 8-15-2006]
Stop South on Rodeo Drive
Longshore Street at Riley Street
(WBW)
Stop East/West on Longshore
Street
Longshore Street at Udall Road
(WBW)
Stop East on Longshore Street
Loop Drive at Lucille Drive (SVL)
[Added 3-10-2009]
Stop West on Lucille Drive
Loop Drive at Ort Court (SVL)
[Added 5-5-1987]
Stop East on Ort Court
Loop Drive at Potomac Lane (SVL)
[Added 8-30-1988]
Stop South on Potomac Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1515
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Loop Drive at Sunrise Drive (SVL)
[Added 1-6-1987]
Stop East/West on Loop Drive
North on Sunrise Drive
Loop Drive at Wyandanch Road
(SVL) [Added 8-30-1988]
Stop North on Wyandanch
Road
Loraine Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Loraine Street
Loraine Street at Winfield Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Loraine
Street
Lorigan Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS) [Added 2-9-2010]
Stop South on Lorigan Street
Lorigan Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Lorigan Street
+Louis Kossuth Avenue at Peconic
Street (LKL)
Stop East/West on Peconic
Street; North/South on
Louis Kossuth Avenue
Louis Kossuth Avenue at Seventh
Street (BHM) [Amended
4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Louis Kossuth Avenue
Louis Kossuth Avenue at Sixth
Street (LKL) [Amended
5-3-1988]
Stop East/West on Sixth Street;
North/South on Louis
Kossuth Avenue
Louis Kossuth Avenue at Sunrise
Road (BHM)
Stop East/West on Sunrise
Road
Louis Kossuth Avenue at Third
Street (LKL) [Amended
3-20-2001]
Stop North/South on Louis
Kossuth Avenue; West on
Third Street
Louise Drive at Manatuck
Boulevard (PNR) [Added
4-4-1978]
Stop East on Louise Drive
Louise Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (PNR) [Added
3-20-1979]
Stop West on Louise Drive
Louisiana Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 9-7-1982]
Stop East on Louisiana Avenue
Louisiana Avenue at driveway 150
feet east of Penetaquit Avenue
(Newbrook Garden Apartments)
(NBS) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop South on driveway
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1516
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Louisiana Avenue at Penataquit
Avenue (NBS) [Amended
2-12-2013]
Stop North on Pennataquit
Avenue; East/West on
Louisiana Avenue
Lowell Avenue at Magnolia Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Magnolia Street
Lowell Avenue at North Greenlawn
Avenue (NGR) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop North on North
Greenlawn Avenue
Lowell Avenue at Oceanside Street
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Oceanside
Street
Lowell Avenue at Orange Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Orange Street
Lowell Avenue at Rockaway Street
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Rockaway
Street
Lowell Avenue at Rosewood Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Rosewood Street
Lowell Avenue at Satinwood Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Satinwood Street
Lowell Avenue at Seacliff Street
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Seacliff
Street
Lowell Avenue at Spruce Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Spruce Street
Lowell Avenue at driveway 190
feet north of Spruce Street
(Waldbaums warehouse) (CIS)
[Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on driveway
Lowell Avenue at driveway 390
feet north of Spruce Street
(Waldbaums warehouse) (CIS)
[Added 1-2-1979]
Stop West on driveway
Lowell Avenue at Tamarack Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Tamarack Street
Lowell Avenue at Willow Street
(CIS)
Stop West on Willow Street
Lowell Road at McNeil Street
(SVL) [Amended 1-3-1989]
Stop East/West on McNeil
Street; North/South on
Lowell Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1517
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Lowell Road at St. Lawrence
Street (SVL) [Amended
1-31-2006]
Stop East/West on St.
Lawrence Street; North/
South on Lowell Road
Lowell Road at Versa Place (SVL)
[Amended 3-16-2010]
Stop East/West on Versa Place;
North/South on Lowell
Road
Lowell Road at Wyandanch Road
(SVL) [Added 1-3-1989]
Stop East on Lowell Road
Lukens Avenue at McKinley Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Lukens
Avenue
Lukens Avenue at Oak Street
(BWD) [Amended 3-16-2010]
Stop East/West on Oak Street;
North/South on Lukens
Avenue
Lukens Avenue at Pine Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Lukens
Avenue
Lukens Avenue at Spruce Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
Lukens Avenue at Van Cedar
Street (BWD) [Amended
2-28-1978]
Stop North/South on Lukens
Avenue
Lumur Drive at Ronald Lane (SVL)
[Added 3-7-2006]
Stop North on Lumur Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
MacArthur Avenue (Clark Street)
at Marshall Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on MacArthur
Avenue; West on Clark
Street
MacArthur Avenue at McNair
Street (BWD) [Amended
4-7-1981; 7-16-2019]
Stop East/West on McNair
Street; North/South on
MacArthur Avenue
MacArthur Avenue at Merrill
Street (BWD) [Amended
4-7-1981; 11-17-1981]
Stop South on MacArthur
Avenue
MacArthur Avenue at Montgomery
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Montgomery
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1518
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
MacArthur Avenue at Patton Street
(BWD)
Stop East on Patton Street
MacArthur Avenue at Somerville
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Somerville Street
MacArthur Boulevard at a curb cut
410 feet north of Betty Place
(HPG) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop East on curb cut
MacArthur Boulevard at Timber
Ridge Drive (HPG) [Added
2-23-1993; amended 1-19-1999]
Stop East on Timber Ridge
Drive; North/South on
MacArthur Boulevard
MacArthur Street at Walnut
Avenue (BHM) [Added
10-3-1978]
Stop West on MacArthur Street
Macon Avenue at Overton Street
(SVL) [Added 2-27-1996]
Stop East/West on Overton
Street; South on Macon
Avenue
Macon Avenue at Regina Drive
(SVL)
Stop North on Macon Avenue
Maddox Avenue at Peckham
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop South on Peckham
Avenue
Maddox Avenue at Roosevelt
Avenue (ISL)
Stop East/West on Maddox
Avenue
Madeline Place at McCall Avenue
(WBS)
Stop East on Madeline Place
Madeline Place at Oakneck Road
(WBS)
Stop West on Madeline Place
Madison Avenue at McKinley
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on McKinley
Street
Madison Avenue at Montana
Avenue (NBS) [Added 7-5-1988]
Stop North on Madison Avenue
Madison Avenue at Morris Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Morris
Avenue
Madison Avenue at Morris Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Morris
Street
Madison Avenue at Morton Street
(BWD) [Amended 6-5-1990]
Stop North/South on Madison
Avenue; East/West on
Morton Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1519
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Madison Avenue at Oak Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Oak Street
Madison Avenue at Perry Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Perry Street
Madison Avenue at Pine Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Pine Street
+Madison Avenue at Rutledge
Street (BWD) [Amended
11-20-1979]
Stop East/West on Rutledge
Street
Madison Avenue at Sherman
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Sherman
Street
Madison Avenue at Spruce Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
Madison Avenue at Stockton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Stockton
Street
Madison Avenue at Thomas Street
(BWD) [Added 4-7-1981]
Stop East/West on Thomas
Street
Madison Avenue at Udall Road
(WIS)
Stop East on Madison Avenue
Madison Avenue at Van Buren
Street (BWD) [Amended
8-12-2003]
Stop East/West on Van Buren
Street; North/South on
Madison Avenue
Madison Avenue at Van Cedar
Street (BWD) [Amended
12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Madison
Avenue; East/West on Van
Cedar Street
Madison Avenue at Walton Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Walton
Street
Madison Avenue at Whipple Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Whipple
Street
Madison Avenue at White Street
(BWD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop North/South on Madison
Avenue; East/West on
White Street
Madison Avenue at Wilson Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Wilson
Street
Madison Street at Monroe Avenue
(WIS) [Added 6-6-2000]
Stop West on Monroe Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1520
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Madison Street on Ocean Avenue
(BHM) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop East on Madison Street;
North/South on Ocean
Avenue
Madison Street at Pine Avenue
(BHM)
Stop North/South on Pine
Avenue
Madison Street at Spur Drive
South (EIS)
Stop East on Madison Street
Madison Street at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Stellenwerf Avenue
Magnolia Street at Prospect
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on Magnolia
Street
Magoun Road at Shady Brook Lane
(WIS) [Added 12-8-1998]
Stop East/West on Magoun
Road; South on Shady
Brook Lane
Magoun Road at Skookwams Court
(WIS) [Added 10-18-2005]
Stop South on Skookwams
Court
Magoun Road at Tahlulah Lane
(WIS) [Amended 8-30-1983;
2-12-2013]
Stop East on Magoun Road;
North/South on Tahlulah
Lane
Magua Street at Mohican Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Magua
Street
Mallar Avenue at Saxon Avenue
(ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop West on Mallar Avenue
Malmac Court at Stanley Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 2-29-2000]
Stop North on Malmac Court;
East/West on Stanley
Street
Malts Avenue at Orinoco Drive
(WIS) [Amended 4-3-1979]
Stop South on Malts Avenue
Malts Avenue at Stanley Street
(WIS) [Amended 5-3-1988;
9-1-1993; 1-14-2003]
Stop East/West on Stanley
Street; North/South on
Malts Avenue
Malts Avenue at West Fourth
Street (WIS)
Stop East/West on West Fourth
Street
Manatuck Boulevard at Montauk
Drive (NBS) [Amended
8-27-2013]
Stop East on Montauk Drive;
North/South on Manatuck
Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1521
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
+Manatuck Boulevard at Ontario
Drive (NBS) [Amended 1-6-1981;
9-19-1989; 8-28-1990]
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
+Manatuck Boulevard at Oswego
Drive (NBS) [Amended
9-19-1989]
Stop East/West on Oswego
Drive; North/South on
Manatuck Boulevard
Manatuck Boulevard at Prospect
Place (PRN)
Stop East/West on Prospect
Place
Manatuck Boulevard at Sioux
Drive (NBS) [Added 12-13-2005]
Stop East on Sioux Drive
Manatuck Boulevard at Spur Drive
North (PNR)
Stop West on Spur Drive North
Manatuck Lane at West Lane
(BSR) [Added 9-16-1980]
Stop West on Manatuck Lane
Manhattan Boulevard at Natick
Street (EIS)
Stop South on Natick Street
Manhattan Boulevard at Olean
Street (EIS) [Amended
3-15-1988]
Stop South on Olean Street;
East/West on Manhattan
Boulevard
Manhattan Boulevard at Tenth
Street (Argosy Street) (EIS)
Stop North/South on Tenth
Street (Argosy Street)
Manistee Lane at Marilyn Street
(EIS) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Marilyn
Street; East/West on
Manistee Lane (traffic
circle)
Manistee Lane at Matinecock
Avenue (EIS) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop West on Manistee Lane
Manistee Lane at Meroke Lane
(EIS) [Amended 10-19-1982]
Stop North/South on Meroke
Lane
Manistee Lane at Overlook Drive
(EIS) [Amended 8-25-1992;
9-10-2002]
Stop East on Manistee Lane;
North/South on Overlook
Drive
Manistee Lane at Pequot Lane
(EIS) [Amended 7-18-1995]
Stop East/West on Manistee
Lane; North/South on
Pequot Lane
Manistee Lane at Sherry Street
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Sherry
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1522
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Manistee Lane at Simmons Drive
(EIS) [Amended 1-30-2001]
Stop East/West on Manistee
Lane; North/South on
Simmons Drive
Manistee Lane at Yuma Lane South
(EIS) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Yuma Lane
South
Manor Lane at Gardiner Shopping
Mall (north driveway) 230 feet
south of Sunrise Highway South
Service Road (BSR) [Added
10-8-1996]
Stop West on Gardiner Manor
Shopping Mall driveway
Manor Lane at Orinoco Drive
(WBS) [Amended 5-3-1983;
9-24-2013]
Stop South on Manor Lane;
East/West on Orinoco
Drive
Manor Lane at Penataquit Drive
(WBS)
Stop West on Penataquit Drive
Manor Lane at Poplar Place (NBS) Stop East/West on Poplar Place
Manor Lane at Runyon Street
(WBS) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop East on Runyon Street
Manor Lane at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Amended 9-21-1993]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Manor Lane
Manor Lane at Tern Court (north)
(WBS)
Stop East on Tern Court
(north)
Manor Lane at Tern Court (south)
(WBS)
Stop East on Tern Court
(south)
Manor Lane at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Added 4-23-2013]
Stop East on Thompson Drive
Manor Lane at Wohseepee Drive
(WBS) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop West on Wohseepee
Drive; North/South on
Manor Lane
Maple Avenue at Maple Court
(BSR)
Stop West on Maple Court
Maple Place at Pinewood Avenue
(CIS) [Added 7-11-1989]
Stop North on Maple Place
Maple Street at Monell Avenue
(ISL) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop South on Monell Avenue
Maple Street at Oak Street (CIS)
[Added 12-6-1977]
Stop South on Maple Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1523
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Maple Street at Ocean Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 9-20-1983]
Stop East/West on Maple
Street; North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Maple Street at St Mark's Lane
(ISL) [Amended 12-19-1978;
3-1-1983; 4-3-1990]
Stop East/West on Maple
Street
Maple Street at Smith Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 12-19-1989]
Stop North/South on Smith
Avenue; East/West on
Maple Street
*Maple Street at South Bay Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 10-1-1974]
Stop East/West on Maple
Street; North/South on
South Bay Avenue
Maple Street at Union Avenue
(ISL)
Stop North/South on Union
Avenue
Marconi Avenue at Smithtown
Avenue (LKL) [Added 2-2-1988]
Stop East on Marconi Avenue
Marconi Avenue at Pond Road
(LKL) [Added 8-30-1983;
amended 11-19-1985;
8-15-2006]
Stop East/West on Marconi
Avenue; North/South on
Pond Road
Marie Lane at Spruce Street (CIS)
[Added 11-20-2018]
Stop North on Marie Lane
Marilyn Street at Wensley Lane
(EIS) [Added 4-17-2001]
Stop West on Wensley Lane;
North/South on Marilyn
Street
Marilyn Street at Wyandotte Lane
(EIS) [Added 7-1-1980;
amended 11-16-1993]
Stop East on Wyandotte Lane;
North/South on Marilyn
Street
Mariner Circle at Snedecor Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 2-28-1989]
Stop East on Mariner Circle;
North/South on Snedecor
Avenue
Marlene Drive (east intersection)
at Sunrise Drive (SVL) [Added
6-7-1983]
Stop South on Marlene Drive
Marlene Drive (west intersection)
at Sunrise Drive (SVL) [Amended
6-7-1983]
Stop South on Marlene Drive
Marsha Lane South at New
Hampshire Avenue (BWD)
Stop South on Marsha Lane
South
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1524
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Marshall Avenue at McNair Street
(BWD) [Amended 10-25-2011]
Stop North/South on Marshall
Avenue; East/West on
McNair Street
Marshall Avenue at Merrill Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-10-2007]
Stop North/South on Marshall
Avenue; East/West on
Merrill Street
Marshall Avenue at Montgomery
Street (BWD) [Amended
1-15-2013]
Stop North/South on Marshall
Avenue; East/West on
Montgomery Street
Marshall Avenue at Patton Street
(BWD) [Amended 10-1-1991]
Stop East/West on Patton
Street; North/South on
Marshall Avenue
Marshall Avenue at St. Andrews
Drive (BWD) [Amended
2-14-2012]
Stop North/South on Marshall
Avenue; East/West on St.
Andrews Drive
Marshall Avenue at St. Peters
Drive (BWD)
Stop North on Marshall Avenue
Marshall Avenue at Somerville
Street (BWD)
Stop North/South on Marshall
Avenue
Marshall Avenue at Suffolk Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-10-2007]
Stop South on Marshall
Avenue; East/West on
Suffolk Avenue
Marshall Avenue at Yarnell Street
(BWD) [Amended 9-9-1997]
Stop East/West on Yarnell
Street; North/South on
Marshall Avenue
Martin Drive at Phyllis Place (WIS)
[Added 8-5-2014]
Stop North Phyllis Place
Martin Drive at Quincy Place (WIS) Stop South on Quincy Place
Martinstein Avenue at Stewart
Street (WBW) [Amended
1-15-2013]
Stop East/West on Stewart
Street; North/South on
Martinstein Avenue
Marvin Lane at Raymond Street
(ISL)
Stop South on Marvin Lane
Marvin Road at Stein Drive (BWD)
[Added 9-15-1992; amended
1-30-2001]
Stop East/West on Marvin
Road; North/South on
Stein Drive
Marvin Road at Wells Drive (BWD)
[Added 1-30-2001]
Stop North/South on Wells
Drive; West on Marvin
Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1525
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Maryland Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 1-3-1984;
amended 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Maryland Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue at Ohio
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on
Massachusetts Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue at Stein
Drive (BWD) [Amended
11-1-1988]
Stop East/West on
Massachusetts Avenue
Matice Place at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North on Pamlico Avenue
Matice Place at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North on Matice Place
Matinecock Avenue at Timber
Point Road (EIS)
Stop South on Matinecock
Avenue
Matinecock Avenue at Winona
Lane (EIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop West on Winona Lane
Matinecock Avenue at Wyandotte
Lane (EIS) [Added 3-20-1979;
amended 10-4-1994]
Stop West on Wyandotte Lane;
North/South on
Matinecock Avenue
Matthews Road at Michael Road
(WSV) [Added 2-25-1997]
Stop North on Michael Road
Matthews Road at Mina Road
(OKD) [Added 5-27-2009]
Stop North/South on Matthews
Road; West on Mina Road
Matthews Road at Windmill Road
(WSV) [Added 5-20-1997]
Stop South on Windmill Road
May Street at Penataquit Avenue
(BSR) [Added 2-6-1979]
Stop West on May Street
Mayflower Avenue at Peach Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-8-2014]
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue; East/
West on Peach Street
Mayflower Avenue at Pear Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue
Mayflower Avenue at West Orange
Street (BWD)
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue
Mayflower Avenue at West Plum
Street (BWD)
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue
Mayflower Avenue at West Willow
Street (BWD) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop North/South on
Mayflower Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1526
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Maynard Lane at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop North on Maynard Lane
Maystrik Avenue at St. Charles
Street (HBK) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Maystrik
Avenue
McCall Avenue at Second Street
(WIS) [Added 6-18-1991]
Stop West on Second Street
McCall Avenue at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Added 2-7-1984]
Stop North/South on McCall
Avenue
McCall Avenue at Third Street
(WBS) [Amended 1-21-1992]
Stop East/West on Third
Street; North/South on
McCall Avenue
McClellan Avenue at Princeton
Street (NBS) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop West on McClellan
Avenue
McConnell Avenue at Railroad
Street (BPT) [Added 6-18-1991]
Stop West on Railroad Street
McElroy Street at Milligan Lane
(WIS) [Amended 3-1-1983]
Stop East/West on McElroy
Street; North/South on
Milligan Lane
McElroy Street at Pat Drive (WIS)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
Stop East on McElroy Street;
North/South on Pat Drive
McElroy Street at Pease Lane
(WIS) [Amended 3-1-1983;
11-18-1986]
Stop East/West on McElroy
Street; North/South at
Pease Lane
McElroy Street at Peter Paul Drive
(WIS) [Amended 11-18-1986;
2-27-1996]
Stop North/South on Peter Paul
Drive
McElroy Street (west leg) at
Tanglewood Road (WIS)
[Amended 7-7-1987; 2-15-2005]
Stop East on McElroy Street
McElroy Street (east leg) at
Tanglewood Road (WIS) [Added
1-15-1985; amended
11-18-1986; 7-7-1987]
Stop West on McElroy Street;
North/South on
Tanglewood Road
McFarland Avenue at Oak Street
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop East/West on Oak Street
McFarland Avenue at O'Kane
Street (CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North on McFarland
Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1527
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
McFarland Avenue at Pine Street
[Added 4-16-1991]
Stop South on McFarland
Avenue
McFarland Avenue at Walnut
Street (CIS) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop North on McFarland
Avenue
+McGowan Lane at Oakland
Avenue (CIS)
Stop East/West on McGowan
Lane; North/South on
Oakland Avenue
McKinley Street at Monroe Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on McKinley
Street
McKinley Street at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East/West on McKinley
Street
McKinley Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on McKinley Street
McKinley Street at Washington
Avenue (EIS)
Stop East/West on McKinley
Street
McKinley Street at Watson Place
(ISL) [Added 3-24-1992]
Stop South on Watson Place
McKinley Street at Wheeler
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
2-6-2007]
Stop North/South on Wheeler
Avenue; East/West on
McKinley Street
McKinney Street at Oak Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Oak Street
McKinney Street at O'Kane Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on O'Kane
Street
McKinney Street at Pine Street
(CIS) [Amended 4-16-1991;
2-1-1994]
Stop East/West on Pine Street
McKinney Street at Smith Street
(CIS) [Amended 1-16-1990]
Stop North/South on McKinney
Street; East/West on
Smith Street
McKinney Street at Walnut Street
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Walnut
Street
McNair Street at Nimitz Avenue
(BWD) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop North on Nimitz Avenue
McNeil Street at Sayville
Boulevard (SVL) [Added
9-15-1987]
Stop East/West on McNeil
Street; North/South on
Sayville Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1528
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
McNeil Street at Seville Boulevard
(SVL)
Stop North/South on Seville
Boulevard
McNeil Street at Sunrise Avenue
(SVL) [Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop North/South on Sunrise
Avenue
McNeil Street at Wyandanch Road
(SVL) [Added 1-11-1995]
Stop South on Wyandanch
Road
McWhorter Street at Reese Avenue
(BWD) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop North on Reese Avenue
McWhorter Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on McWhorter Street
Meadowbrook Drive at
Meadowbrook Drive East (BWD)
Stop West on Meadowbrook
Drive East
Meadowbrook Drive at Second
Avenue (BWD)
Stop South on Meadowbrook
Drive
Meadow Creek Court at Meadow
Farm Road (EIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
Stop East on Meadow Creek
Court
Mechanicsville Road at Park
Avenue (BSR)
Stop East/West on
Mechanicsville Road;
North/South on Park
Avenue
Mechanicsville Road at Second
Avenue (BSR) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop South on Second Avenue
Mechanicsville Road at Smith
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North/South on Smith
Avenue
Mechanicsville Road at Third
Avenue (BSR) [Amended
8-30-1983; 5-27-2009;
6-23-2009]
Stop East on Mechanicsville
Road; North/South on
Third Avenue
Meeks Lane at Plum Place (ISL)
[Amended 12-18-1984]
Stop East/West on Plum Place
Melody Lane at Timberline Drive
(BWD) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop South on Timberline
Drive
Melody Lane at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop South on Westwood Drive
Menasha Lane at Timber Point
Road (EIS) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop North on Menasha Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1529
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Merion Road at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
3-3-1981]
Stop East/West on Merion
Road
Merion Road at Winthrop Road
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Winthrop
Road
Meroke Lane at Timber Point Road
(EIS)
Stop South on Meroke Lane
Meroke Lane at Wyandotte Lane
(EIS) [Amended 10-4-1994]
Stop East/West on Wyandotte
Lane; North/South on
Meroke Lane
Merriam Road at Nugent Avenue
(WBW) [Amended 1-17-1989]
Stop North/South on Nugent
Avenue; East/West on
Merriam Road
Merrill Street at Nimitz Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 10-1-1991]
Stop East/West on Merrill
Street; North/South on
Nimitz Avenue
Merritt Street at Milligan Lane
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Merritt
Street
Merritt Street at Pat Drive (WIS) Stop East on Merritt Street
Merritt Street at Pease Lane (WIS)
[Amended 3-7-2006]
Stop East/West on Merritt
Street; North/South on
Pease Lane
Merritt Street at Peter Paul Drive
(WIS)
Stop South on Peter Paul Drive
Merritt Street at South Briarwood
Avenue (WIS) [Added
11-17-1992]
Stop South on South
Briarwood Avenue
Merritt Street at South Chicot
Avenue (WIS) [Added
12-18-1984]
Stop North/South on South
Chicot Avenue
Merritt Street at South Dyre
Avenue (WIS) [Added
11-17-1992; amended
2-27-2007; 5-27-2014]
Stop West on Merritt Street;
South on South Dyre
Avenue
Messina Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 5-18-1982]
Stop West on Messina Street
Miami Road at Shore Road (OKD) Stop South on Miami Road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1530
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Michael Drive at Mina Road (OKD)
[Added 4-16-2019]
Stop South of Michael Drive
Michigan Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Michigan
Avenue
Michigan Street and Fir Grove
Road at Pine Avenue (RNK)
Stop West on Michigan Street;
East on Fir Grove Road
Michigan Street at Pond Road
(RNK)
Stop East on Michigan Street
Midwood Court at North Gillette
Avenue (BPT) [Added 1-17-1978;
amended 8-27-2013]
Stop East/West on Midwood
Court; North/South on
North Gillette Avenue
Midwood Court at Sylvan Avenue
(BPT) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North/South on Sylvan
Avenue; West on Midwood
Court
Milandy Street at Sparrow Place
(BWD) [Added 10-15-1991]
Stop East on Sparrow Place
Millenium Court at Smithtown
Avenue (BHM) [Added
2-15-2005]
Stop West on Millennium Court
Miller's Court at West First Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Miller's
Court
Milligan Lane at Ryan Street (WIS)
[Amended 3-27-2007]
Stop East/West on Ryan Street;
North/South on Milligan
Lane
Milton Street at Terry's Road (SVL)
[Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Milton Street
Mindres Avenue at Wheeler
Avenue (BWD) [Added
12-14-2004]
Stop South on Wheeler Avenue
Minerva Avenue at Orinoco Drive
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop South on Minerva Avenue
Minerva Avenue at Stanley Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop North on Minerva Avenue
Mississippi Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 9-7-1982]
Stop East on Mississippi
Avenue
Mobile Street at Terry's Road
(SVL) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Mobile Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1531
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Mockingbird Place at Peterson
Street (BWD) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop North on Peterson Street
Mockingbird Place at Timberline
Drive (BWD)
Stop East/West on Mockingbird
Place; North/South on
Timberline Drive
Mockingbird Place at Westwood
Drive (BWD) [Amended
3-15-1988; 3-25-2003]
Stop East/West on Mockingbird
Place; North/South on
Westwood Drive
Moffitt Boulevard at Robbins
Avenue (ISL) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop South on Robbins Avenue
Moffitt Boulevard at Roosevelt
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
6-6-1995]
Stop East/West on Moffitt
Boulevard; South on
Roosevelt Avenue
Moffitt Boulevard at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop South on Stellenwerf
Avenue
Moffitt Boulevard at Taylor Avenue
(EIS) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop South on Taylor Avenue
Moffitt Boulevard at William
Avenue (ISL)
Stop South on William Avenue
Moffitt Boulevard at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Amended
3-27-2007]
Stop South on Wilson
Boulevard; East/West on
Moffitt Boulevard
Mohawk Street at Mohican Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Mohawk
Street
Mohican Avenue at North Huron
Avenue (RNK)
Stop East/West on North
Huron Avenue
Mohican Avenue at North Ontario
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on North
Ontario Street
Mohican Avenue at Oneida Street
(RNK) [Amended 1-5-1982;
11-14-2000]
Stop East/West on Oneida
Street; North/South on
Mohican Avenue
Mohican Avenue at Pawnee Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Pawnee
Street
+Mohican Avenue at Richmond
Boulevard (RNK) [Amended
3-24-1992]
Stop North/South on Mohican
Avenue; East/West on
Richmond Boulevard
Mohican Avenue at Seneca Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Seneca
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1532
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Mohican Avenue at Sioux Street
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Sioux Street
Mohican Avenue at Uncas Street
(RNK)
Stop North on Mohican Avenue
Monell Avenue at Raymond Street
(ISL) [Amended 3-23-1999]
Stop East/West on Raymond
Street; North/South on
Monell Avenue
Monell Avenue at Second Street
(ISL)
Stop East on Second Street
Monroe Avenue at Oak Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Oak Street
Monroe Avenue at Oakwood
Boulevard (NBS) [Added
7-5-1988; amended 4-8-1997;
6-10-2008]
Stop South on Monroe Avenue;
East/West on Oakwood
Boulevard
Monroe Avenue at Pine Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Pine Street
Monroe Avenue at Spruce Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
Monroe Avenue at Van Cedar
Street (BWD)
Stop North/South on Monroe
Avenue
Montana Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(NBS) [Added 12-6-1983]
Stop South on Ohio Avenue
Montana Avenue at Washington
Avenue (NBS) [Added 3-9-1999]
Stop North on Washington
Avenue
Montauk Avenue at Oceanside
Street (NGR) [Amended
7-11-2000]
Stop East/West on Oceanside
Street; North/South on
Montauk Avenue
Montauk Avenue at Rockaway
Street (NGR)
Stop North/South on Montauk
Avenue
Montauk Avenue at Sea Cliff Street
(NGR)
Stop East/West on Sea Cliff
Street
Montauk Boulevard at Oakdale-
Bohemia Road (OKD) [Added
1-21-1992]
Stop West on Montauk
Boulevard
Montauk Drive at Peters Boulevard
(NBS) [Amended 10-25-2011]
Stop North/South on Peters
Boulevard; East/West on
Montauk Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1533
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Montauk Drive at Pine Drive (NBS)
[Amended 4-4-1995; 6-24-1997;
12-13-2005; 9-24-2013]
Stop North/South on Pine
Drive; East/West on
Montauk Drive
Montauk Drive at curb cut located
35 feet west of Pine Drive (NBS)
[Added 9-11-2012]
Stop North on curb cut
Montauk Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
Montauk Drive at Potter Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop North/South on Potter
Boulevard
Montauk Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
8-27-2013]
Stop North/South on Richland
Boulevard; East/West on
Montauk Drive
+Montauk Drive at Windsor
Avenue North (Baldwin Boulevard)
(NBS) [Amended 11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Windsor
Avenue North; East/West
on Montauk Drive
Moody Avenue at Peckham Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Moody
Avenue
Moody Avenue at Roosevelt
Avenue (ISL)
Stop East/West on Moody
Avenue
Morris Avenue at North Monroe
Avenue (WIS) [Amended
7-11-1989]
Stop South on Morris Avenue;
East/West on North
Monroe Avenue
Morris Avenue at Washington
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North/South on Morris
Avenue
Morris Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Morris Street
Morton Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Morton Street
Muncey Road at Oak Avenue (WIS) Stop North/South on Oak
Avenue
Muncey Road at Pine Avenue (WIS) Stop North/South on Pine
Avenue
Muncey Road at Sagtikos
Recreation Center driveway (WBS)
Stop South on Sagtikos
Recreation Center
driveway
Muncey Road at Spruce Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North on Spruce Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1534
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Muncey Road at Thompson Drive
(WBS)
Stop South on Thompson Drive
Muncey Road at Washington Place
(WIS)
Stop North on Washington
Place
Muncey Road at Wilson Place
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Wilson
Place
Mur Place at Voorhis Drive (BWD) Stop North on Mur Place
Myrtle Avenue at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Amended 8-14-2007]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Myrtle Avenue
Myrtle Avenue at Third Street
(WBS) [Amended 1-15-2013]
Stop East/West on Third
Street; North/South on
Myrtle Avenue
Myson Street at Spruce Avenue
(WIS) [Added 2-4-2003]
Stop East on Myson Street
Mystic Circle at Wohseepee Drive
(WBS) [Added 12-19-1989]
Stop North on Mystic Circle
Mystic Oaks Drive at Orinoco Drive
(WBS)
Stop South on Mystic Oaks
Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Namdac Avenue at Runyon Street
(WBS)
Stop North/South on Namdac
Avenue
Napoli Street at Nicoll Avenue
(CIS) [Added 6-7-1994]
Stop West on Napoli Street
Nassau Avenue at Islip Railroad
Station access road (South Lot,
Parking Field No. 9) (ISL) [Added
5-15-2018]
Stop West on access road
Nassau Avenue at driveway 40 feet
north of Manitton Court (Islip
Parking Field No. 6) (ISL)
Stop West on driveway
Nassau Avenue at Town Hall Circle
(ISL) [Added 10-2-1984]
Stop West on Town Hall Circle
Nassau Avenue at Vail Street (ISL) Stop West on Vail Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1535
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Nassau Street at Park Place (EIS)
[Amended 7-7-1987; 5-1-1990]
Stop East/West on Nassau
Street; North/South on
Park Place
Natick Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS)
Stop East/West on Rodney
Avenue
Natick Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Natick Street
Naugatuck Lane at Woodland
Drive (EIS)
Stop East on Naugatuck Lane
Nelson Street at Walter Avenue
(HPG) [Added 1-25-2000]
Stop West on Nelson Street
Nelson Street/Wayne Street at
Wedgewood Drive (HPG)
[Amended 6-19-2012]
Stop East on Nelson Street;
West on Wayne Street;
North/South on
Wedgewood Drive
Nemeth Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Added 12-3-1991]
Stop West on Nemeth Street
Nestle Court at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM) [Added 4-28-2009]
Stop East on Nestle Court
Newman Street/Nolin Street at
Peacock Place (BWD) [Added
6-19-2012]
Stop South on Newman Street
New Street at Provost Avenue
(GRV) [Added 7-11-1978]
Stop West on Provost Avenue
New Street at River Road (GRV)
[Added 2-11-2014]
Stop South on New Street;
East/West on River Road
New Street at Wilton Court (GRV)
[Added 4-8-2014]
Stop West on Wilton Court
New Street at Woodhollow Road
(GRV) [Amended 11-14-2000]
Stop East/West on New Street;
North/South on
Woodhollow Road
New Hampshire Avenue at Stein
Drive (BWD) [Amended
1-30-2001]
Stop East/West on New
Hampshire Avenue;
North/South on Stein
Drive
New Jersey Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-5-1983]
Stop East/West on New Jersey
Avenue; North/South on
Ohio Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1536
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
New York Avenue at Ohio Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on New York
Avenue
Niagara Street at Saxon Avenue
(BSR)
Stop West on Niagara Street
Nichols Road at North Connecting
Road (CIS) [Added 11-20-1979]
Stop East on North Connecting
Road
Nichols Road at Pacific Street
(CIS)
Stop East on Pacific Street
Nichols Road at Richmond
Boulevard (RNK)
Stop West on Richmond
Boulevard
Nichols Road at San Juan Drive
(RNK) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East/West on San Juan
Drive
Nichols Road at Seusing Boulevard
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Seusing
Boulevard
Nichols Road at South Bedford
Avenue (CIS) [Amended
4-4-1978]
Stop South on South Bedford
Avenue
Nichols Road at Split Cedar Drive
(CIS) [Amended 4-4-1978]
Stop South on Split Cedar
Drive
Nichols Road at Teddy Court
(HPG) [Added 3-23-1999]
Stop West on Teddy Court
Nicole Court at Sal Court (BHM)
[Added 10-13-2010]
Stop East on Sal Court
Nicoll Avenue at Sportsmen Street
(Oak Street) and Willow Street
(CIS) [Amended 12-6-1977;
5-15-2001]
Stop East on Willow Street;
North/South on Nicoll
Avenue; West on
Sportsmen Street (Oak
Street)
Nicoll Avenue at Orange Street
(CIS)
Stop South on Nicoll Avenue
Nicoll Avenue at Poplar Street
(CIS)
Stop East on Poplar Street
Nicoll Avenue at Spruce Street
(CIS) [Added 5-3-1988]
Stop East on Spruce Street
Nimbus Road at Rime Lane (HBK)
[Added 7-15-2008]
Stop West on Rime Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1537
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Nimbus Road at Thunder Road
(HBK) [Added 1-21-1992;
amended 5-4-2004]
Stop East/West on Thunder
Road; South on Nimbus
Road
Nimbus Road at Waco Lane (HBK)
[Added 9-11-2012]
Stop East on Waco Lane;
North/South on Nimbus
Road
Nimitz Avenue at Patton Street
(BWD) [Amended 7-16-2019]
Stop North/South on Nimitz
Avenue; East/West on
Patton Street
Nimitz Avenue at Suffolk Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 4-10-2007]
Stop South on Nimitz Avenue;
East/West on Suffolk
Avenue
Nimitz Avenue at Yarnell Street
(BWD) [Amended 4-1-1986]
Stop North/South on Nimitz
Avenue; East/West on
Yarnell Street
Nineteenth Avenue at Peconic
Street West (LKL) [Added
4-30-1996]
Stop South on Nineteenth
Avenue
Ninth Avenue at Owens Street
(BWD) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North on Owens Street
Ninth Avenue at Peconic Street
West (LKL) [Added 6-3-1980]
Stop South on Ninth Street
Ninth Avenue at Second Street
(BWD) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North/South on Second
Street
Ninth Avenue at Southport Street
(LKL) [Added 1-17-1978;
amended 8-11-1998]
Stop East/West on Southport
Street; North/South on
Ninth Avenue
Ninth Avenue at Third Street and
driveway opposite Third Street
(BWD) [Added 12-16-2003;
amended 4-5-2005]
Stop South on Third Street;
North on driveway
opposite Third Street
Ninth Avenue at Thrift Street
(LKL) [Added 5-18-1994]
Stop North on Ninth Avenue
Nob Hill Development access road
at Nichols Road (RNK) [Added
5-6-1986]
Stop West on Nob Hill
Development access road
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1538
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Nob Hill Development access
roads at Richmond Boulevard
(RNK) [Added 10-14-2009]
Stop North/South on Nob Hill
Development access
roads; East/West on
Richmond Boulevard
Norma Avenue at Rockaway Street
(WIS)
Stop East on Rockaway Street
North Street at West Street (WIS)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop North on West Street
North Briarwood Avenue at North
Dyre Avenue (WIS) [Added
9-9-2008]
Stop North on North
Briarwood Avenue
North Connecting Road at Shafter
Street (CIS)
Stop North/South on Shafter
Street
North Fifth Street and West Fifth
Street at Victory Drive (RNK)
Stop South on North Fifth
Street; North on West
Fifth Street
North Fire Road at Spur Drive
North (BWD)
Stop West on North Fire Road
North First Street and West First
Street at Victory Drive (RNK)
Stop South on North First
Street; North on West
First Street
North Fourth Street and West
Fourth Street at Victory Drive
(RNK)
Stop South on North Fourth
Stree; North on West
Fourth Street
North Gardiner Drive at Pineaire
Drive (PNR) [Amended
11-17-1981]
Stop North on North Gardiner
Drive
North Greenlawn Avenue at
Oceanside Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Oceanside
Street
North Greenlawn Avenue at
Rockaway Street (NGR)
[Amended 2-7-1989]
Stop East/West on Rockaway
Street; North/South on
North Greenlawn Avenue
North Greenlawn Avenue at
Seacliff Street (NGR)
Stop East/West on Seacliff
Street
North Greenlawn Avenue at Seal
Road (NGR) [Amended
1-18-1983]
Stop South on North
Greenlawn Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1539
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
North Greenlawn Avenue at Valley
Stream Street (NGR) [Amended
5-1-1990]
Stop East/West on Valley
Stream Street; North/
South on North
Greenlawn Avenue
North Monroe Avenue at Quincy
Place (WIS) [Amended
6-19-2012]
Stop North on Quincy Place;
East on North Monroe
Avenue
North Monroe Avenue at Udall
Road (WIS)
Stop East on North Monroe
Avenue
North Ocean Avenue at Ontario
Street (RNK)
Stop East on Ontario Street
North Ocean Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK) [Added 6-5-1979;
amended 9-20-1983]
Stop South on North Ocean
Avenue
North Ontario Avenue at Parkway
Boulevard (RNK) [Amended
6-6-1989]
Stop East/West on North
Ontario Avenue; North/
South on Parkway
Boulevard
North Park Avenue at Trim Street
(NBS) [Added 9-15-1992]
Stop West on Trim Street
North Second Street and West
Second Street at Victory Drive
(RNK)
Stop South on North Second
Street; North on West
Second Street
North Seventh Street and West
Seventh Street at Victory Drive
(RNK)
Stop South on North Seventh
Street; North on West
Seventh Street
North Sixth Street and West Sixth
Street at Victory Drive (RNK)
[Amended 12-17-1991]
Stop North/South on North
Sixth Street and West
Sixth Street; East/West on
Victory Drive
North Third Street and West Third
Street at Victory Drive (RNK)
[Amended 12-17-1991]
Stop South on North Third
Street; North on West
Third Street; East/West
on Victory Drive
North Thompson Drive at Pineaire
Drive (EDG)
Stop North on North
Thompson Drive
North Thompson Drive at Sonia
Road (EDG) [Added 11-17-1981;
amended 4-22-1986]
Stop East on Sonia Road;
North/South on North
Thompson Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1540
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
North Thompson Drive at South
Fourth Street (EDG) [Added
8-12-2008]
Stop East on South Fourth
Street
North Thompson Drive at Third
Street (WBW) [Added 6-4-1996]
Stop East on Third Street;
North/South on North
Thompson Drive
North Windsor Avenue at Ontario
Drive (NBS) [Added 12-18-1984;
amended 11-1-1984]
Stop North/South on North
Windsor Avenue; East/
West on Ontario Drive
Northfield Road at Plymouth Road
(HPG)
Stop West on Northfield Road
Northfield Road at Ridgefield Road
(north) (HPG) [Amended
1-5-1982; 2-27-2001]
Stop East on Ridgefield Road;
North/South on Northfield
Road
Northfield Road at Ridgefield Road
(south) (HPG) [Amended
1-5-1982]
Stop West on Northfield Road
Nostrand Avenue at Vita Drive
(CIS) [Added 1-3-1989]
Stop East on Nostrand Avenue
Nostrand Avenue at Willoughby
Street (BWD) [Amended
6-19-2012]
Stop East/West on Nostrand
Avenue; North/South on
Willoughby Street
Nugent Avenue at Sonia Road
(EDG)
Stop North on Nugent Avenue
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Oak Avenue at West First Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop South on Oak Avenue
Oak Avenue at West Second Street
(WIS) [Added 5-18-1982]
Stop East/West on West Second
Street
Oak Avenue at West Third Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop East/West on West Third
Street
Oak Road at Seaman Avenue (BPT)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Stop South on Seaman Avenue
Oak Street at Ocean Avenue (BPT) Stop West on Oak Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1541
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Oak Street at Park Avenue (BSR)
[Added 1-15-1980]
Stop East on Oak Street
Oak Street at West Drive (BSR) Stop South on West Drive
Oak Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 5-4-2004]
Stop East on Oak Street
Oakdale Avenue at Pineville Road
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Pineville
Road
Oakdale Avenue at Rose Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Rose
Street
Oakdale Avenue at Stein Drive
(CIS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on Stein
Drive
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at Oakdale
Railroad Station curb cut (OKD)
[Added 2-7-1995]
Stop East on Railroad Station
curb cut
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at Oakdale
Railroad Station Parking Lot exit
(OKD)
Stop East on Oakdale Railroad
Station Parking Lot exit
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at
Oakwood Road (OKD)
Stop East/West on Oakwood
Road
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at Viking
Court (OKD) [Added 11-16-1982]
Stop West on Viking Court
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at
apartment driveway 200 feet south
of Viking Court (BHM) [Added
7-11-1978]
Stop East on apartment
driveway
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at
Waterford Road (OKD) [Amended
5-27-2009]
Stop North/South on Oakdale-
Bohemia Road; West on
Waterford Road
Oakdale-Bohemia Road at Wilshire
Lane (OKD) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop West on Wilshire Lane
Oakland Avenue at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Oakland Street
Oakland Street at Windfield
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Oakland
Street
Oakneck Road at Orinoco Drive
(WBS) [Amended 10-2-1990;
9-24-2013]
Stop South on Oakneck Road;
East/West on Orinoco
Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1542
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Oakneck Road at Runyon Street
(WBS) [Amended 3-8-2016]
Stop North on Oakneck Road
Oakneck Road at Seventh Street
(WBS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 11-15-1988;
11-14-2006]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Oakneck Road
Oakneck Road at Third Street
(WBS)
Stop East/West on Third Street
Oakridge Drive at Spur Drive
North (BWD) [Added
10-18-1983]
Stop North on Oakridge Drive
Oakton Avenue at Vanderbilt
Boulevard (OKD) [Amended
5-15-1990]
Stop East/West on Oakton
Avenue; North/South on
Vanderbilt Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue at Orinoco Drive
(WIS) [Added 9-7-1982;
amended 9-24-2013]
Stop South on Oakwood
Avenue; East/West on
Orinoco Drive
Oakwood Avenue at Railroad
Street (BPT)
Stop East/West on Railroad
Street
Oakwood Avenue at Railroad
Street (BPT)
Yield North on Oakwood
Avenue, turning east on
east spur of Oakwood
Avenue
Oakwood Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD) [Added 12-6-1977;
amended 11-17-1981;
5-18-1982; 12-6-1983]
Stop East/West on Oakwood
Avenue
Oakwood Boulevard and
Washington Avenue at curb cut
entrance to shopping center (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983; amended
12-16-1986; 5-20-2003]
Stop North on curb cut; South
on Washington Avenue
Oakwood Boulevard (Brook Street)
at St. Louis Avenue (NBS)
Stop North/South on St. Louis
Avenue
Oakwood Boulevard at Senior
Citizens Complex east roadway
(NBS) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop North on Senior Citizens
Complex east roadway
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1543
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Oakwood Road at Waterford Road
(OKD) [Added 4-5-1983;
amended 6-7-1988]
Stop South on Oakwood Road;
East/West on Waterford
Road
Ocean Avenue at Ocean Avenue
Extension (ISL)
Stop East on Ocean Avenue
Extension
Ocean Avenue at Orowoc Avenue
(ISL)
Stop West on Orowoc Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Pond Road (BHM) Stop North on Pond Road
Ocean Avenue at President Street
(OKD)
Stop North on President Street
Ocean Avenue at Raymond Street
(ISL) [Amended 1-5-1982;
12-12-1995]
Stop East/West on Raymond
Street; North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Ridgewood Street
(WIS) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop East/West on Ridgewood
Street; North/South on
Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Rockaway Street
(WIS) [Amended 4-17-1990]
Stop North/South on Ocean
Avenue; East/West on
Rockaway Street
Ocean Avenue at Saltmeadow Lane
(BPT)
Stop East/West on Saltmeadow
Lane
Ocean Avenue at Shirley Lane
(BHM) [Added 3-16-2010]
Stop East on Shirley Lane
Ocean Avenue at Stewart Street
(WBW)
Stop East/West on Stewart
Street
Ocean Avenue at The Lane (BPT)
[Amended 1-5-1982; 12-6-1994]
Stop West on The Lane; North/
South on Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Third Street
(RNK) [Added 5-12-2020]
Stop East/West on Third
Street; South on Ocean
Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Union Parkway
(LKL) [Added 7-11-2000]
Stop West on Union Parkway
Ocean Avenue at Vita Drive (CIS)
[Added 2-1-1994]
Stop East on Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue at West Bayberry
Road (ISL)
Stop South on Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Westwind Drive
(BHM) [Added 1-7-1986]
Stop East on Westwind Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1544
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ocean Avenue at Wichard Drive
(WSV) [Added 7-5-1988]
Stop West on Wichard Drive;
North/South on Ocean
Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Willoughby
Street (BWD)
Stop East/West on Ocean
Avenue
Ocean Avenue at Windwood Road
(BHM) [Added 3-16-1994;
amended 10-9-2001]
Stop North/South on Ocean
Avenue; West on
Windwood Road
Oceanview Avenue at Riverview
Avenue (OKD)
Stop South on Riverview
Avenue
Oceanview Avenue at Roxbury
Avenue (OKD)
Stop South on Roxbury Avenue
Oceanview Avenue at Roxbury
Court (OKD)
Stop North on Roxbury Court
Oceanview Avenue at Shore Drive
(OKD) [Amended 12-6-1988]
Stop West on Oceanview
Avenue; North/South on
Shore Drive
Oceanview Avenue at Tower Mews
(OKD) [Added 7-15-2008]
Stop South on Tower Mews
Oceanview Drive at Riverview
Court (OKD) [Added 11-17-2009]
Stop North on Riverview Court
Oconee Walk at West Lane (BSR)
[Added 9-24-1996]
Stop West on Oconee Walk
Ohio Avenue at Pennsylvania
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on
Pennsylvania Avenue
Ohio Avenue at Rhode Island
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East/West on Rhode
Island Avenue
Ohio Avenue at Spur Drive North
(BWD)
Stop South on Ohio Avenue
Ohio Avenue at Spur Drive South
(NBS)
Stop North on Ohio Avenue
Ohio Avenue at Vermont Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Vermont Avenue
Oklahoma Avenue at Stein Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Oklahoma
Avenue
Old Broadway Avenue at Old
Montauk Highway (SVL) [Added
12-13-2005]
Stop East on Old Montauk
Highway
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1545
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Old Post Road at Terry Road (HPG)
[Added 12-6-1977]
Stop South on Old Post Road
Old Railroad Avenue at Smithtown
Avenue (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
Stop South on Old Railroad
Avenue
Olean Street at Rodney Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 3-16-2010]
Stop North/South on Olean
Street
Olean Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Olean Street
Olive Court at Spruce Avenue
(WIS) [Added 7-7-1987]
Stop East on Olive Court
Olive Street at Root Avenue (CIS)
[Amended 2-15-2005]
Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Olive Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Olive Street
Omni Lane at Thunder Road (HTV)
[Added 1-2-1991]
Stop East on Omni Lane
Oneida Street at Victory Drive and
West Eighth Street (RNK) [Added
1-5-1982]
Stop North on West Eighth
Street; East on Oneida
Street
O'Neill Avenue at Redington Street
(BSR)
Stop North/South on O'Neill
Avenue
O'Neill Avenue at Tillie Street
(BSR)
Stop North on O'Neill Avenue
Ontario Drive at Peters Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive
Ontario Drive at Pine Drive (NBS)
[Amended 6-3-1980]
Stop West on Ontario Drive
Ontario Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
2-12-2013]
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive; North/South on
Pine Acres Boulevard
Ontario Drive at Potter Boulevard
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Drive
Ontario Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Richland
Boulevard; East/West on
Ontario Drive
Ontario Street at Pamlico Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1546
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Ontario Street at Pine Avenue
(RNK) [Added 7-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Ontario
Street; North/South on
Pine Avenue
Ontario Street at Port Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Ontario
Street
Opal Street at Parkside Street
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Parkside
Street
Opal Street at Parkside Street
(west intersection) (HBK) [Added
10-3-1978]
Stop North on Opal Street
Orange Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop South on Prospect Avenue
Orange Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 6-21-2011]
Stop East/West on Orange
Street; North/South on
Wilson Boulevard
Orient Avenue [Added
3-10-2020]
Stop East on Stuyvesant
Avenue
Orinoco Drive at Patricia Avenue
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 9-24-2013]
Stop South on Patricia Avenue;
East/West on Orinoco
Drive
Orinoco Drive at Ridgeway
Boulevard (WBS) [Added
1-3-1989]
Stop South on Ridgeway
Boulevard
Orinoco Drive at Sandra Avenue
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 9-24-2013]
Stop South on Sandra Avenue;
East/West on Orinoco
Drive
Orinoco Drive at Thompson Drive
(WBS)
Stop South on Thompson Drive
Orleans Street at Saxon Avenue
(BSR) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop West on Orleans Street
O'Rourke Street at Palmer Street
(BWD)
Stop North on Palmer Street
Ort Court at Swindon Row (SVL)
[Added 9-18-1979; amended
12-18-2001]
Stop East/West on Ort Court;
North on Swindon Row
Orville Drive at Wilbur Place
(north leg) (BHM)
Yield East on Wilbur Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1547
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Orville Drive at Wilbur Place
(south leg) (BHM)
Yield East on Wilbur Place
Oswego Drive at Pine Acres
Boulevard (NBS) [Amended
11-1-1988]
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard; East/
West on Oswego Drive
Oswego Drive at Richland
Boulevard (NBS)
Stop East/West on Oswego
Drive
Otis Road at Seley Cross Street
(NGR) [Added 11-18-2014]
Stop East on Seley Cross
Street
Oversouth Lane at a driveway 270
feet west of Candee Avenue (SVL)
[Added 9-1-1993]
Stop East on the driveway
Owens Drive at Tenth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Tenth
Avenue
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pacific Avenue at Westbury Street
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Pacific
Avenue
Pacific Street at Prime Place (HPG)
[Added 1-25-2000]
Stop South on Pacific Street
Palm Street at Root Avenue (CIS) Stop South on Root Avenue
Palm Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Palm Street
Palmetto Street at Root Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Palmetto Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East on Palmetto Street
Pamlico Avenue at Shelter Road
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Pamlico
Avenue
Pamlico Avenue at Springdale
Drive (RNK) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop East on Springdale Drive
Pamlico Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Pamlico
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1548
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pamoqua Lane at Tahlulah Lane
(WIS) [Amended 9-9-2003]
Stop East/West on Pamoqua
Lane; North/South on
Tahlulah Lane
Pamoqua Lane at Wagstaff Lane
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Pamoqua
Lane
Pamoqua Lane at Willets Lane
(WIS) [Added 5-23-2017]
Stop East on Pamoqua Lane
Pandora Drive at Par Lane (BWD)
[Added 9-20-2016]
Stop South on Par Lane
Pandora Drive at Par Lane South
(BWD) [Added 4-5-1983;
amended 11-17-1992]
Stop North on Par Lane South
Pansmith Lane at Secatogue Lane
(WIS) [Added 4-29-2008;
amended 11-18-2008]
Stop East on Pansmith Lane
Paprocki Avenue at West Islip
Boulevard (WIS) [Amended
8-20-1985]
Stop South on Paprocki Avenue
Park Avenue at Pine Court (BWD) Stop East/West on Pine Court
Park Avenue at Railroad Plaza
(BSR) [Added 1-15-1980]
Stop West on Railroad Plaza
Park Avenue at Service Road
(north of Main Street) (BSR)
Stop East/West on Service
Road (north of Main
Street)
Park Avenue at Wood Street (BWD) Stop East/West on Wood Street
Park Place at Richard Avenue (EIS)
[Amended 7-13-2004]
Stop East/West on Richard
Avenue; North on Park
Place
Park Place at Roslyn Street (EIS)
[Amended 9-7-2011]
Stop North/South on Park
Place; East/West on
Roslyn Street
Park Place at Wantagh Avenue
South (EIS)
Stop South on Park Place
Parkview Way at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 5-4-1993]
Stop West on Parkview Way
Parkway Boulevard at Pawnee
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on Pawnee
Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1549
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Parkway Boulevard at Seminole
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on Seminole
Street
Parkway Boulevard at Seneca
Street (RNK)
Stop East/West on Seneca
Street
Parkway Gardens Boulevard at
Orchard Street (HPG)
Stop East/West on Orchard
Street
Parkway Gardens Boulevard at
Rose Street (HPG) [Amended
9-24-1996]
Stop East/West on Rose Street
North/South on Parkway
Gardens Boulevard
Parkway Gardens Boulevard at
Terry Road (HPG)
Stop North on Parkway
Gardens Boulevard
Parkway Gardens Boulevard at
Valencia Street (HPG)
Stop East/West on Valencia
Street
Parkway Gardens Boulevard at
Yerk Street (HPG)
Stop East on Yerk Street
Parkwood Street at Terry Road
(RNK)
Stop East/West on Parkwood
Street
Pat Drive at Peter Paul Drive (WIS)
[Amended 11-15-1983]
Stop East on Peter Paul Drive
Pat Drive at Ryan Street (WIS)
[Amended 6-6-1989]
Stop East on Ryan Street;
North/South on Pat Drive
Pauchogue Avenue at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop South on Pauchogue
Avenue
Paulanna Street at William Street
(BPT) [Added 10-18-1988]
Stop South on Paulanna Street
Pawnee Street at Richmond
Avenue (RNK)
Stop West on Pawnee Street
Peach Place at Potter Boulevard
(PNR) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East/West on Peach Place
Peach Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Peach Street
Peacock Place at Timberline Drive
(BWD) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop North/South on
Timberline Drive
Peacock Place at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Peacock
Place
Pear Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Pear Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1550
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pearl Street at Smithtown Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 5-3-1988]
Stop East on Pearl Street
Pearl Street at Terry Road (RNK) Stop East on Pearl Street
Pearl Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM)
Stop North/South on Walnut
Avenue
Pease Lane at Ryan Street (WIS)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
Stop East/West on Ryan Street;
North/South on Pease
Lane
Peck Avenue at Pineaire Drive
(BWD)
Stop North on Peck Avenue
Peckham Avenue at Root Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Peckham
Avenue; East/West on
Root Avenue
Peckham Avenue at Shaw Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Shaw
Avenue
+Peconic Street at Pond Road
(LKL) [Amended 8-28-1979]
Stop East/West on Peconic
Street; North/South on
Pond Road
Peconic Street at Sycamore
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
12-14-2010]
Stop North/South on Sycamore
Avenue; East on Peconic
Street
Peconic Street at Walnut Avenue
(LKL) [Added 7-11-1978]
Stop South on Walnut Avenue
Peconic Street West at driveways
470 feet east of First Avenue (LKL)
[Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on driveways
Peconic Street West at Pine Avenue
(LKL)
Stop North/South on Pine
Avenue
Peconic Street West at
Seventeenth Avenue (LKL)
Stop South on Seventeenth
Avenue
Peconic Street West at Thirteenth
Avenue (LKL) [Amended
10-21-2008]
Stop North/South on
Thirteenth Avenue; East/
West on Peconic Street
West
Pelham Drive at Standish Road
(BWD)
Stop South on Pelham Drive
Pelham Drive at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Pelham Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1551
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Penataquit Avenue at Railroad
Place (BSR)
Stop East on Railroad Place
Penataquit Avenue at South Court
(BSR) [Amended 1-5-1982;
11-12-1996]
Stop East/West on South Court
North/South on
Penataquit Avenue
Penataquit Avenue at a curb cut 75
feet south of Sunrise Highway
(BSR) [Added 4-3-2001]
Stop West on curb cut
Penataquit Avenue at Tillie Street
(BSR) [Amended 2-7-1988]
Stop East/West on Tillie Street;
North/South on
Penataquit Avenue
Penataquit Drive at Pine Drive
(WBS) [Added 10-25-2011]
Stop North/South on Pine
Drive; East on Penataquit
Drive
Penataquit Drive at Ridgeway
Boulevard (WBS) [Added
1-3-1989]
Stop North on Ridgeway
Boulevard
Pennsylvania Avenue at Prospect
Drive (BWD) [Amended
9-19-1995]
Stop North/South on
Pennsylvania Avenue;
East/West on Prospect
Drive
Pepperidge Road at Russell Road
(OKD) [Added 5-7-1985]
Stop North/South on
Pepperidge Road
Pequot Lane at Timber Point Road
(EIS)
Stop South on Pequot Lane
Pequot Lane at Wyandotte Lane
(EIS) [Amended 5-27-2009;
6-23-2009]
Stop North/South on Pequot
Lane; East/West on
Wyandotte Lane
Percy Williams Court at Percy
Williams Court South (EIS)
[Added 7-15-2003]
Stop East/West on Percy
Williams Court; North on
Percy Williams Court
South
Percy Williams Drive at Suffolk
Lane (EIS) [Added 7-6-1982]
Stop East on Percy Williams
Drive
Perkal Street at Ross Avenue (BSR)
[Added 11-21-1978]
Stop East/West on Perkal
Street
Perkal Street at Second Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 8-15-2000]
Stop East/West on Perkal
Street; North/South on
Second Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1552
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Perry Street at Washington Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Perry Street
Peter Lane at Westminster Drive
(BHM) [Added 12-6-1994]
Stop East on Peter Lane
Peter Paul Drive at Ryan Street
(WIS) [Amended 6-7-1988]
Stop East/West on Ryan Street;
North/South on Peter Paul
Drive
Peters Boulevard at Potter Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop West on Potter Avenue
Peters Boulevard at St. Johns
Street (CIS)
Stop North/South on Peters
Boulevard
Peterson Street at Poe Lane (BWD) Yield West on Peterson Street
Pheasant Place at Timberline Drive
(BWD) [Amended 4-20-1999]
Stop East on Pheasant Place
Pheasant Place at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Pheasant
Place
Phyllis Place at Ruth Street (WIS)
[Added 11-18-2008]
Stop South on Phyllis Place
Pine Avenue at Roderick Road
(east intersection) (WIS) [Added
12-6-1977; amended 1-25-2011]
Stop South on Pine Avenue
Pine Avenue at Roderick Road
(west intersection) (WIS) [Added
1-25-2011]
Stop North on Pine Avenue;
East/West on Roderick
Road
Pine Avenue at Shelter Road (RNK) Stop East on Shelter Road
Pine Avenue at Shirley Street
(BHM) [Added 3-5-2002]
Stop North on Pine Avenue
Pine Avenue at Stanley Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979]
Stop South on Pine Avenue
Pine Avenue at Sylvia Drive (WIS)
[Added 9-7-1982]
Stop East on Sylvia Drive
Pine Avenue at Third Street (LKL) Stop South on Pine Avenue
Pine Avenue at West Fifth Street
(WIS)
Stop East/West on West Fifth
Street
Pine Avenue at West First Street
(WIS) [Amended 10-7-1997]
Stop East/West on West First
Street; North/South on
Pine Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1553
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pine Avenue at West Fourth Street
(WIS) [Added 2-26-2008]
Stop South on Pine Avenue
Pine Avenue at West Second Street
(WIS) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop East/West on West Second
Street
Pine Avenue at Westminster Lane
(WIS) [Added 12-6-1977]
Stop East/West on Westminster
Lane
Pine Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK)
Stop East on Wildwood Road
Pine Drive at Poplar Place (NBS)
[Added 8-17-2010]
Stop East on Poplar Place
Pine Street at West Pine Street
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop North on West Pine Street
Pine Street at Whitman Avenue
(ISL)
Stop West on Pine Street
Pine Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 4-24-2012]
Stop East on Pine Street
Pine Acres Boulevard at Pineaire
Drive (PNR)
Stop North on Pine Acres
Boulevard
Pine Acres Boulevard at Prospect
Place (PNR)
Stop North/South on Pine
Acres Boulevard
Pine Acres Boulevard at Sioux
Drive (NBS)
Stop West on Sioux Drive
Pine Acres Boulevard at Spur
Drive South (NBS)
Stop North on Pine Acres
Boulevard
Pine Aire Drive at Washington
Avenue (EDG) [Added 2-24-2009]
Stop North on Washington
Avenue
Pine Grove Boulevard at Prospect
Place (PNR)
Stop North/South on Pine
Grove Boulevard
Pineaire Drive at Pine Grove
Boulevard (PNR)
Stop North on Pine Grove
Boulevard
Pineaire Drive at Princess Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North on Princess Avenue
Pineaire Drive at Savoy Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North on Savoy Avenue
Pineaire Drive at Wells Drive
(BWD)
Stop North on Wells Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1554
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pinedale Drive at Radburn Drive
(HPG) [Added 11-19-1985]
Stop South on Radburn Drive
Pinedale Road at Sparton Lane
(HPG) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop North on Sparton Lane
Pinedale Road at Village Lane
(HPG) [Added 3-20-1979]
Stop East on Pinedale Road
Pineview Boulevard at Potter
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop East on Potter Avenue
Pineview Boulevard at St. Johns
Street (Baldwin Avenue) (CIS)
[Amended 1-30-2001]
Stop East/West on St. Johns
Street (Baldwin Avenue);
North/South on Pineview
Boulevard
Pineville Road at Storey Avenue
(CIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on Pineville
Road
Pineville Road at William Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Pineville
Road
Piper Lane at Westminster Drive
(BHM) [Added 12-6-1994]
Stop East on Piper Lane
Pleasant Street at Terry Road
(RNK) [Amended 9-29-2009]
Stop North/South on Terry
Road; East on Pleasant
Street
Plum Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Plum Street
Plunkett Street at Radcliff Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Radcliff
Drive
Plunkett Street at Second Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Plunkett
Street
Plunkett Street at Stepney Lane
(BWD) [Added 12-17-2019]
Stop North on Stepney Lane
Poet Place at Resiak Court (HBK)
[Added 12-6-1994]
Stop West on Resiak Court
Pond Road at Second Street and a
curb cut opposite South Second
Street (LKL) [Added 7-14-1998]
Stop East on curb cut West on
South Second Street
Pond Road at South Fourth Street
(LKL) [Added 1-25-2000]
Stop West on South Fourth
Street
Pond Road at Village Lane (BHM)
[Added 6-16-1992]
Stop East on Village Lane
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1555
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Pond Road at Weichers Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East on Weichers Avenue
Pond Road at West Eleventh Street
(RNK)
Stop East on West Eleventh
Street
Pond Road at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK)
Stop East on Woodlawn Avenue
Poplar Street at Prospect Avenue
(CIS) [Amended 2-26-2008]
Stop North/South on Prospect
Avenue; East/West on
Poplar Street
Poplar Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Poplar
Street
Port Avenue at Shelter Road (RNK) Stop East/West on Shelter
Road
Port Avenue at Springdale Drive
(RNK) [Amended 9-21-1993]
Stop North/South on Port
Avenue; East/West on
Springdale Drive
Port Avenue at Wildwood Road
(RNK) [Amended 10-18-1983]
Stop North/South on Port
Avenue; East/West on
Wildwood Road
Post Office Road at School House
Road and service entrance to
Heckscher State Park (EIS)
[Added 11-14-2000]
Stop North on service entrance
to Heckscher State Park
Potomac Street at Raft Avenue
(SVL) [Added 9-20-1983;
amended 9-16-1986]
Stop South on Raft Avenue
President Street at Riverdale
Avenue (OKD) [Added 6-2-1981]
Stop South on President Street
President Street at Woody Lane
(OKD) [Added 3-24-1992]
Stop East on Woody Lane
Princeton Street at Sylvan Street
(NBS) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop East on Sylvan Street
Princeton Street at Whitman
Avenue (ISL)
Stop East on Princeton Street
Princeton Street at William Street
(NBS) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop East on William Street
Prospect Avenue at Rosewood
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Rosewood
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1556
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Prospect Avenue at Satinwood
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Satinwood
Street
Prospect Avenue at South Clinton
Avenue (BSR) [Added 8-21-2018]
Stop East on Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue at Tamarack
Street (CIS)
Stop East/West on Tamarack
Street
Prospect Avenue at Willoughby
Street (BWD) [Amended
11-1-1988]
Stop North on Willoughby
Street; East/West on
Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue at Willow Street
(CIS) [Amended 12-6-1977]
Stop East/West on Willow
Street; North/South on
Prospect Avenue
Prospect Place at Westwood
Boulevard (PNR) [Amended
10-17-1995]
Stop West on Prospect Place
Prospect Place at Woodcrest Drive
(HPG) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North on Prospect Place
Prospect Street at Ridge Avenue
(CIS) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop North/South on Prospect
Street
Prospect Street at Woodland
Avenue (CIS) [Added
11-18-1980]
Stop East/West on Woodland
Avenue
Provost Street at Widgeon Court
(GRV) [Amended 7-14-2015]
Stop North/South on Widgeon
Court; East/West on
Provost Street
Public Road at Terry Road (HPG)
[Amended 12-6-1977]
Stop North on Public Road
Pueblo Court at Versa Place (SVL) Stop North/South on Pueblo
Court
Purdy Avenue at South Snedecor
Avenue (BPT) [Added 1-17-1978]
Stop East/West on Purdy
Avenue
Purick Street at Sylvan Avenue and
school driveway (BPT) [Amended
2-3-1981; 5-3-1988]
Stop East on school driveway
West on Purick Street;
North/South on Sylvan
Avenue
Purick Street at Terrace Road
(access road for Bayport Terrace
Apartments) (BPT)
Stop North on Terrace Road
(access road for Bayport
Terrace Apartments)
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1557
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Quail Drive at Par Lane North
(BWD) [Added 9-20-2016]
Stop North on Par Lane
Quail Drive at Swallow Lane
(BWD) [Added 9-21-1993]
Stop South on Swallow Lane
Quail Drive at West White Street
(BWD) [Amended 11-17-1981;
12-16-2003]
Stop East/West on West White
Street; North on Quail
Drive
Quail Run at Sandpiper Lane (EIS)
[Added 2-15-2005]
Stop West on Sandpiper Lane
Queen Street at Udall Road (WBW) Stop East on Queen Street
Quincy Place at Scott Avenue
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Quincy
Place
Quintuck Lane at Rosemary Place
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Quintuck
Lane
Quintuck Lane at Woodland Drive
(EIS)
Stop South on Quintuck Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Rabro Drive at Ranick Road (HPG)
[Added 1-5-1982]
Stop North on Ranick Road
Radcliff Drive at Riddle Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Riddle
Street
Radcliff Drive at Stacom Street
(BWD) [Added 1-30-2001]
Stop East on Stacom Street
Radcliff Drive at Stahley Street
(BWD) [Added 9-1-1993]
Stop South on Radcliff Drive
Radcliff Drive at Studley Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Radcliff
Drive
Railroad Avenue at Islip Compost
Site driveway (HBK) [Added
1-30-2001]
Stop North from driveway
Railroad Avenue at Main Street
(HBK) [Added 9-16-1980;
amended 7-7-1992]
Stop East/West on Railroad
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1558
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Railroad Avenue at Station Street
(HBK) [Added 11-18-1980]
Stop South on Station Street
Railroad Avenue at parking lot
driveway 130 feet east of Station
Street (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
Stop South on parking lot
driveway
Railroad Avenue at parking lot
driveway 280 feet east of Station
Street (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
Stop South on parking lot
driveway
Railroad Avenue at parking lot
driveway 370 feet east of Station
Street (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
Stop South on parking lot
driveway
Railroad Avenue at Swayze Street
(SVL)
Stop East on Swayze Street
Railroad Street at Snedecor
Avenue (BPT)
Stop East/West on Railroad
Street
Railroad Street (south spur) at
Snedecor Avenue (BPT)
[Amended 2-5-1991]
Stop East on Railroad Street,
turning south on Railroad
Street (south spur)
Rajon Road at Sylvan Avenue
(BPT) [Added 12-2-2014]
Stop East on Rajon Road
Ralph Avenue at Willoughby Street
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Ralph
Avenue
Raymond Street at Smith Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 8-28-1990]
Stop North/South on Smith
Avenue; East/West on
Raymond Street
Raymond Street at South Bay
Avenue/Wavecrest Drive (ISL)
[Amended 11-20-1990;
6-16-1992]
Stop East on Raymond Street;
North/South on South Bay
Avenue
Raymond Street at Union Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 5-5-1998]
Stop East/West on Raymond
Street; North/South on
Union Avenue
Raymond Street at Willow Avenue
(ISL)
Stop South on Willow Avenue
Raynor Avenue at South Second
Street (RNK) [Added 8-27-2013]
Stop South on Raynor Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1559
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Redington Street at Redmond
Avenue (BSR)
Stop North/South on Redmond
Avenue
Redmen Street at Spur Drive
South and pedestrian bridge (EIS)
[Added 10-2-1990]
Stop West on pedestrian bridge
Redmond Avenue at Tillie Street
(BSR)
Stop North/South on Redmond
Avenue
Redwood Drive at Woodhollow
Road (GRV) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop North/South on
Woodhollow Road; West
on Redwood Drive
Remington Boulevard at Sixth
Street (LKL) [Added 11-17-1987]
Stop West on Sixth Street
Renee Drive at Second Street
(BPT) [Amended 10-18-2005]
Stop North/South on Renee
Drive; West on Second
Street
Renee Drive at Stephen Road
(BPT)
Stop East on Stephen Road
Renee Drive at Tucker Drive (BPT)
[Added 11-20-1979; amended
4-5-1988]
Stop East on Tucker Drive;
North/South on Renee
Drive
Rhodes Avenue at Second Avenue
(BSR)
Stop East on Rhodes Avenue
Richardson Lane at Saint Marks
Lane (ISL) [Added 4-16-1996]
Stop East on Richardson Lane
Richland Boulevard at Seminole
Drive (NBS)
Stop East/West on Seminole
Drive
Richland Boulevard at Sioux Drive
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Sioux Drive
Richland Boulevard at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Richland
Boulevard
Richmond Boulevard at Terrace
Court (RNK) [Added 12-3-1991]
Stop South on Terrace Court
Richmond Boulevard at West
Eighth Street (RNK) [Added
8-27-1991]
Stop South on West Eighth
Street
Richmond Boulevard at West Fifth
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West Fifth
Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1560
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Richmond Boulevard at West First
Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West First
Street
Richmond Boulevard at West
Fourth Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Fourth Street
Richmond Boulevard at West
Second Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on West
Second Street
Richmond Boulevard at West
Seventh Street (RNK) [Added
8-27-1991]
Stop South on West Seventh
Street
Richmond Boulevard at West Sixth
Street (RNK) [Amended
1-5-1982; 3-24-1992]
Stop North/South on West
Sixth Street; East/West on
Richmond Boulevard
Richmond Boulevard at West Third
Street (RNK) [Amended
1-4-1994]
Stop North/South on West
Third Street; East/West
on Richmond Boulevard
Richmond Street at Webster Road
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Richmond
Street
Ricky Road at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop West on Ricky Road
Riddle Street at Stepney Lane
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Stepney
Lane
Ridgefield Road at Salem Court
and Salem Path (HPG) [Added
4-5-1983; amended 4-7-1987]
Stop West on Salem Court;
East on Salem Path;
North/South on Ridgefield
Road
Ridgeway Boulevard at Wohseepee
Drive (WBS) [Amended
11-15-2005]
Stop North/South on Ridgeway
Boulevard; East/West on
Wohseepee Drive
Ridgewood Court at Sylvan Avenue
(BPT) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North/South on Sylvan
Avenue; West on
Ridgewood Court
Ridgewood Court at Terrace Road
(BPT) [Added 7-11-1978]
Stop East on Ridgewood Court
Ridgewood Street at Udall Road
(WIS)
Stop West on Ridgewood
Street
Riley Street at West Belmont
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 4-2-1985;
8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on West
Belmont Street; North/
South on Riley Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1561
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Riley Street at West Lakeland
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop North on Riley Street
Riley Street at West Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978; 8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on West
Oakdale Street; North/
South on Riley Street
Rita Drive at Washington Avenue
(BWD)
Stop West on Rita Drive
Ritchie Court at Third Avenue and
a curb cut opposite Ritchie Court
(BSR) [Added 11-16-1982]
Stop West on Ritchie Court;
East on curb cut
River Road at River Street (SVL) Stop East on River Street
River Road at Terry Street (SVL) Stop North/South on River
Road
River Road at Timber Point Road
(GRV) [Added 5-1-1979]
Stop West on Timber Point
Road
River Road at Widgeon Court
(GRV) [Added 12-11-2012]
Stop South on Widgeon Court
River Road at Willow Street (SVL) Stop East/West on Willow
Street
River Road at Woodhollow Road
(GRV) [Amended 8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on River Road;
North/South on
Woodhollow Road
Riverdale Avenue at Yale Avenue
(OKD) [Added 12-6-1988]
Stop West on Riverdale Avenue
Robbins Avenue at Spruce Street
(ISL) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North on Robbins Avenue
Robbins Avenue at West Hemlock
Street (ISL) [Amended
11-18-2003]
Stop East/West on West
Hemlock Street; North/
South on Robbins Avenue
Robin Hill Place at Timberlane
Drive (BWD) [Amended
11-20-1984]
Stop East/West on Robin Hill
Place
Robin Hill Place at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Robin Hill
Place
Robinhood Drive at Sherwood
Drive (EIS) [Added 12-6-1983]
Stop East at Robinhood Drive
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1562
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Rockaway Street at Southside
Avenue (WIS)
Stop North on Southside
Avenue
Rockaway Street at Udall Road
(WIS)
Stop West on Rockaway Street
Roderick Road at Spruce Avenue
(east intersection) (WIS) [Added
12-6-1977; amended 5-7-1985]
Stop South on Spruce Avenue
Roderick Road at Spruce Avenue
(west intersection) (WIS) [Added
5-7-1985]
Stop North on Spruce Avenue;
East/West on Roderick
Road
Rogers Road at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM) [Added 5-4-1993]
Stop West on Rogers Road
Rollstone Avenue at Union Street
(WSV) [Added 1-5-1988;
amended 11-27-2007]
Stop West on Union Street;
North/South on Rollstone
Avenue
Rollstone Avenue at Weaver Road
(WSV) [Added 12-12-1995]
Stop East on Weaver Road
Roosevelt Avenue at Root Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 10-18-1988]
Stop North/South on Roosevelt
Avenue; East/West on
Root Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue at Seventh
Street (BHM) [Amended
4-7-1987]
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street; North/South on
Roosevelt Street
Roosevelt Avenue at Shaw Avenue
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Shaw
Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue at Sunrise Road
(BHM) [Amended 6-10-2008]
Stop East/West on Sunrise
Road; North/South on
Roosevelt Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue at Tariff Street
(SVL) [Added 12-3-1991]
Stop North on Roosevelt
Avenue
Roosevelt Street at Stellenwerf
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North on Stellenwerf
Avenue
Roosevelt Street at Washington
Avenue (Brentwood Road) (BWD)
Stop East on Roosevelt Street
Roosevelt Street at Washington
Avenue (EIS)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Root Avenue at Sage Street (CIS) Stop West on Sage Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1563
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Root Avenue at Sassafras Street
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Root
Avenue
Rose Drive at Rosevale Avenue
(RNK)
Stop North/South on Rose
Drive
Rose Drive at Woodlawn Avenue
(RNK) [Added 10-8-1996]
Stop South on Rose Drive
Rose Street at Storey Avenue (CIS) Stop North/South on Rose
Street
Rose Street at Violet Street (CIS)
[Added 4-7-1981]
Stop North/South on Violet
Street
Rose Street at William Avenue
(CIS) [Added 1-4-1993]
Stop West on William Avenue
Rosemary Place at Woodland Drive
(EIS)
Stop West on Rosemary Place
Rosevale Avenue at Terrace Court
(RNK)
Stop South on Terrace Court
Rosevale Avenue at Weichers Place
(RNK) [Amended 11-13-2001]
Stop East/West on Rosevale
Avenue; North on
Weichers Place
Rossmore Avenue at St. Johns
Street (CIS)
Stop South on Rossmore
Avenue
Royal Oak Court at Singingwood
Drive (HBK) [Added 2-26-1991]
Stop West on Royal Oak Court
Roy Avenue at Toomey Road (WIS)
[Added 2-5-2008]
Stop West on Roy Avenue
Rugby Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Rugby Street
Rugby Street at Winfield Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Winfield
Avenue
Runyon Street at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Amended 1-3-1984;
8-27-2013]
Stop East/West on Runyon
Street; North/South on
Thompson Drive
Russell Road at West Shore Road
(OKD) [Added 11-20-1979]
Stop West on Russell Road
Rutledge Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Rutledge Street
Ryan Street at Tanglewood Road
(WIS)
Stop East/West on Ryan Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1564
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Sage Street at Tree Avenue (CIS)
[Amended 6-6-1978; 1-5-1982;
4-5-1994]
Stop North/South on Tree
Avenue
Sage Street at Twig Avenue (CIS) Stop South on Twig Avenue
Sage Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East on Sage Street
Sagebrush Lane at South Bedford
Avenue (CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop West on Sagebrush Lane
St. Johns Street at Terry's Road
(SVL) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop East on St. Johns Road
St. Johns Street (Baldwin Avenue)
at Wilson Boulevard (CIS)
Stop West on St. Johns Street
(Baldwin Avenue)
St. Lawrence Street at Seville
Boulevard (SVL) [Added
5-1-1979; amended 9-15-2009]
Stop East/West on St.
Lawrence Street; North/
South on Seville
Boulevard
St. Lawrence Street at Sunrise
Avenue (SVL) [Amended
5-24-2011]
Stop North/South on Sunrise
Avenue; East/West on St.
Lawrence Street
St. Lawrence Street at Wyandanch
Road (SVL) [Amended
11-18-2008]
Stop East/West on St.
Lawrence Street; North/
South on Wyandanch
Road
St. Louis Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on St. Louis Avenue
St. Louis Avenue at Utica Street
(NBS)
Stop East/West on Utica Street
St. Mark's Lane at Tappan Avenue
(ISL) [Added 9-25-2012]
Stop West on Tappen Avenue
St. Mark's Lane at Wavecrest Drive
(ISL) [Added 2-27-2007]
Stop East on Wavecrest Drive;
North/South on St. Mark's
Lane
St. Mark's Lane at Woodside
Avenue (ISL) [Added 9-25-2012]
Stop West on St. Mark's Lane
St. Mary's School driveway at
Suffolk Lane (EIS)
Stop West on St. Mary's School
driveway
Salem Street at Spur Drive South
(EIS)
Stop North on Salem Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1565
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Sampson Avenue at Shafter Street
(CIS) [Amended 4-16-1985]
Stop East/West on Shafter
Street
San Juan Drive at Wayne Street
(HPG)
Stop North/South on San Juan
Drive
Sandpiper Lane at Woodlane Drive
(EIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Stop East on Sandpiper Lane
Sandra Avenue at Stanley Street
(WIS) [Added 4-3-1979;
amended 9-1-1993]
Stop East on Stanley Street;
North/South on Sandra
Avenue
Sandra Avenue at West Fourth
Street (WIS) [Added 8-12-2008]
Stop North on Sandra Avenue
Santa Anita Court at Shadow
Grove Lane (HBK) [Added
1-19-1999]
Stop North on Santa Anita
Court
Sassafras Street at Tree Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North/South on Tree
Avenue
Sassafras Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS)
Stop East on Sassafras Street
Saxon Avenue at Master's
Shopping Center driveway (BSR)
Stop West on Master's
Shopping Center
driveway
Saxon Avenue at Sorowoc Lane
(ISL) [Added 10-18-1988]
Stop West on Sorowoc Lane
+Saxon Avenue at Spur Drive
South (NBS)
Stop North on Saxton Avenue
Saxon Avenue at Wenmen Avenue
(ISL) [Added 10-6-1981]
Stop West on Wenman Avenue
Sayville Avenue at Thirteenth
Street (BHM)
Stop North/South on Sayville
Avenue
Sayville Boulevard at St. Lawrence
Street (SVL) [Amended
8-30-1988]
Stop North/South on Sayville
Boulevard
Sayville Boulevard at Sunrise Drive
(SVL)
Stop North on Sayville
Boulevard
Sayville Boulevard at Versa Place
(SVL) [Amended 9-15-1987]
Stop East/West on Versa Place;
North/South on Sayville
Boulevard
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1566
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Scaup Court at Studley Street
(BWD)
Stop South on Scaup Court
School Street at Udalia Road (WIS)
[Added 10-2-1990]
Stop South on School Street
School House Lane at Woodcrest
Drive (HPG) [Added 1-5-1992]
Stop East on Woodcrest Drive
Schoolhouse Road at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop North on Schoolhouse
Road
Schoolhouse Road at Woodland
Drive (EIS) [Added 11-17-2015]
Yield South on Schoolhouse
Road
+Scotch Pine Drive at Silverleaf
Lane (CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop South on Scotch Pine
Drive
+Scotch Pine Drive at Sunflower
Lane (CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop North on Scotch Pine
Drive
Sea Breeze Lane at Snedecor
Avenue (WIS) [Added 2-2-1993]
Stop East on Sea Breeze Lane
Seaspray Lane at Sequams Lane
(WIS) [Added 6-11-2002]
Stop West on Seaspray Lane
Secatogue Avenue at Timber Point
Road (EIS) [Amended
4-18-2000]
Stop East/West on Timber
Point Road; South on
Secatogue Avenue
Secaucus Lane at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop North on Secaucus Lane
Second Avenue at Second Place
(BSR) [Added 3-7-2006]
Stop West on Second Place
Second Avenue at Second Street
(BPT)
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue
Second Avenue at driveway located
290 feet west of American
Boulevard (BWD) [Added
1-14-2003]
Stop North on driveway
Second Avenue at driveway located
320 feet west of Meadow Brook
Drive (BWD) [Added 1-14-2003]
Stop South on driveway
Second Avenue at Second Street
(BWD) [Amended 2-28-1978;
11-1-1988]
Stop North on parking lot
driveway; South on
Second Street; East/West
on Second Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1567
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Second Avenue at Seventh Street
(BWD) [Amended 8-28-1979]
Stop North on Seventh Street
Second Avenue at Sixth Street and
shopping center driveway (BWD)
[Amended 8-28-1979]
Stop North on Sixth Street;
South on shopping center
driveway
Second Avenue at Third Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Third
Street
Second Avenue at Timberline Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on
Timberline Drive
Second Avenue at driveway 50 feet
east of Westwood Drive (BWD)
[Added 2-4-1992]
Stop South on driveway
Second Avenue at Westwood Drive
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Westwood
Drive
Second Street at Sixth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Second
Street
Second Street at Smith Avenue
(ISL) [Amended 1-4-1994]
Stop North/South on Smith
Avenue; West on Second
Street
Second Street at South Fifth
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
1-25-2005]
Stop North/South on Second
Street; East/West on
South Fifth Avenue
Second Street at Tenth Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Tenth
Avenue
Second Street at Third Avenue
(BPT)
Stop North/South on Third
Avenue
Second Street at Third Avenue
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Second
Street
Sequams Lane at Sequams Lane
West (WIS) [Added 6-20-1978]
Stop East on Sequams Lane
West
Sequams Lane East at Sequams
Way (WIS) [Added 8-17-2010]
Stop South on Sequams Lane
East
Sequams Lane North at Sequams
Lane (WIS) [Added 6-6-1989]
Stop West on Sequams Lane
North
Serene Place at Seusing Boulevard
(HPG)
Stop West on Serene Place
Serene Place at Wayne Street
(HPG) [Amended 1-19-1993]
Stop North/South on Serene
Place
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1568
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Service Road (north of Main
Street) at Third Avenue (BSR)
Stop East/West on Service
Road (north of Main
Street)
Serpentine Lane at Slate Lane
(CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Slate Lane
Serpentine Lane/Halsey Street at
South Bedford Avenue (CIS)
[Added 4-4-1978]
Stop East on Halsey Street;
West on Serpentine Lane;
North/South on South
Bedford Avenue
Serpentine Lane at Sunflower Lane
(CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop North on Serpentine Lane
Seusing Boulevard at Wayne Street
(HPG) [Amended 3-15-1988;
8-30-1988]
Stop North/South on Seusing
Boulevard; East/West on
Wayne Street
Seventeenth Avenue at Southport
Street (LKL) [Amended
5-16-1989]
Stop North/South on
Seventeenth Avenue;
East/West on Southport
Street
Seventeenth Avenue at Thrift
Street (LKL)
Stop East/West on Thrift Street
Seventh Avenue at Sycamore
Avenue (BHM)
Stop East on Seventh Street
Seventh Street at Third Avenue
(BWD) [Added 5-12-2020]
Stop South on Seventh Street
Seventh Street at Thompson Drive
(WBS) [Amended 12-16-1986]
Stop North/South on
Thompson Drive
Seventh Street at Washington
Avenue (BHM) [Amended
8-16-2005]
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue; East/
West on Seventh Street
Seville Boulevard at Versa Place
(SVL) [Amended 8-30-1988;
3-16-2010; 8-17-2010]
Stop North/South on Seville
Boulevard; East/West on
Versa Place
Shadow Grove Lane at a bicycle
path 250 feet west of Santa Anita
Court (HBK) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop North/South on bicycle
path
Shafter Street at South Connecting
Road (CIS) [Added 1-5-1982]
Yield West on South
Connecting Road
Shebar Drive at South Bay Avenue
(ISL) [Added 12-14-2010]
Stop West on Shebar Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1569
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Shelter Road at Vanderbilt Avenue
(RNK) [Added 10-19-1982;
amended 12-16-1986;
11-21-1989]
Stop West on Shelter Road;
North/South on
Vanderbilt Avenue
Sherman Avenue at a curb cut 50
feet west of Beach Street (WIS)
[Added 5-3-1983]
Stop North on curb cut
Sherman Avenue at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Sherman Street
Sherman Drive at Wantagh Avenue
South (EIS)
Stop South on Sherwood Drive
Sherman Street at Stub Street
(BWD) [Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North on Stub Street
Sherry Street at Wensley Lane
(EIS) [Added 4-18-2000]
Stop South on Sherry Street
Shinnecock Lane at Timber Point
Road (EIS)
Stop East on Shinnecock Lane
Shinnecock Lane at Woodland
Drive (EIS)
Stop East/West on Shinnecock
Lane
Shirley Street at Sycamore Avenue
(BHM)
Stop West on Shirley Street
+Shore Drive at Vanderbilt
Boulevard (OKD) [Amended
10-13-2010]
Stop North/South on
Vanderbilt Boulevard;
East on Shore Drive
Shore Road at West Avenue (WSV)
[Added 10-17-1978; amended
9-19-1995]
Stop West on Shore Road;
North/South on West
Avenue
Short Street at William Street
(CIS) [Added 3-21-1978]
Stop East on Short Street
Silverleaf Lane at Snowberry Lane
(CIS)
Stop South on Snowberry Lane
Silverleaf Lane/Bergen Street at
Split Cedar Drive (CIS) [Added
4-4-1978]
Stop East on Silverleaf Lane;
West on Bergen Street;
North/South on Split
Cedar Drive
Silverleaf Lane at Sycamore
Avenue (CIS)
Stop West on Silverleaf Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1570
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Simmons Drive at Thorpe Drive
(EIS) [Added 2-19-2002]
Stop South on Thorpe Drive
Singingwood Drive at a bicycle
path 375 feet west of Acacia Drive
(HBK) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop North/South on bicycle
path
Singingwood Drive at a bicycle
path of 400 + feet west of Burleigh
Drive (HBK) [Added 6-16-1981]
Stop North on bicycle path
Singingwood Drive at a bicycle
path of 50 feet northeast of
Patchogue-Holbrook Road (HBK)
[Added 6-16-1981]
Stop Northwest on bicycle path
Singingwood Drive at
Springmeadow Drive (HBK)
[Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North on Springmeadow
Drive
Singingwood Drive at Sunny Glenn
Way (HBK) [Added 4-15-1980]
Stop East on Sunny Glenn Way
Sixth Avenue at Third Street
(BWD) [Amended 5-1-1990]
Stop North/South on Third
Street; East/West on Sixth
Avenue
Skipper Drive at Viking Drive
(WIS) [Added 10-9-2001]
Stop North on Viking Drive
Skylark Drive at Spiral Road (HTV)
[Added 4-15-1980]
Stop North/South on Spiral
Road
Slope Lane at Village Lane (HPG)
[Added 4-2-2002]
Stop North/South on Village
Lane; West on Slope Lane
Smith Avenue at Parking Field
driveways 250 feet south of
Mechanicsville Road (BSR)
Stop East/West on driveways
Smith Avenue at Union Place (ISL)
[Added 2-2-1988]
Stop West on Union Place
Smith Street at 160 feet north of
Montauk Highway (Sayville
Parking Lot No. 11) [Added
3-23-1999]
Stop South on Smith Street
+Smith Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS) [Amended 11-17-1987]
Stop West on Smith Street;
North on Wilson
Boulevard
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1571
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Smithtown Avenue at Tom Farino
Drive [Added 9-29-2009]
Stop West on Tom Farino Drive
Smithtown Avenue at Union Street
(BHM) [Added 9-11-2012]
Stop East on Union Street
*Smithtown Avenue at Wilson
Street (BHM) [Amended
2-23-1988; 5-25-2010]
Smithtown Avenue (within flight
line area of Islip MacArthur
Airport) north aisle at west aisle
(Parking Lot No. H-1, Area D,
BOCES) (HBK)
Stop North on west aisle
Snowberry Lane at Sunflower Lane
(CIS) [Added 4-4-1987]
Stop North on Snowberry Lane
Somerset Drive at Windsor Court
(HBK) [Added 11-9-1999]
Stop East on Windsor Court
Somerset Drive at Wyndham Lane
(HBK) [Added 1-19-1999]
Stop East on Wyndham Lane;
North/South on Somerset
Drive
South Drive at Terrace Drive
(RNK) [Added 2-27-1990]
Stop West on South Drive
South Drive at The Vale (RNK)
[Added 5-7-1985]
Stop North/South on The Vale
South Bay Avenue at South Clinton
Avenue (BSR) [Added 2-5-1985]
Stop East on South Bay Avenue
South Bay Avenue at Wavecrest
Drive (ISL) [Added 6-16-1992]
Stop West on Wavecrest Drive
South Bedford Avenue at
Sunflower Lane (CIS) [Added
4-4-1978]
Stop North on South Bedford
Avenue
South Clinton Avenue (west side)
at a curb cut located 330 feet
south of Montauk Highway (BSR)
[Added 2-23-1993]
Stop East on curb cut (YMCA)
South Fifth Avenue at Third Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Third
Street
South Harrison Avenue at Starlight
Drive (EIS) [Added 10-10-2000]
Stop South on South Harrison
Avenue
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1572
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
South Montgomery Avenue at
South Court (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
Stop South on South
Montgomery Avenue
South Pentaquit Avenue at South
Pentaquit Lane (BSR) [Added
3-1-1988]
Stop East on South Pentaquit
Lane
South Research Place at South
Technology Drive/Carleton Avenue
Food & Entertainment Center
driveway (CIS) [Added
7-10-2001]
Stop North on South
Technology Drive; South
on driveway
South Second Street at
Washington Avenue (EDG) [Added
1-25-2005]
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
South Union Avenue at Union
Place (ISL) [Added 2-2-1988]
Stop East on Union Place
Southern Boulevard at Wayne
Street (HPG) [Amended
4-20-1999]
Stop North/South on Southern
Boulevard; West on
Wayne Street
Southport Street at Thirteenth
Avenue (LKL) [Added 5-18-1994]
Stop North on Thirteenth
Avenue
Sparrow Place at Timberline Drive
(BWD) [Amended 4-17-2001]
Stop East/West on Sparrow
Place; North/South on
Timerbline Drive
Sparrow Place at Westwood Drive
(BWD) [Amended 3-15-1988]
Stop North/South on Westwood
Drive
Split Cedar Drive at Sunflower
Drive (CIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
Stop North on Split Cedar
Drive
Spruce Avenue at Terry's Road
(BHM) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop North/South on Spruce
Avenue
Spruce Avenue at West Fifth Street
(WIS)
Stop North/South on Spruce
Avenue
Spruce Avenue at West Fourth
Street (WIS)
Stop East/West on West Fourth
Street
Spruce Avenue at West Third
Street (WIS)
Stop East/West on West Third
Street
Spruce Avenue at Westminster
Lane (WIS) [Added 6-24-2014]
Stop North on Spruce Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1573
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Spruce Drive at West Drive (RNK)
[Added 4-30-1996]
Stop South on West Drive
Spruce Street at Wilson Boulevard
(ISL) [Added 5-4-2004]
Stop East on Spruce Street
Spur Drive North at Spur Lane
(BWD) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop North on Spur Lane
Spur Drive North at Valley Stream
Street (NGR) [Added
12-18-1984]
Stop South on Valley Stream
Street
*Spur Drive North at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
6-11-2002]
Stop East/West on Spur Drive
North; North/South on
Wilson Boulevard
Spur Drive South at driveway
1,000 feet east of East Forks Road
(Newbrook Garden Apartments)
(NBS) [Added 6-5-1979]
Stop North on driveway
+Spur Drive South at Southern
State Parkway Eastbound Exit 42
(NBS)
Stop South on Southern State
Parkway Exit 42
Spur Drive South at Tennessee
Street (NBS)
Stop West on Tennessee Street
Spur Drive South at Thirty-Eighth
Street (ISL)
Stop North on Thirty-Eighth
Street
Starlight Drive at Suffolk Lane
(EIS) [Added 5-15-2018]
Stop West on Starlight Drive
Station Street at parking lot
driveway 180 feet south of
Railroad Avenue Extension (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980]
Stop East on parking lot
driveway
Stein Drive at Third Avenue (BWD) Stop North on Stein Drive
Stein Drive at Walbridge Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East/West on Walbridge
Avenue
Stein Drive at Wisconsin Avenue
(BWD) [Amended 11-1-1988]
Stop North/South at Stein
Drive; East/West on
Wisconsin Avenue
Stephen Court at Stephen Road
(BPT) [Added 9-24-2019]
Stop East on Stephen Court
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1574
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Stephen Road at Tucker Drive
(BPT) [Added 12-18-1984]
Stop South on Tucker Drive
Sterling Place at Terry's Road
(SVL) [Amended 1-5-1982;
8-12-2003]
Stop North/South on Terry's
Road; West on Sterling
Place
Stewart Street at Third Avenue
(EIS)
Stop West on Stewart Street
Stewart Street at Udall Road
(WBW)
Stop West on Stewart Street
Stockton Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Stockton Street
Stuyvesant Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Stuyvesant Street
Stuyvesant Street at Winfield
Avenue (BWD)
Stop North/South on Winfield
Avenue
Sullivan Street at West Oakdale
Street (WBW) [Amended
10-3-1978]
Stop North on Sullivan Street
Summerwood Road at Windemere
Drive (north intersection) (HBK)
[Added 11-17-2009]
Stop West on Summerwood
Road
Summerwood Road at Windemere
Drive (south intersection) (HBK)
[Added 11-17-2009]
Stop West on Summerwood
Road
Sunburst Boulevard at a curb cut
790 feet east of Robbins Drive
(CIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop North on curb cut
Sunburst Boulevard (at a curb cut
590 feet east of Robbins Drive) and
at an access point opposite the
curb cut (CIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop North on curb cut; South
on access point
Sunburst Boulevard at Sunburst
Terrace (east intersection) (CIS)
[Added 3-1-1994]
Stop South on Sunburst
Terrace
Sunburst Boulevard at University
Drive (CIS) [Added 3-1-1994]
Stop South on University Drive
Sunrise Avenue at Sunrise Drive
(SVL)
Stop North on Sunrise Avenue
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1575
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Sunrise Avenue at Versa Place
(SVL) [Amended 8-30-1988]
Stop North/South at Sunrise
Avenue
Sunrise Highway North Service
Road Spur at Udall Road (WIS)
[Added 7-6-1982]
Yield Northwest on Sunrise
Highway North Service
Road Spur
Sunrise Road at Washington
Avenue (BHM)
Stop East/West on Sunrise
Road
Swallow Lane at Thrush Drive
(BWD) [Added 8-22-2017]
Stop West on Thrush Drive
Sycamore Avenue at Third Street
(north intersection) (LKL) [Added
4-15-1980; amended 6-13-2006]
Stop West on Third Street
(north intersection);
North/South on Sycamore
Avenue
Sycamore Avenue at Third Street
(south intersection) (LKL)
[Amended 4-15-1980]
Stop East on Third Street
(south intersection)
Sycamore Avenue at Village Lane
(BHM) [Added 5-4-1993]
Stop West on Village Lane
Sycamore Avenue at Westwind
Drive (BHM) [Added 1-7-1986]
Stop West on Westwind Drive
Sycamore Avenue at Woody Lane
(OKD) [Added 2-28-1978]
Stop South on Sycamore
Avenue
Sycamore Avenue at Zaura Court
(BHM) [Added 5-4-1993]
Stop West on Zaura Court
Sycamore Street at Wilson
Boulevard (CIS) [Amended
2-26-1991]
Stop East on Sycamore Street;
North/South on Wilson
Boulevard
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Tabor Street at Trader Land (BWD)
[Added 10-19-1993]
Stop North on Trader Lane
Tabor Street at Winnie Lane (BWD)
[Added 12-6-1977]
Stop North/South on Winnie
Lane
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1576
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Taft Avenue at Taft Avenue
Extension (ISL) [Added 3-5-1985;
amended 5-25-2010]
Stop East on Taft Avenue
Extension
Taft Street at Washington Avenue
(BWD)
Stop East on Taft Street
Tahlulah Lane at Wagstaff Lane
(WIS)
Stop North on Wagstaff Lane
Tahlulah Lane at Wampum Lane
(WIS)
Stop West on Wampum Lane
Tamarack Street at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL)
Stop East/West on Tamarack
Street
Tappen Avenue at Wingam Drive
(ISL) [Added 9-25-2012]
Stop East/West on Tappen
Avenue
Tariff Street at Willett Avenue
(SVL) [Added 7-12-2005]
Stop North on Willett Avenue
Tariff Street at Yonda Drive (SVL)
[Added 9-7-1999]
Stop South on Yonda Drive
Taylor Avenue at West Madison
Street (EIS) [Added 5-5-1981]
Stop North/South on Taylor
Avenue
Terry Boulevard at Tuttle Street
(HBK)
Stop North/South on Tuttle
Street
Terry Road at Vanderbilt Avenue
(RNK)
Stop South on Vanderbilt
Avenue
Terry Road at Victory Street (RNK) Stop East on Victory Street
Terry Road at Wainwright Street
(RNK)
Stop East on Wainwright Street
Terry Road at Walter Avenue
(HPG) [Added 1-25-2000]
Stop South on Walter Avenue
Third Avenue at Third Street
(BWD)
Stop North/South on Third
Street
Third Avenue at Trim Street (NBS)
[Added 9-15-1992]
Stop East on Trim Street
Thomas Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Thomas Street
Thrush Drive at Willen Lane (BWD) Stop East on Thrush Drive
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1577
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Timber Point Road at Woodland
Drive (EIS) [Amended
11-20-1979; 8-30-1988]
Stop East/West on Timber
Point Road; North/South
on Woodland Drive
Timber Point Road at Woodland
Drive (east spur) (EIS) [Added
8-30-1988]
Yield North, turning east on
Woodland Drive (east
spur)
Timber Point Road at Wyandanch
Avenue (EIS)
Stop South on Wyandanch
Avenue
Timber Point Road at Yuma Lane
(EIS)
Stop South on Yuma Lane
Tojan Drive at Wantagh Avenue
(EIS) [Amended 1-5-1982]
Stop North on Tojan Drive
Toomey Road at Van Buren Avenue
(WIS) [Amended 10-1-1985]
Stop East/West on Van Buren
Avenue; North/South on
Toomey Road
Toppy Lane at Udall Road (WBW) Stop East on Toppy Lane
Town Hall Circle at Main Street
(ISL) [Added 10-18-1994]
Yield Northbound entering
Town Hall Circle
Trade Zone Court at Trade Zone
Drive (HBK) [Added 11-21-1989]
Stop West on Trade Zone Court
Tupelo Lane at Woodland Drive
(EIS)
Stop East on Tupelo Lane
Tyler Avenue at Cherry Street
(SVL) [Added 11-18-2008]
Stop East on Tyler Avenue
Tyler Avenue at Union Street
(WSV)
Stop North/South on Tyler
Avenue
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Udalia Court at Udalia Road (WIS)
[Added 10-2-1990]
Stop South on Udalia Court
Udall Road at Paumanake
Elementary School north driveway
opposite West Third Street (WIS)
[Added 11-20-1979]
Stop East on school driveway
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1578
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Udall Road at Paumanok School
driveway (south curb cut) (WIS)
[Added 12-6-1977]
Stop East on Paumanok School
driveway
Udall Road at Van Buren Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Van Buren
Avenue
Udall Road at Washington Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Washington
Avenue
Udall Road at Watts Place (WIS) Stop East on Watts Place
Udall Road at Webster Avenue
(WIS)
Stop East on Webster Avenue
Udall Road at West Belmont Street
(WBW) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop East on West Belmont
Street
Udall Road at West Fifth Street
(WlS)
Stop West on West Fifth Street
Udall Road at West First Street
(WlS)
Stop West on West First Street
Udall Road at West Fourth Street
(WIS)
Stop West on West Fourth
Street
Udall Road at West Lakeland
Street (WBW) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop East on West Lakeland
Street
Udall Road at West Oakdale Street
(WBW) [Added 8-19-1986]
Stop East on West Oakdale
Street
Udall Road at West Second Street
(WIS)
Stop West on West Second
Street
Udall Road at West Third Street
(WIS)
Stop West on West Third Street
Union Avenue at Veterans Road
(ISL) [Added 2-26 1991]
Stop West on Veterans Road
Union Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Amended 2-23-1988]
Stop North/South on Walnut
Avenue; East/West on
Union Street
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1579
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Van Buren Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Amended
4-7-1981]
Stop East on Van Buren Street
Van Cedar Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD) [Added
11-17-1981]
Stop East on Van Cedar Street
Vanderbilt Boulevard at a driveway
150 feet south of Montauk
Highway (OKD) [Added
4-7-1981]
Stop West on driveway
+Vanderbilt Boulevard at
Woodlawn Avenue (OKD)
[Amended 4-7-1981]
Stop East on Woodlawn Avenue
Versa Place at Wyandanch Road
(SVL) [Amended 7-18-1995;
3-16-2010]
Stop North/South on
Wyandanch Road
Victory Drive at North Sixth Street
and West Sixth Street (RNK)
Stop North/South on North
Sixth Street and West
Sixth Street
Victory Drive at West Eighth Street
(RNK) [Amended 4-13-1993]
Stop North on West Eighth
Street; East/West on
Victory Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Wall Street at Walnut Avenue
(BHM) [Added 9-17-1991]
Stop East on Wall Street
Wallace Street at Wingan-
Hauppauge Road (ISL)
Stop East on Wallace Street
Walnut Avenue at West Gulf Street
and driveway opposite West Gulf
Street (BHM)
Stop East on West Gulf Street;
West on driveway
opposite West Gulf Street
Walnut Avenue at Wilson
Boulevard (ISL) [Added
1-19-1993]
Stop East on Walnut Avenue
Walnut Avenue at Wilson Street
(BHM) [Added 10-18-1983]
Stop West on Wilson Street
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1580
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
Walnut Street at West Pine Street
(CIS) [Added 4-16-1991]
Stop South on West Pine Street
Walton Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop East on Walton Street
Wampum Lane at Willets Lane
(WIS)
Stop East on Wampum Lane
Wantagh Avenue at Wantagh
Avenue South (EIS) [Added
1-5-1982; amended 6-18-2013]
Stop South on Wantagh
Avenue; East on Wantagh
Avenue South
Ward Street at Watts Place (WIS)
[Added 4-9-2008]
Stop West on Watts Place
Warren Street at Washington
Avenue (BWD)
Stop West on Warren Street
Washington Avenue at Wayne
Street (BWD)
Stop West on Wayne Street
Washington Avenue at West
Madison Street (EIS) [Added
1-16-1979]
Stop South on Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue at Whipple
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Whipple Street
Washington Avenue at White
Street (BWD)
Stop East on White Street
Washington Avenue at Wilson
Street (BWD)
Stop East on Wilson Street
Washington Place at West Fifth
Street (WIS) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop South on Washington
Place
Waterford Road at Yale Avenue
(OKD)
Stop East on Waterford Road
Wayne Street and Nelson Street at
Wedgewood Drive (HPG)
Stop East/West on Wayne
Street and Nelson Street
Webster Road at Windsor Street
(ISL)
Stop East/West on Windsor
Street
Weeks Avenue at William Avenue
(CIS)
Stop North on Weeks Avenue
Weichers Place at Woodlawn
Avenue (RNK) [Added 12-2-2014]
Stop South on Weichers Place
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § G-1
66:1581
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
* Denotes intersections controlled by a flashing signal; see Schedule A.
+ Designates intersections where "dual" signs are erected, i.e., on both right- and left-hand
sides approaching the intersection. (For use by Traffic Safety Division only.)
West Avenue at golf course exit
(150 feet north of Shore Road)
(WSV) [Added 10-17-1978]
Stop East on golf course exit
West Fifth Street at Wilson Place
(WIS) [Added 2-24-2004]
Stop South on Wilson Place
West Orange Street at Yankee
Street (BWD) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop West on West Orange
Street
West White Street at Willen Lane
(BWD) [Amended 11-17-1981]
Stop South on Willen Lane
Wexford Drive at Wilshire Lane
(OKD) [Added 12-19-1978]
Stop East on Wilshire Lane
Whitman Avenue at Yale Street
(ISL)
Stop East on Yale Street
Whittberg Street at Winnie Lane
(BWD) [Added 12-10-2013]
Stop West on Whittberg Street
Wiley Street at Wurz Street (BWD)
[Added 12-16-2003]
Stop North on Wurz Street
Wiley Street at Yankee Street
(BWD) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop North on Wiley Street
Wilken Lane at Winnie Lane (BWD)
[Added 12-10-2013]
Stop East on Wilken Lane;
North/South on Winnie
Lane
Wilken Lane at Winston Drive
(BWD) [Added 10-19-1993;
amended 3-1-1994]
Stop South on Wilken Lane
Willow Street at Wilson Boulevard
(CIS)
Stop East/West on Willow
Street
Winnie Lane at Winston Drive
(BWD) [Added 7-11-2006]
Stop South on Winnie Lane
Woody Lane at Yale Avenue (OKD)
[Added 1-17-1989]
Stop North on Yale Avenue
Wurz Street at Zane Court (BWD)
[Added 12-16-2003]
Stop West on Zane Court
Wyandotte Lane at Yuma Lane
(EIS)
Stop North/South on Yuma
Lane
Yankee Street at Zane Court
(BWD) [Added 4-16-2019]
Stop East on Zane Court
§ G-1 ISLIP CODE § G-1
66:1582
Schedule H
SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS
§ H-1. Speed limits on certain streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 2-9, the speed limits for streets or
parts of streets described below shall be as indicated:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bay Shore Road (BSR,
WIS)
40 From the Islip-Babylon Town line
to the Islip- Brightwaters Town
line
Broadway Avenue (HBK)
[Amended 9-15-1987]
40 From Sunrise Highway to
Veterans Highway
Caleb's Path (BWD)
[Amended 12-19-1989]
35 From Suffolk Avenue to Motor
Parkway
Campus Road (BWD)
[Added 11-18-1980]
40 From Wicks Road to Crooked
Hill Road
Candlewood Road (BWD)
[Amended 1-25-2000]
30 From Heckscher Avenue to
Brentwood Road
Carleton Avenue (CIS) 40 From Smith Street to Spur Drive
North
Carleton Avenue (EIS) 35 From Spur Drive North to
Beaver Dam Road
Carleton Avenue (EIS) 35 From McKinley Street to
Montauk Highway
Church Street (BPT) 40 From Sylvan Avenue to Sunrise
Highway
Connetquot Avenue (CIS,
NGR, EIS) [Added
8-30-1983; amended
12-15-1992]
35 From Montauk Highway to
Veterans Memorial Highway
Crooked Hill Road (EDG,
BWD)
40 From Fifth Avenue to Sagtikos
Parkway
Express Drive North
(RNK)
40 From Pond Road to Nichol's
Road
Express Drive North
(HPG)
45 From Wheeler Road (Rt. 111) to
Motor Parkway (C.R. 67)
Express Drive South
(RNK)
40 From Nichol's Road to Pond
Road
§ G-1 WATER QUALITY § H-1
66:1583
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Fifth Avenue (BWD, NBS) 40 From Crooked Hill Road to
Sunrise Highway
Higbie Lane (WIS)
[Amended 1-2-1991;
1-14-2014]
30 From Montauk Highway to Udall
Road
Johnson Avenue (BHM,
HBK) [Amended
4-15-1980]
50 From Sunrise Highway to
Veterans Highway
Lakeland Avenue (BHM,
LKL) [Added 3-3-1987]
50 From Ocean Avenue to Sunrise
Highway
Lowell Avenue (CIS,
NGR) [Amended
12-15-1992]
35 From Connetquot Avenue to
Suffolk Avenue
Montauk Highway (OKD,
WSV) [Amended
4-26-2011]
40 From Sunrise Highway to
Munson Lane
Montauk Highway (OKD,
WSV) [Amended
4-26-2011]
35 From Munson Lane to 200 feet
east of Benson Avenue
Montauk Highway (SVL)
[Amended 11-16-1982]
40 From Woodhull Lane to Sejon
Drive
Montauk Highway (SVL,
BPT) [Added
9-24-2019]
40 From Sejon Drive to McConnell
Avenue
Montauk Highway (BPT)
[Amended 9-24-2019]
40 From McConnell Avenue to the
Brookhaven Town line
Motor Parkway (BWD)
[Amended 10-17-1978;
3-15-1988]
40 From the Islip-Smithtown Town
line to Old Willets Path
Motor Parkway (CIS,
BWD) [Added
3-15-1988; amended
8-30-1988]
45 From Old Willets Path to
Veterans Memorial Highway
Motor Parkway (HPG,
CIS) [Added
10-17-1987]
45 From Veterans Highway to
Nichols Road
Motor Parkway (RNK) 40 From Nichols Road to Rosevale
Avenue
Nicolls Road (HTV, BPT) 55 From the Long Island Rail Road
(Brookhaven Town line) to
Montauk Highway
§ H-1 ISLIP CODE § H-1
66:1584
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Ocean Avenue (LKL,
RNK) [Amended
1-7-1986]
40 From Veterans Highway to
Rosevale Avenue
Old Patchogue-Holbrook
Road (HBK)
40 From Broadway Avenue to the
Islip-Brookhaven Town line
(Long Island Railroad main line)
Orinoco Drive (WBS,
WIS) [Amended
9-24-2013]
35 From Oakwood Avenue to 700
feet east of Manor Lane
(Brightwaters Village line)
Patchogue-Holbrook
Road (HBK, HTV)
[Added 1-7-1986;
amended 8-30-1988;
3-24-1992]
45 From the Long Island Rail Road
(Brookhaven Town line) to 150
feet north of Waverly Avenue
(Brookhaven Town line)
Pine Aire Drive (EDG,
PNR, BWD)
40 From Dunton Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Rabro Drive (CR 6)
(HPG) [Added
3-3-2015]
40 From Smithtown/Islip Town Line
to NYS 111/Wheeler Road
Railroad Avenue (RNK)
[Added 12-16-1986;
amended 2-25-1992]
40 From 100 feet west of
Knickerbocker Avenue to
Smithtown Avenue
Rosevale Avenue (RNK)
[Added 5-6-1980]
40 From the Smithtown-Islip town
line to Ocean Avenue
Smithown Avenue (LKL)
(HBK) [Added
3-21-2000]
40 Form Lakeland Avenue to the
Long Island Railroad (Islip-
Brookhaven Town Line)
Spur Drive North (EIS)
[Added 3-2-1982]
35 From Belmore Avenue to
Manhattan Boulevard
Spur Drive North (CIS,
NGR) [Added 3-2-1982;
amended 7-10-2007]
35 From Manhattan Boulevard to
Carleton Avenue
Spur Drive North (NBS,
BWD, CIS) [Added
3-2-1982]
35 From Carleton Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Spur Drive South (NBS,
ISL, EIS) [Added
3-2-1982]
35 From Fifth Avenue to Manhattan
Boulevard
Suffolk Avenue (CIS)
[Added 5-6-1980]
40 From Carleton Avenue to
Veterans Highway
§ H-1 WATER QUALITY § H-1
66:1585
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Suffolk Avenue (CIS)
[Amended 10-15-1985;
7-11-1989]
30 From Joshua's Path (NYS 111) to
Oakland Avenue
Town Line Road (HPG)
[Added 5-6-1980;
amended 1-14-2014;
7-16-2019]
35 From Wheeler Road (NYS 111)
to Southern Boulevard
Udall Road (WIS)
[Amended 1-14-2014]
30 From Sunrise Highway to Higbie
Lane
Union Boulevard (WIS,
WBS) [Amended
1-5-1982; 3-2-1982]
40 From the Babylon town line (700
feet west of Parkwood Road) to
Woodland Drive (Brightwaters
village line)
Union Boulevard (BSR,
ISL, EIS, GRV) [Added
12-19-1978; amended
1-5-1982; 6-7-1988]
35 From 135+ feet west of Sunset
Road to Montauk Highway
West Islip Boulevard
(WIS) [Added
9-24-2013]
35 From Oakwood Avenue to Higbie
Lane (CR 82)
Wheeler Road (CIS)
[Amended 8-30-1995]
30 From Joshua's Path (NYS 111) to
Suffolk Avenue
Wicks Road (BWD)
[Added 12-19- 1978]
35 From Motor Parkway to Quail
Drive
Woodside Avenue (HTV) 50 From Patchogue-Holbrook Road
to Islip- Brookhaven Town line
Schedule I
SCHOOL SPEED LIMITS
§ I-1. School speed limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-10, school speed limits shall be
as indicated upon the streets or parts of streets described below:
§ H-1 ISLIP CODE § I-1
66:1586
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Aberdeen Road (WSB)
[Added 3-2-1982]
20 From 180 feet north of Sunny
Lane to 200 feet south of
Northfield Road
Academy Street (BPT)
[Added 6-18-1985]
20 From Oakwood Avenue to
Snedecor Avenue
Baldwin Boulevard (PNR)
[Added 10-15-1991;
amended 5-22-2007]
20 From Hemlock Drive to 100 feet
south of Fig Place
Barberry Road (WIS)
[Added 4-9-2008]
20 From 700+/- feet north of
Montauk Highway to Iris Place
Bardolier Lane (WBS)
[Added 12-16-1986]
20 From Hampshire Road to
Aberdeen Lane
Barrett Avenue (BPT)
[Added 3-3-1981]
20 From 230 feet south of Fulton
Street to 110 feet south of Davis
Street
Barrett Avenue (BPT)
[Added 7-6-1982]
20 From 500 feet south of Inwood
Streets to 390 feet north of Elliott
Street
Bellmore Avenue (EIS)
[Added 3-4-1986]
20 From 40 feet north of Adler
Street to 180 feet north of
Manhattan Boulevard
Boulevard Avenue (CIS) 20 From 50 feet north of Satinwood
Street to 50 feet south of Juniper
Street
Bourne Boulevard (BHM)
[Added 1-17-1978]
20 From 250 feet east of Evergreen
Avenue to 300 feet west of Oak
Avenue
Brentwood Parkway (BWD)
[Added 7-11-1989]
20 From 400 feet south of Oxford
Road to Island Avenue
Broadway Avenue (HBK)
[Amended 9-15-1987]
20 At the Merrimac Elementary
School, from 450 feet north of
Maria Court to 500 feet south of
Maria Court
Brook Avenue (NBS)
[Added 1-7-1986;
amended 10-6-1987;
8-15-2006]
20 From Abrew Street to 150 feet
east of East Third Avenue
Brook Avenue (BSR)
[Amended 8-15-2006]
20 From 125 feet north of Palm
Road to William Street
§ I-1 WATER QUALITY § I-1
66:1587
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Brook Street (WSV)
[Added 8-14-2007]
20 From 115+/- feet west of Saxon
Aveue to 100 +/- west of Cherry
Street
Candlewood Road (BWD)
[Added 11-18-1980;
amended 2-29-2000]
20 From 175 feet east of Arbell
Drive to 50 feet east of East Third
Avenue
Castle Lane (WBS) [Added
12-16-1986]
20 From Hampshire Road to
Aberdeen Lane
Cherokee Street (RNK)
[Added 12-12-1995]
20 From Mohican Avenue to 100
feet west of Seminole Street
Cherry Avenue (WSV)
[Added 8-25-1987]
20 From 275 feet north of Second
Street to 120 feet south of Third
Street
Church Street (BHM)
[Added 6-18-1985;
amended 5-6-1986]
20 From 150 east of Smithtown
Avenue to 175 feet east of Walnut
Avenue
Clinton Avenue (BSR)
[Added 10-16-1990]
15 From 560+/- feet south of Union
Boulevard to Montauk Highway
Coates Avenue (HBK)
[Added 11-20-1979]
20 From 40 feet south of Perimeter
Street to 20 feet north of Elin
Street
Commack Road (ISL)
[Added 8-25-1987]
20 From 90 feet south of Lexington
Avenue to 800 feet south of
Franklin Street
Community Drive (BSR)
[Added 9-24-2019]
20 From Montauk Highway to
Cooper Lane
Connetquot Avenue (EIS,
NGR) [Amended
2-23-1993]
25 From 200 feet south of
Woodmere Street to 200 feet
south of Merrick Street
Cordello Avenue (CIS)
[Added 6-6-2000]
20 From 100 feet north of Clift
Street to 50 feet north of Earle
Street
Craig B. Gariepy Avenue
(EIS) [Added 4-7-1981]
20 From Nassau Street to Redman
Street
Dubois Road (WIS) [Added
10-14-2014]
20 From Higbie Lane to east
terminus
East Lakeland Street
(WBW) [Added
5-15-2001]
20 From Martinstein Avenue to
Joselson Avenue
§ I-1 ISLIP CODE § I-1
66:1588
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
East Third Avenue (BWD)
[Added 8-17-2010]
20 From 100 feet south of Bailey
Avenue to Walbridge Avenue
East Third Avenue (NBS)
[Added 2-2-1988]
20 From 380 feet north of
Greenwood Avenue to 120 feet
south of Beldon Avenue
East William Street (BSR) 20 At the Brook Avenue School for
787 feet
Easton Street (RNK)
[Added 8-20-1985]
20 From 100 feet west of Louis
Kossuth Avenue to 710 feet east
of First Avenue
Garden City Street (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
20 From Joselson Avenue to
Martinstein Avenue
Grassmere Avenue (OKD)
[Added 4-9-2008]
20 From Shore Drive 300+/- feet
south to school entrance
Greenwood Road (NBS)
[Added 11-16-2010]
20 From East Third Avenue to
Woodlea Avenue
Grundy Avenue (HBK) 20 At the Grundy Avenue School,
from 300 feet north of the north
building line to 300 feet south of
the south building line
Half Mile Road (CIS) 20 From 650 feet east of Hawthorne
Avenue to 160 feet west of
Dovecote Lane
Hampshire Road (WBS)
[Added 12-16-1986]
20 From Castle Lane to 300 feet
north of Bardolier Lane
Harrison Avenue (EIS)
[Added 11-22-2016]
20 From Montauk Highway to Duval
Street
Harvest Lane (WIS)
[Added 2-4-1986]
20 From 50 feet south of Doncaster
Avenue to 490 feet north of
Hunter Avenue
Hemlock Drive (PNR)
[Added 10-15-1991]
20 From 110 feet east of Baldwin
Boulevard to 100 feet east of Pine
Acres Boulevard
Higbie Lane (WIS) [Added
9-15-1981; amended
1-12-1994; 10-4-1994;
1-14-2014]
20 From 30 feet north of Wilherm
Lane to South Street
Hubbard Street (BSR)
[Added 3-3-2015]
20 From Rhodes Avenue to Third
Avenue
§ I-1 WATER QUALITY § I-1
66:1589
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Hunter Avenue (WIS)
[Added 8-17-1982]
At our Lady of Lourdes School
from 300 feet east of the east
building line to 300 feet west of
the west building line
Idle Hour Boulevard (OKD)
[Added 11-15-1988]
20 At the Idle Hour Elementary
School from 200 feet north of
Hollywood Drive to Middlesex
Avenue
Idle Hour Boulevard (OKD)
[Added 11-15-1988]
20 At the Idle Hour Elementary
School from Middlesex Avenue to
Hollywood Drive
Johnson Avenue (RNK) 20 From 150 feet west of Pamlico
Avenue to 150 feet east of
Sycamore Avenue
Johnson Avenue (SVL)
[Added 2-4-1986]
20 From Virginia Court to 230 north
of Elizabeth Court
Joselson Avenue (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
20 From East Lakeland Street to 210
feet north of Garden City Street
Korol Street (BSR) [Added
10-13-2010]
20 From Dewey Place to Third
Avenue
Lexington Avenue/Devon
Road/Standish Road (BWD)
[Added 9-11-2012]
20 From 240 feet east of Orient
Avenue to 260 feet east of
Pelham Drive
Lincoln Avenue (SVL)
[Added 6-21-2011]
20 From 300 feet south of Marseille
Path/Greenbrier Lane to
Partington Place
Lincoln Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 4-1-1986]
20 From 570 feet north of Veterans
Highway to Townline Road
Lowell Avenue (CIS)
[Added 3-6-1984;
amended 5-4-1993]
25 From 200 feet north of East
Maple Street to Hemlock Street
Main Street (HBK) [Added
9-15-1987]
20 From 250 feet south of Furrows
Road south to Broadway Avenue
Manhattan Boulevard (EIS)
[Added 3-4-1986]
20 From Connetquot Avenue to
Bellmore Avenue
Marseille Path (SVL)
[Added 9-29-2009]
20 From 1,000 +/- feet west of
Lincoln Avenue to 200 plus or
minus feet south of Canterbury
Drive
§ I-1 ISLIP CODE § I-1
66:1590
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Martinstein Avenue (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
20 From East Lakeland Street to 210
feet north of Garden City Street
Melody Lane (BWD)
[Added 12-17-2019]
20 From Westwood Drive to Frank J.
Cannon School driveway located
130 feet east of Timberline Drive
Merrick Street (EIS)
[Added 3-4-1986]
20 From Connetquot Avenue to
Bellmore Avenue
Montauk Highway (OKD)
[Amended 10-13-2010]
30 From 350 feet west of the west
property line of the Arthur
Premm Elementary School (550
feet east of Bayview Avenue) east
for 1,200 feet
North Clinton Avenue
(BSR) [Added 10-9-2001]
20 From 500 feet north of Kristin
Court to 980 feet north of Kristin
Court
North Ontario Street (RNK)
[Added 12-12-1995]
20 From Mohican Avenue to 600
feet west of Mohican Avenue
Oakdale-Bohemia Road
(OKD) [Added 4-4-1978]
20 From 450 feet south of Wilshire
Lane to 540 feet north of Wilshire
Lane
Ogden Road (WIS) [Added
10-14-2014]
20 From Higbie Lane to east
terminus
Pamlico Avenue (RNK)
[Added 7-7-1987]
20 From 800 feet north of Johnson
Avenue to Johnson Avenue
Partington Place (SVL)
[Added 6-21-2011]
20 From Lincoln Avenue east for 200
feet
Peconic Street (RNK)
[Added 2-16-1999]
20 From 280 feet east of First
Avenue to 250 feet west of Louis
Kossuth Avenue
Perkal Street (BSR)
[Added 10-13-2010]
20 From Third Avenue to Second
Avenue
Pine Acres Boulevard
(PNR) [Added
10-15-1991; amended
3-5-2002; 5-22-2007]
20 From Hemlock Drive to 730 feet
south of Locust Drive
Redman Street (EIS) 20 From Craig B. Gariepy Avenue to
Spur Drive South
Rhodes Avenue (BSR)
[Added 3-3-2015]
20 From Brook Street to Second
Avenue
§ I-1 WATER QUALITY § I-1
66:1591
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Rollstone Avenue (WSV)
[Added 1-5-1988]
20 From 550 feet north of Montauk
Highway to Union Street
Second Avenue (BSR)
[Added 10-13-2010]
20 From Sunrise Highway to Rhodes
Avenue
Seventh Street (BHM)
[Added 6-10-2008]
20 From Roosevelt Avenue to school
entrance
Smith Avenue (ISL)
[Added 1-7-1986]
20 From 180 feet south of
Cloverwood Place to 1,200 feet
south of Cloverwood Place
Smithtown Avenue (BHM)
[Added 6-18-1985;
amended 5-6-1986]
20 From 120 feet north of Church
Street to 260 feet north of John
Street
Snedecor Avenue (BPT)
[Added 6-18-1985]
20 From 700 feet north of Academy
Street (east) to 150 feet south of
Academy Street (west)
Snedecor Avenue (WIS) 20 At Captree and Bayview Schools,
from 300 feet north of the
building line of Captree School
south for 1,850 feet
Spence Avenue (HTV)
[Added 12-19-2000]
20 From Deerfield Court to a point
1,100 feet north of Deerfield
Court
Spruce Avenue (WIS)
[Added 8-19-1986]
20 From Arcadia Drive to Roderick
Road
Spur Drive South (EIS)
[Added 8-19-1980]
20 From Manhattan Boulevard south
for 1,100 feet
Spur Drive South (EIS) 20 From Redman Street north for
700 feet
Sunrise Drive (SVL)
[Added 3-23-1999]
20 From Sayville Boulevard to Loop
Drive
Sycamore Avenue (BHM)
[Amended 5-6-1986]
20 From 200 feet north of Westwind
Drive to 500 feet north of Lanson
Street
Sycamore Avenue (RNK)
[Added 7-7-1987]
20 From 700 feet north of Johnson
Avenue to Johnson Avenue
Sylvan Avenue (BPT)
[Added 2-3-1981;
amended 5-3-1988]
20 From 300 feet south of Purick
Street to 420 feet north of Purick
Street
Third Avenue (BSR)
[Added 10-13-2010]
20 From Roosevelt Avenue to
Sunrise Highway
§ I-1 ISLIP CODE § I-1
66:1592
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Timber Point Road (GRV) 20 From School House Road to
Country Village Lane
Toomey Road (WIS)
[Added 2-29-2000]
20 From Hunter Avenue to Douglas
Avenue
Townline Road (HPG)
[Added 4-1-1986]
25 From 50 feet west of Townline
Road to 120 feet east of Park
Avenue
Udall Road (WBW) [Added
9-7-1982]
20 From Brentwood Street to 50 feet
south of Howells Road
Udall Road (WIS) [Added
2-4-1986; amended
8-14-2007]
20 From 430 feet north of Rockaway
Street to 650 feet north of
Bellmore Street
Udall Road (WIS) [Added
12-18-1984]
20 From 550 feet north of Roderick
Road to 25 feet south of North
Monroe Avenue
Union Boulevard (ISL)
[Added 12-19-1978]
25 From 450 feet west of Ocean
Avenue west for 1,850 feet
Voorhis Drive (BWD)
[Added 5-26-2015]
20 From 130 feet east of Mur Place
to 225 feet west of Knoll Place
Waverly Avenue (HTV)
[Added 1-31-2006]
20 From 1,170 feet south of Blue
Point Road west to 2,456 feet
south of Blue Point Road West
West White Street (BWD)
[Added 1-30-2001]
20 From Quail Drive to Chapel Hill
Drive
Wheeler Road (CIS)
[Added 1-17-1978;
amended 8-30-1995]
20 From 100 feet south of Halley
Lane to Anne Lane
Wheeler Road (CIS)
[Added 8-30-1995]
20 From Monsen Street to Oakdale
Avenue
Wicks Road (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
20 From 70 feet south of Heyward
Street to Floyd Street
William Street (Tillie
Street) (BSR)
20 From Brook Avenue to 130 feet
east of Perkal Street
Wingan-Hauppauge Road
(ISL) [Added 8-25-1992]
20 From 100 feet south of James
Street to Sunrise Highway
Wisconsin Avenue (BWD)
[Added 1-15-1980]
20 From 300 feet east of East Third
Avenue to 1,050 feet east on East
Third Avenue
§ I-1 WATER QUALITY § I-1
66:1593
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Wohseepee Drive (WBS)
[Added 12-19-1989;
amended 11-15-2005]
20 From Courtland Drive to
Ridgeway Boulevard
Woodland Drive (EIS)
[Added 2-3-1981]
20 From 100 feet north of
Shinnecock Lane to 440 feet
south of Gwendolyn Place
Woodlea Avenue (NBS)
[Added 11-16-2010]
20 From Greenwood Road south for
380 feet (at school grounds)
Schedule J
PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING RESTRICTIONS
§ J-1. Parking, stopping and standing restrictions.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC3-3, the parking, stopping or
standing of vehicles is restricted as indicated in the following locations:
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Academy Street/
North
From Bayport Ave. to 50 ft.
east of Snedecor Ave. (BPT)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 6-5-2001]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From 170 ft. east of
Snedecor Ave. to Snedecor
Ave. (BPT) [Added
12-6-1977; amended
9-24-2013]
No parking —
From 1,050 feet west of
Snedecor Ave. to April La.
(BPT) [Added 10-22-2019]
No parking —
From Snedecor Ave. west
for 1,050 feet (BPT)
[Amended 10-22-2019]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From April La. to Oakwood
Ave. (BPT) [Added
4-4-1978]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Bogel Rd. to Academy
St. west terminus (BPT)
[Added 1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
§ I-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1594
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Academy Street/
South
From Bogel Rd. to Academy
St. west terminus (BPT)
[Added 1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
From Oakwood Avenue east
for 1,085 ft. (BPT) [Added
9-24-2013]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 1,085 ft. east of
Oakwood Avenue east to
Snedecor Avenue (BPT)
[Added 9-24-2013]
No parking —
From Snedecor Ave. east for
130 ft. (BPT) [Added
12-6-1977; amended
9-24-2013]
No parking —
Ackerman
Street/North
From 110 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (CIS) [Added
1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
Ackerman
Street/South
From Carleton Ave. to 220
ft. east of Carleton Ave.
(CIS) [Added 1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
Ackerson
Boulevard/East
From 120 ft. south of
Montauk Dr. to Montauk Dr.
(NBS) [Added 4-22-2003]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
From Montauk Dr. north for
100 ft. (NBS) [Added
7-13-2004]
No parking —
From 150 ft. north of Fern
Pl. to its terminus 230 ft.
north of Fern Pl. (NBS)
[Added 4-15-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ackerson
Boulevard/West
From its terminus 230 ft.
north of Fern Pl. to 150 ft.
north of Fern Pl. (NBS)
[Added 4-15-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Montauk Dr. south for
120 ft. (NBS) [Added
4-22-2003]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Ackerson Street/
North
From Fifth Ave. west for
115 ft. (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1595
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 115 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to 75 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) (BSR)
[Added 1-16-1979]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 115 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to 75 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) (BSR)
[Added 1-16-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 75 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) to Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) (BSR)
[Added 1-16-1979]
No parking —
From Clinton Ave. (CR 13A)
to the Brightwaters village
line (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Clinton Ave. (CR 13A)
to the Brightwaters village
line (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ackerson Street/
South
From the Brightwaters
village line to Clinton Ave.
(CR 13A) (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the Brightwaters
village line to Clinton Ave.
(CR 13A) (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Clinton Ave. (CR 13A)
east for 70 ft. (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979; amended
7-1-1980]
No parking —
From 70 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) to 75 ft. west
of Fifth Ave. (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979; amended
7-1-1980]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 40 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. (CR 13A) to 75 ft. west
of Fifth Ave. (BSR) [Added
1-16-1979]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1596
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 75 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 1-16-1979]
No parking —
Adams Avenue/
North
From Dunwoodie Rd. to
Hancock Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Adams Avenue/
South
From Hancock Ave. to
Dunwoodie Rd. (WIS)
[Added 4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Adams Road/
North
From Hawthorne Ave. west
for 1,710 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
From 1,450 ft. west of
Hawthorne Ave. to Feller Dr.
(CIS) [Added 5-19-1998]
No
stopping
—
From Feller Dr. west for 700
ft. to Brown St. (CIS)
[Added 8-14-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Brown St. to Forest Pl.
(CIS) [Added12-18-1979;
amended 4-7-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Forest Pl. to Wheeler
Rd. (CIS) [Added
12-18-1979; amended
4-7-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Wheeler Rd. east for
200 ft. (CIS) [Added
12-18-1979]
No parking —
From 200 ft. east of
Wheeler Rd. to Brown St.
(CIS) [Added 12-18-1979]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Adams Road/
South
From Wheeler Rd. east for
200 ft. (CIS) [Added
4-7-1981]
No parking —
From 200 ft. east of
Wheeler Rd. to Feller Dr.
(CIS) [Added 4-7-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Feller Dr. east for 400
ft. (CIS) [Added
6-24-1997]
No parking 3:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1597
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Adams Street
East/North
From Carleton Ave. east for
175+/- ft. (EIS) [Added
5-27-2009; amended
6-23-2009]
No
stopping
—
Adams Street/
South
From Garfield Ave. to
Carleton Ave. (EIS)
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. east for
75 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Aft Court/East 150 ft. north of Norman Dr.
(BHM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No
stopping
—
Aft Court/West 150 ft. north of Norman Dr.
(BHM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No
stopping
—
Aldrich Court/
North
From Shore La. to Maple
Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
Aldrich Court/
South
From Maple Ave. to Shore
La. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
Aletta Place/East From 66 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
Aletta Place/East
(east leg)
[Added
5-15-2018]
From 50 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
Aletta Place/
South
From Aletta Pl. (west leg) to
Aletta Pl. (east leg) (BSR)
No parking —
Aletta Place/
West
From Union Blvd. south for
66 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Aletta Place/
West and North
(east leg)
[Amended
5-15-2018]
Union Blvd., south and west
for 300 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Alkier Street/
South
From 75 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-15-1980]
No parking —
Amityville
Street/North
From 235 ft. east of
Connetquot Ave. to 50 ft.
east of Connetquot Ave.
(NGR) [Added
10-25-2011]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1598
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 ft. east of
Connetquot Ave. to
Connetquot Ave. (NGR)
[Added 10-25-2011]
No
standing
—
Amityville
Street/South
From Connetquot Ave. to 35
ft. east of Connetquot Ave.
(NGR) [Added
10-25-2011]
No
standing
—
From 35 ft. east of
Connetquot Ave. to 105 ft.
east of Connetquot Ave.
(NGR) [Added
10-25-2011]
No parking —
Amuxen Court/
North
From Islip Ave. to Nassau
Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Amuxen Court/
South
From Nassau Ave. east for
60 ft. (ISL) [Added
12-6-1988]
No parking —
From 175 ft. east of Nassau
Ave. to Islip Ave. (ISL)
[Amended 12-6-1988]
No parking —
Anchorage
Drive/East
From terminus to 300 ft.
north of terminus (WIS)
[Added 9-15-1987]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Anchorage
Drive/West
From 415 ft. south of
Skipper Dr. to south
terminus (WIS) [Added
9-15-1987]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Andrea Road/
East
From 50+/- ft. south of
Colin Dr. to Colin Dr. (HBK)
[Added 10-14-2009]
No parking —
Andrea Road/
West
From Colin Dr. south for
50+/- ft. (HBK) [Added
10-14-2009]
No parking
Andrew Avenue/
North
From 420 ft. north to 160 ft.
east of Lilmar Dr. (EIS)
[Added 4-5-1988;
amended 8-14-2007;
7-15-2008]
No
stopping
Andrew Avenue/
South
From 250 ft. to 500 ft. east
of Lilmar Dr. (EIS) [Added
4-5-1988; amended
8-14-2007; 7-15-2008]
No
stopping
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1599
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Anita Drive/West From the north side of Jones
Dr. south for 250 ft. (SVL)
[Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
Anna Road/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Anna Road/
South Ansonia
Street/North
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Norma Ave. to
Leopold Ave. (WIS)
No parking —
Ansonia Street/
South
From Leopold Ave. to
Norma Ave. (WIS)
No parking —
Apache Road/
South
From 115 ft. west of
Parkway Blvd. to Parkway
Blvd. (RNK) [Added
6-19-2012]
No
standing
—
Arbell Drive/
West
From 150 ft. north of
Candlewood Rd. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 10-18-1983]
No parking —
Arbour Street/
East
From Kime Ave. to 200 ft.
north of Kime Ave. (WIS)
[Added 3-23-1999]
No
stopping
Nightly, 7:00
p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Arbour Street/
West
From 75 ft. north of Kime
Ave. to 15 ft. south of Kime
Ave. (WIS) [Amended
3-23-1999]
No
stopping
Nightly, 7:00
p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Ardmore
Avenue/North
From Brentwood Pkwy. west
for 130 ft. (BWD) [Added
4-22-1986]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Argosy Street/
West
From 195 ft. north of
Manhassett St. to 50 ft.
north of Manhassett St.
(EIS) [Added 3-3-1987]
No parking —
Arizona Avenue/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Arizona Avenue/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1600
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Arkansas
Avenue/North
From Brentwood Rd. west
for 60 ft. (NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
Arkansas
Avenue/South
From 60 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
Arkays Avenue/
West
From Montank Hwy. north
for 100 ft. (EIS)
No
standing
—
Aron Drive/
North
From 972 ft. west of Nathan
Dr. to 1,139 ft. west of
Nathan Dr. (BHM) (I/F/O
House No. 69) [Added
5-15-1990]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Aron Drive/
South
At a town recharge basin
(Access Rd.) located 125 ft.
east of Nathan Dr. (BHM)
[Added 5-15-1990]
No parking —
Arrival Avenue/
East
From the east roadway of
Johnson Ave. east for 920 ft.
(HBK)
No parking —
Arrival Avenue/
North
From Johnson Ave. (east
roadway) southerly
intersection to Johnson Ave.
(east roadway) northerly
intersection (HBK)
[Amended 11-15-1983]
No parking —
From MacArthur Memorial
Hwy. (southerly
intersection) north and west
to MacArthur Memorial
Hwy. (northerly
intersection) (HBK) [Added
5-7-1985]
No parking —
Arrival Avenue/
South
From Johnson Ave. (east
roadway) southerly
intersection to Johnson Ave.
(east roadway) northerly
intersection (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1601
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From MacArthur Memorial
Hwy. (southerly
intersection) east and north
to MacArthur Memorial
Hwy. (northerly
intersection) (HBK) [Added
5-7-1985]
No parking —
Asharoken
Boulevard/East
From 100 ft. south of
Penataquit Dr. to Penataquit
Dr. (BSR) [Added
9-7-1982]
No parking —
Atlantic Avenue/
East
From terminus to 123 +/- ft.
south of Clyde St. (WSV)
[Added 7-10-2007]
No parking
From Clyde St. to Montauk
Hwy. (WSV) [Added
7-10-2007; amended
2-9-2010]
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. north for 75 ft.
(NBS) [Added 7-17-2018]
No parking —
Atlantic Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 100 ft. (WSV)
No parking —
From 435 +/- ft. south of
Shore Rd. to terminus
(WSV) [Added 7-10-2007]
No parking
From 170 ft. south of
Antarctic Ave. to Sunrise
Hwy. North Service Rd.
(NBS) [Added 7-17-2018]
No parking —
Atlantic Street/
North
From South Clinton Ave. to
terminus (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Atlantic Street/
South
From terminus to S. Clinton
Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1602
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Auburn Avenue/
East
From Bayview Ave. to
Lawrence Ave. (BSR)
[Added 6-21-2011;
amended 5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
From Bayview Ave. north
for 180 ft. (BSR) [Added
9-23-2014]
Limited
parking 2
hours
—
Auburn Avenue/
West
From Lawrence Ave. to
Bayview Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Audwin Drive/
East
From Clayton St. to Smith
St. (CIS) [Added
8-22-2017]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Awixa Avenue/
East
From Penataquit Ave. north
for 340 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Awixa Avenue/
West
From 800 ft. south of
Second Ct. to Penataquit
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Bancroft Road/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Bancroft Road/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 85 ft. (WIS) [Added
7-17-2018]
No
stopping
—
Barberry Road/
East
From 85 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 225
ft. (WIS) [Added
11-20-1979; amended
7-17-2018]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Ivy Ct. to Iris Pl. (WIS) No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1603
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Barberry Road/
West
From Iris Pl. south for 495
ft. (WIS) [Amended
6-7-1988; 6-10-2008;
3-10-2020]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Barnard Street/
East
From Ogden Rd. to Dubois
Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dubois Rd. to Udalia
Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Barnard Street/
West
From Udalia Rd. to Dubois
Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dubois Rd. to Ogden
Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Barrett Avenue/
East
From Davis St. to Elliot St.
(BPT) [Added 3-3-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Elliot St. to Fulton St.
(BPT) [Added 2-5-1985]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fulton St. to Garrison
St. (BPT) [Added
2-5-1985]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Garrison St. to Inwood
St. (BPT) [Added
2-5-1985; amended
2-6-2007; 11-27-2007]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Barrett Avenue/
West
From Garrison St. to Fulton
St. (BPT) [Amended
2-7-1995]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fulton St. to Elliot St.
(BPT) [Amended
2-7-1995]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Elliot St. to Davis St.
(BPT) [Amended
2-7-1995]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Bates Street/
South
From Freeman Ave. to
Whitman Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Bay Avenue/East From Lawrence Ave. to
Gibson St. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1604
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 150 ft. south of Main
St. to Main St. (BSR)
No parking —
Bay Avenue/West From West Main St. to
Gibson St. (BSR)
No parking —
From Gibson St. to
Lawrence Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
Bay Fifth Street/
South
From 210 ft. east of
Secatogue La. W. to
Secatogue La. E. (WIS)
No parking —
Bay Ninth
Street/North
From 100 ft. east of West
Bay Dr. to West Bay Dr.
(WIS) [Added 2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From West Bay Dr. west for
100 ft. (WIS) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bay Ninth
Street/South
From 100 ft. west of West
Bay Dr. to 100 ft. east of
West Bay Dr. (WIS) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bay Second
Street/South
From 30 ft. east of terminus
to its terminus (WIS)
[Added 7-5-1988]
No parking —
Bay Shore
Avenue/East
From Main St. to Ritchie Ct.
(BSR)
No parking —
From 160 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
Angle
parking
—
Bay Shore
Avenue/West
From Ritchie Ct. south for
550 ft. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 550 ft. south of
Ritchie Ct. south for 100 ft.
(BSR)
Limited
parking
10 minutes
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 685 ft. south of
Ritchie Ct. to Main St.
(BSR)
No parking —
Bay Shore Road/
North
From Montauk Dr. to
Gardiner Dr. (NBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1605
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Gardiner Dr. to Manor
La. (NBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Manor La. to
Thompson Dr. (NBS)
[Amended 11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Thompson Dr. to
Howells Rd. (NBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Thompson Dr. west for
30 ft. (NBS) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking —
From Howells Rd. to
Martinstein Ave. (WBW)
[Added 3-20-1979]
No
stopping
—
From Sullivan St. East for
200 ft. (WBW) [Added
5-20-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Bay Shore Ave. to
Ocean Ave. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
From Ocean Ave. west for
350 ft. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
Bay Shore Road/
South
From 190 ft. east of Arbour
St. to Cotter St. (WIS)
[Added 6-18-2013;
amended 8-27-2013]
No parking —
From Ocean Ave. to Bay
Shore Ave. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
From Howells Rd. to Storey
Blvd. (WBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Storey Blvd. to
Thompson Dr. (WBS)
[Added 1-5-1988;
amended 11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Thompson Dr. to
Manor La. (WBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Manor La. to Howells
Rd. (WBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1606
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Baymen's Court/
East
From Montauk Hwy. to 150
ft. north of Montauk Hwy.
(SVL) [Added 11-13-2001]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
Baymen's Court/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL) [Added
11-13-2001]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
Bayport Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 100 ft. (BPT) [Amended
7-14-2015]
No
stopping
—
Bayport Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. [Amended
7-14-2015]
No
stopping
—
From Montauk Hwy. to LIRR
(BPT) [Amended
7-14-2015]
No
stopping
—
From 195 ft. north of Middle
Rd. to Middle Rd. (BPT)
No parking —
Bayview Avenue/
East
From the Great South Bay
north for 1,500 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 750 ft. north of
Timberpoint Rd. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Added
11-16-2010]
No parking —
Bayview Avenue/
West
From 1,500 ft. north of the
Great South Bay to the
Great South Bay (EIS)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 250 ft. (EIS) [Added
11-16-2010]
No parking —
Bayview Avenue/
East
From Maple St. to Orowoc
Ave., including the Center
Mall (ISL)
No parking —
Bayview Avenue/
West
From Orowoc Ave. to Maple
St., including the Center
Mall (ISL)
No parking —
Bayview Avenue/
North
From Ocean Ave. to Burnett
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
9-23-2014]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1607
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Burnett Ave. to
Auburn Ave. (BSR) [Added
11-18-2014]
Limited
parking 2
hours
—
From Auburn Ave. to South
Clinton Ave. (BSR) [Added
9-23-2014]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bayview Avenue/
South
From South Clinton Ave. to
Ocean Ave. (BSR) [Added
9-20-1994]
No parking —
Beach Drive/East From 200 ft. south of Gate
La. to Gate La. (WIS)
[Added 8-12-2008]
No parking —
From Gate La. north for 100
ft. (WIS) [Added
12-18-2001]
No parking —
From 50 ft. south of Beach
Manor Court to Beach
Manor Court (WIS) [Added
8-12-2003]
No parking —
From Beach Manor Court
north for 50 ft. (WIS)
[Added 8-12-2003]
No parking —
From 420 ft. north of Beach
Manor Ct. to Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Amended
5-1-1984; 5-11-2010]
No parking —
Beach Drive/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 1,475 ft. (WIS)
[Amended 5-1-1984;
7-13-1994]
No parking —
From 610 ft. south of Gate
La. to 750 ft. south of Gate
La. (WIS) [Added
6-5-1979]
No parking —
Beach Street/
West
From 220 ft. north of
Sherman Ave. to Sherman
Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-20-1999]
No
stopping
2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Beachview
Place/East
From 260 ft. south of
Waterview Ave. to
Waterview Ave. (RNK)
[Added 8-30-1983]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1608
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Beacon Drive/
East
From Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. to Colin Dr.
(HBK) [Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
Beacon Drive/
West
From Colin Dr. to Sunrise
Hwy. North Service Rd.
(HBK) [Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
Beaver Dam
Road/North
From Carleton Ave. west for
600 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 90 ft. east of Islip Ave.
to Islip Ave. (ISL) [Added
8-12-2008]
No parking —
From Islip Ave. west for 475
ft. (ISL) [Added
2-24-2004]
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. west of Wilson
Blvd. east for 150 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Beaver Dam
Road/South
From Carleton Ave. west for
600 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From Islip Ave. east for 125
ft. (ISL) [Added
8-12-2008; amended
4-28-2009]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Beech Street/
North
From Islip Ave. to Wingan-
Hauppauge Rd. (ISL)
No parking —
Beech Street/
South
From Wingan-Hauppauge
Rd. to Islip Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Bel Cul Court/
South
From Irish La. east for 75 ft.
(EIS) [Added 1-15-2013]
No parking —
Belgrave
Avenue/North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Belgrave
Avenue/South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Bellmore Street/
North
From 310 ft. west of Fire
Island Ave. to Udall Rd.
(WIS)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1609
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Belmore Avenue/
East
From 270 ft. north of
Westbury St. to Freeport St.
for a distance of 30 ft. (EIS)
[Added 1-5-1988]
No parking —
From Freeport Ave. to
Sunrise Hwy. (EIS) [Added
12-15-2015]
No parking —
Belmore Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Belmore Gardens driveway
to 100 ft. south of Belmore
Gardens driveway (EIS)
[Added 1-2-1979]
No parking —
Belver Drive/
East
From Seventh St. to 450 ft.
north of Seventh St. (BHM)
[Amended 1-2-1991;
5-4-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Belver Drive/
West
From 300 ft. north of
Seventh St. to Seventh St.
(BHM) [Amended
1-2-1991]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Benson Avenue/
East
From 175 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL)
No parking —
Benson Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 100 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Bernice Drive/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 200 ft. (BPT) [Added
12-19-1978; amended
2-9-2016]
No parking —
Bernice Drive/
West
From Renee Dr. (south leg)
to Montauk Hwy. (BPT)
[Added 12-19-1978]
No parking —
From Highland Ave. to
Wavecrest Ave. (WIS)
[Added 8-22-2017]
No parking –
Birch Street/East From Wavecrest Ave. to
Union Blvd. (WIS) [Added
1-6-1987]
No parking —
From Highland Avenue to
Wavecrest Avenue (WIS)
[Added 8-22-2017]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1610
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Birch Street/
West
From Wavecrest Ave. south
for 100 ft. (WIS) [Added
8-27-2013]
No parking —
Bishop Lane/
East
From the southern terminus
for 1,770 ft. north for 500 ft.
(HBK) [Added 5-27-2014]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bishop Lane/
West
From 1,250 ft. south of the
south side of Bishop La. for
a distance of 515 ft.
(adjacent to the recharge
basin) (HBK) [Added
5-27-2014]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bishop Road/
East
From 400 ft. south of Ninth
Ave. to Ninth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Bishop Road/
West
From Ninth Ave. south for
400 ft. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Blue Point Road/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Waverly Ave. to Waverly
Ave. (HTV) [Added
10-8-1996]
No
stopping
—
Blydenburgh's
Road/East
From Paul's Ct. north for
330 ft. (HPG) [Added
11-20-1979]
No parking —
From 750 ft. south of Town
Line Rd. to Town Line Rd.
(HPG)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Blydenburgh's
Road/West
From Veterans Hwy. south
for 815 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
Bogel Road/Culde-
sac
Perimeter of cul-de-sac
located 955 ft. south of
Academy St. Ext. (BPT)
[Added 9-15-1987]
No parking —
Booss Lane
Extension/North
From terminus to Lincoln
Blvd. (HPG) [Added
9-15-1987]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Booss Lane
Extension/South
From Lincoln Blvd. to
terminus (HPG) [Added
9-15-1987]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1611
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Boulevard
Avenue/East
From 460 ft. south of East
Cherry St. to East Cherry
St. (CIS) [Added 7-6-1982;
amended 2-7-1989]
No
stopping
bus stop
School days
Boulevard
Avenue/West
From East Cherry St. to 75
ft. south of East Cherry St.
(CIS) [Added 7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
Breeze Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. south of Fir
Grove Rd. south for 120 ft.
(RNK) [Added 7-7-1987]
No parking —
Breeze Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. south of Fir
Grove Rd. south for 159 ft.
(RNK) [Added 7-7-1987]
No parking —
Brentwood
Parkway/East
From Prospect Dr. to Flick
Pl. (BWD)
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Flick Pl. to Rita Dr.
(BWD)
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Rita Dr. to Crescent
Dr. (BWD)
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Wayne Ave. to Motor
Pkwy. (BWD) [Added
10-10-2000]
No parking —
Brentwood
Parkway/West
From 200 ft. north of
Ardmore Ave. to Ardmore
Ave. (BWD) [Added
4-22-1986]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Stuyvesant St. to
Oakland St. (BWD) [Added
1-2-1991]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
Brentwood Road/
East
From 270 ft. to 670 ft. north
of Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
[Added 3-24-1998;
amended 11-18-2003]
No parking —
From 130 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
From Moffitt Blvd. north
and south for 50 ft. (BSR)
No
standing
—
From the south entrance to
the Oakwood Cemetery
north and south for 50 ft.
(BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1612
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Nevada Ave. to
Minnesota Ave. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Minnesota Ave. to
Oakwood Blvd. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Oakwood Blvd. to
Idaho Ave. (NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Idaho Ave. to Oregon
Ave. (NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Colorado Ave. north
for 75 ft. (NBS) [Added
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From 125 ft. north of
California Ave. to Colorado
Ave. (NBS) [Added
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Pennsylvania Ave. to
New Jersey Ave. (BWD)
[Added 12-16-1986]
No parking —
From 266 ft. south of
Candlewood Rd. to 300 ft.
north of Candlewood Rd.
(BWD) [Added 4-18-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 300 ft. north of Fourth
St. to Commack Rd. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Commack Rd. to 450
ft. north of Commack Rd.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Seventh Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Fourth Ave. north for
80 ft. (BWD) [Amended
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From 80 ft. north to Fourth
Ave. to Third Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1613
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Third Ave. to Second
Ave. (BWD) [Amended
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Second Ave. north for
210 ft. (BWD) [Added
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From 210 ft. north of
Second Ave. to First Ave.
(BWD) [Amended
5-5-1981]
No parking —
From First Ave. to the LIRR
(BWD)
No parking —
Brentwood Road/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to First
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. north of First
Ave. south for 138 ft. (BWD)
No
standing
—
From the LIRR to First Ave.
(BWD)
No parking —
From First Ave. south for
190 ft. (BWD) [Amended
5-5-1981]
No parking —
From 190 ft. south of First
Ave. to Second Ave. (BWD)
[Added 5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Second Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD) [Amended
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Third Ave. south for
320 ft. (BWD) [Amended
4-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
From 320 ft. south of Third
Ave. to Fourth Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
From South Fifth Ave. to
Sixth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Sixth Ave. to Seventh
Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From 140 ft. south of Eighth
Ave. south for 820 ft. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1614
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 307 ft. north of
Candlewood Rd. to 228 ft.
south of Wisconsin Ave.
(BWD) [Added 4-18-1989]
No
stopping
—
From New York Ave. to
Eighteenth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Oregon Ave. to Idaho
Ave. (NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Idaho Ave. to
Arkansas Ave. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Arkansas Ave. to
Minnesota Ave. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Minnesota Ave. to
Nevada Ave. (NBS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From the LIRR to Union
Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
From 100 ft. north of
Redington St. to Redington
St. (BSR) [Added
6-18-2013]
No parking —
From Redington St. to
Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Amended 3-3-1981]
No parking —
From 550 ft. south of Tillie
St. to 290 ft. north of
Redington St. (BSR) [Added
4-9-2008]
No parking
From 325 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to 425 ft. south of
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
3-28-2006]
No parking
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
11-18-2003]
No
stopping
—
Bridge Road/
North
From 500 ft. west of Enter
La. to Motor Pkwy. (CIS)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1615
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Helen Marie Pl. to
Wheeler Rd. (HPG) [Added
4-6-1982; amended
7-6-1982; 9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
From 240 ft. west of Joyce
Dr. to 540 ft. west of Joyce
Dr. (HPG) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Wheeler Rd. west for
500 ft. (HPG) [Added
9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
Bridge Road/
South
From 500 ft. west of
Wheeler Rd. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Wheeler Rd. to Helen
Marie Pl. (CIS) [Added
4-6-1982; amended
7-6-1982; 9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Motor Pkwy. to Oval
Dr. (west leg) (CIS)
No parking —
From Oval Dr. (west leg)
east for 100 ft. (CIS)
[Added 4-4-1978;
6-6-1978]
No parking —
Bridger
Boulevard/Inner
Circle
Counterclockwise from
Kelly Ave. to Kelly Ave.
[Added 6-7-2016]
No parking —
Bridle Way/West From Montauk Hwy. to
Stuyvesant Rd. (OKD)
[Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
Brightside
Avenue/North
From Carleton Ave. west for
75 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
Brightside
Avenue/South
From 75 ft. west of Carleton
Ave. to Carleton Ave. (CIS)
[Added 7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
Broadway/East From Forty-Third St. north
for 75 ft. (ISL) [Added
1-16-1979]
No parking —
From Newberry St. north
for 100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1616
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 300 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS) [Added 11-22-2016]
No parking —
Broadway/West From 300 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. south to Suffolk
Ave. (CIS) [Added
6-7-1988]
No parking —
From 150 ft. south of Nolin
St. south for 250 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From 60 ft. north of
Plunkett St. to Plunkett St.
(BWD) [Added 6-19-2012]
No
standing
—
Broadway
Avenue/East
From Spur Dr. North to
Wurz St. (BWD) [Added
8-20-1985]
No parking —
From 150 ft. south of
Veterans Hwy. to Veterans
Hwy. (HBK)
No
stopping
—
From Veterans Hwy. to
Leona St. (HBK)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. to 1440
ft. north of Montauk Hwy.
(SVL) [Added 9-18-1990]
No parking —
Broadway
Avenue/West
From Winston Dr. to Spur
Dr. North (BWD) [Added
8-20-1985]
No parking —
From Westbridge Dr. (south
leg) to Veterans Hwy. (HBK)
No parking —
From Veterans Hwy. south
for 150 ft. (HBK)
No
stopping
—
From 300 ft. south of Maria
Ct. to Maria Ct. (HBK)
[Added 12-14-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Bethesada Lane north
for 150 ft. (SVL) [Added
1-24-2017]
No parking —
From 75 ft. north of Versa
Pl. to 75 ft. south of the
entrance of Broadway Ave.
Park (SVL) [Added
5-6-1986]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1617
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 75 ft. north of the Islip
Grange entrance to 75 ft.
south of the Islip Grange
entrance (SVL) [Added
1-18-1983]
No parking —
Brook Street/
North
From Milton St. west for
900 ft. (ISL) [Added
7-15-2008]
No parking
From Saxton Ave. to Cherry
Ave. (WSV)
No
standing
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Cherry Ave. to
Division St. (WSV) [Added
7-18-1995]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 250 ft. east of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (OKD) [Added
4-27-2004]
No
stopping
—
Brook Street/
South
From 400 ft. east of Boston
Ave. east for 900 ft. (ISL)
[Added 7-15-2008]
No parking
From Cherry Ave. to Saxon
Ave. (WSV)
No
standing
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Brook Street/
South
From Division St. to Cherry
Ave. (WSV) [Added
7-18-1995]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second Ave. east for
150 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
From Bay Shore Road north
for 100 ft. (WBW) [Added
11-22-2016]
No parking —
Brookdale
Avenue/West
From 150 ft. north of Bay
Shore Road to Bay Shore
Road (WBW) [Added
11-22-2016]
No parking —
Brookfield Place/
East
From 35 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
11-17-1987]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1618
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Brooklyn
Boulevard/East
From 120 ft. north of Spur
Dr. South to north terminus
(NBS) [Added 7-7-1987]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Brooklyn
Boulevard/West
From north terminus south
to 120 ft. north of Spur Dr.
S. (NBS) [Added 7-7-1987]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Brown Street/
East
From Adams Rd. to Dolores
Pl. (CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dolores Pl. north for
175 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 175 ft. north of
Dolores Pl. to Delores Pl.
(CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Brown Street/
West
From Dolores Pl. to Adams
Rd. (CIS) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Browns
Boulevard/East
From Rosevale Ave. to the
Islip Town beach property
(RNK)
No parking —
Browns
Boulevard/West
From the Islip Town beach
property to Rosevale Ave.
(RNK)
No parking —
Browns River
Road/North
From River Rd. to Foster
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
9-15-1981; 4-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Browns River
Road/South
From Foster Ave. to River
Rd. (SVL)
No parking —
From 270 ft. east of Foster
Ave. to 500 ft. east of Foster
Ave. (SVL) [Added
7-17-1979]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
Browns River
Road No. 3/
North
From Seaman Ave. to
Browns River (BPT)
[Amended 4-1-1986;
8-19-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Browns River
Road No. 3/
South
From Browns River to 380
ft. east of Browns River
(BPT) [Amended
4-1-1986; 8-19-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1619
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 380 ft. east of Browns
River to 310 ft. west of
Seaman Ave. (BPT) [Added
8-19-1986]
No parking —
From 310 ft. west of
Seaman Ave. to Seaman
Ave. (BPT) [Added
8-19-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Budenos Drive/
East
From Versa Pl. to Belinda
Ct. (SVL) [Added
6-7-2016]
No parking —
Budenos Drive/
West
From Belinda Ct. to Versa
Pl. (SVL) [Added
6-7-2016]
No parking —
From 80 ft. north of Versa
Pl. to Versa Pl. (SVL)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking —
Buffalo Avenue/
East
From 175 ft. to 350 ft. north
of Moffitt Blvd. (ISL)
[Added 11-16-1993;
amended 4-14-2009]
No parking —
Bunker Place/
East
From Fairway Ln. to
Johnson Ave. (RNK) [Added
12-10-2013]
No parking —
Burling Lane/
North
From Everdell Ave. west to
the terminus (WIS) [Added
6-18-1985]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Burling Lane/
South
From Everdell Ave. to the
terminus (WIS) [Added
6-18-1985]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Burnett Avenue/
East
From Bayview Ave. to
Lawrence Ave. (BSR)
[Added 6-21-2011;
amended 5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Burnett Avenue/
West
From Lawrence Ave. to
Bayview Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Byron Way/East From Lincoln Dr. to its
terminus (OKD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking Sat., Sun. and
holidays
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1620
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Byron Way/West From its terminus to Lincoln
Dr. (LKD) [Amended
10-3-1978]
No parking Sat., Sun. and
holidays
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Caleb's Path/
West
From Express Dr. South to
Motor Pkwy. (HPG) [Added
12-17-1991]
No parking —
Candee Avenue/
East
From the Great South Bay
to Elm St. (SVL) [Added
9-18-1979; amended
8-19-1980]
No parking —
From 110 ft. north of Elm
St. to 192 ft. north of Elm
St. (SVL) [Added
7-11-2006]
No parking —
From 276 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL) [Amended
8-19-1980]
No parking —
Candee Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 276 ft. (SVL) [Amended
9-19-1980]
No parking —
From 211 ft. north of Elm
St. to Elm St. (SVL) [Added
7-11-2006]
No parking —
From Elm St. to the Great
South Bay (SVL) [Added
8-19-1980]
No parking —
Candlewood
Road/North
From 259 ft. east of
Brentwood Rd. to 416 ft.
west of Brentwood Rd.
(BWD) [Added 4-18-1989]
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. west for
100 ft. (BWD) [Added
4-15-1980]
No parking —
Candlewood
Road/South
From 220 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-15-1980;
amended 1-17-1984]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1621
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 148 ft. west of
Nebraska Ave. to 259 ft.
east of Brentwood Rd.
(BWD) [Added 4-18-1989]
No
stopping
—
Cardinal Lane From 20 ft. east of Quail
Run to terminus (EIS)
[Added 10-20-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Carey Street/
North
From 530 ft. west of Third
Ave. for 260 ft. (to Irish Ln.)
(EIS) [Added 8-27-2013]
No parking Nightly
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Carey Street/
South
From Irish Ln. east for 45 ft.
(EIS) [Added 8-27-2013]
No parking Nightly
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Carl Avenue/East From Furrows Rd. north for
250 ft. (HBK) [Added
5-23-2017]
No parking —
Carleton Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. to
Union Blvd. (EIS)
[Amended 9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. to Wall St.
(EIS) [Amended
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Wall St. to Jefferson
St. (EIS)
No
stopping
From Jefferson St. to East
Madison St. (EIS) [Added
6-20-1978]
No
stopping
—
From East Madison St. to
Jackson St. (EIS) [Added
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Islip Blvd. to Nassau
St. (EIS) [Added
10-18-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Lincoln Ave. to
Fairview Ave. (EIS) [Added
6-6-1978]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. north of
Fairview Ave. north for 75
ft. (EIS) [Added
11-20-1979]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1622
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Richard Ave. to
Andrew Ave. (EIS) [Added
3-1-1994]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 110 ft. south of
Andrew Ave. to Andrew Ave.
(EIS) [Added 9-17-1991;
amended 8-25-1992]
No parking —
From Andrew Ave. north for
80 ft. (EIS)
Bus stop —
From 110 ft. south of Smith
St. to Smith St. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Earle St. to Clayton
St. (CIS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Clayton St. to St.
Johns St. (CIS)
No
stopping
—
From St. Johns St. to Third
Ave. (CIS) [Amended
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Third Ave. to Second
Ave. (CIS) [Added
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Second Ave. to First
Ave. (CIS) [Added
7-17-1979; amended
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. south of
Brightside Ave. to
Brightside Ave. (CIS)
[Added 7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Brightside Ave. to
First Ave. (CIS) [Added
7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
From First Ave. to Suffolk
Ave. (CIS) [Amended
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
Carleton Avenue/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to
Brightside Ave. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1623
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 ft. north of
Brightside Ave. to
Brightside Ave. (CIS)
[Added 7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Brightside Ave. south
for 400 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-6-1982; amended
7-15-1997]
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. south of
Brightside Ave. to
Brightside Ave. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From 350 ft. south of
Brightside Ave. south for 25
ft. (CIS) [Added
10-18-1983]
No parking
Loading
zone
—
From 50 ft. north of South
Rd. to South Rd. (CIS)
[Amended 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From South Rd. to St. Johns
St. (CIS) [Amended
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From St. Johns St. to
Clayton St. (CIS)
No
stopping
—
From Clayton St. to Earle
St. (CIS)
No
stopping
—
From Earle St. to Elmore St.
(CIS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Elmore St. to
Ackerman St. (CIS) [Added
6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Ackerman St. to Clift
St. (CIS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Clift St. to Irving St.
(CIS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Irving St. to Smith St.
(CIS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Smith St. to 110 ft.
south of Smith St. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Roosevelt St. south
for 50 ft. (EIS)
No
standing
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1624
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 370 ft. south of
McKinley St. to Cleveland
St. (EIS) [Added 5-5-1987]
No parking —
From Cleveland St. south
for 30 ft. (EIS) [Added
5-5-1987]
No parking —
From 30 ft. south of
Cleveland St. to Islip Blvd.
(EIS) [Added 5-5-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Jackson St. to
Madison St. (EIS) [Added
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Madison St. to Moffitt
Blvd. (EIS) [Added
6-20-1978; amended
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Moffitt Blvd. to Wall
St. (EIS)
No
stopping
—
From Wall St. to Stewart St.
(EIS)
No
stopping
—
From Stewart St. to Union
Blvd. (EIS)
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. to Watson
St. (EIS) [Amended
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Watson St. to
Montauk Hwy. (EIS)
[Amended 9-7-1982;
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
Cedar Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 30 ft. (ISL) [Amended
7-7-1981]
No parking —
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 60
ft. (ISL) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 90 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 90
ft. (ISL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Cedarhurst
Street
At east terminus of
Cedarhurst St. (NGR)
[Added 4-10-2007]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1625
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Celeste Avenue/
East
700 ft. west of Coates Ave.
to 862 ft. west of Coates
Ave. (HBK) [Added
6-5-1990]
No
stopping
—
Celeste Avenue/
West
From 630 ft. west of Coates
Ave. to 957 ft. west of
Coates Ave. (HBK) [Added
6-5-1990]
No
stopping
—
Center Street/
North
From Railroad Ave. to
Greene Ave. (SVL) [Added
7-7-1987]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
Center Street/
South
From Greene Ave. to
Railroad Ave. (SVL) [Added
5-6-1980; amended
7-7-1987]
No parking —
Central Avenue/
East
From Church St. north for
360 ft. (HBK) [Added
9-13-2005]
No parking —
Central Avenue/
West
From 170 ft. north of
Church St. (HBK) [Added
9-13-2005]
No parking —
Central Avenue/
North
From Joshuas Path west for
100 ft. (HPG) [Added
4-5-1983]
No parking —
Central Avenue/
South
From Central Ave. terminus
to Joshuas Path (HPG)
[Added 4-5-1983;
amended 5-3-1988]
No parking —
Central
Boulevard/East
From dead end to Shore Dr.
(OKD)
No parking —
From Connetquot Dr. to Idle
Hour Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
Central
Boulevard/West
From Idle Hour Blvd. to
Connetquot Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
From Shore Dr. south for
560 ft. (OKD)
No parking —
Central Islip
Boulevard
From 140 ft. west of
Rosevale Ave. to 245 ft.
west of Rosevale Ave. (RNK)
[Added 9-19-1989]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1626
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Champlain
Avenue/East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 250 ft. (EIS) [Added
3-4-1986]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Champlain
Avenue/West
From 250 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Added
3-4-1986]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Added
1-12-1994]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
Chapman Place/
East
From Montauk Hwy. to
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
2-14-2012; amended
3-8-2016; 11-22-2016]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
except
Sundays
Chapman Place/
West
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Highway to
Montauk Highway (BSR)
[Added 2-14-2012;
amended 11-22-2016]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to 200 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 3-8-2016]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
except
Sundays
Chateau Drive/
North
From Fernwood Ave. to Idle
Hour Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
From Idle Hour Blvd. to
Connetquot Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
Chateau Drive/
South
From Connetquot Dr. to Idle
Hour Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
From Central Blvd. to Van
Bomel Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
Cheril Drive/East From 200 ft. south of
Camille La. to Camille La.
(HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Cheril Drive/
West
From 50 ft. north to 200 ft.
south of Camille La. (HBK)
[Added 11-15-1983]
No parking —
Cherokee
Avenue/East
From Second St. north for
200 ft. (WIS) [Added
5-3-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1627
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Cherry Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 75 ft. (WSV) [Amended
5-24-2011]
No parking —
From 630 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 300
ft. (WSV) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking —
From 650 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 300
ft. (WSV) [Amended
2-26-2008; 4-9-2008]
No parking —
From 200 ft. of north of
Union St. to Brook St.
(WSV) [Added 4-6-1982;
amended 2-26-2008;
4-9-2008]]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
School days
From Brook St. to Fifth St.
(WSV) [Added 2-2-1993]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
school days
From 50 ft. south of the
south entrance to 50 ft.
north of the north driveway
at the Cherry Ave.
Elementary School (WSV)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Cherry Avenue/
West
From Tariff St. to Easy St.
(WSV) [Added 2-23-1993]
No parking —
From Fifth St. to Brook St.
(WSV) [Added 2-2-1993]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Brook St. to Union St.
(WSV) [Amended
4-28-2009]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 130 ft. south of Union
St. south for 75 ft. (WSV)
No parking —
From 75 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WSV) [Amended
2-9-2010]
No parking —
Chester Road/
East
From the south side of its
east-west extension south
for 30 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1628
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 260 ft. west of
Lakeland Ave. to Lakeland
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-15-1988]
No parking —
Chester Road/
North
From Lakeland Ave. west
for 150 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Chester Road/
South
From 150 ft. west of
Lakeland Ave. to Lakeland
Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
Chester Road/
West
From Lakeland Ave. south
for 390 ft. (SVL) [Added
11-15-1988]
No parking —
Chestnut
Avenue/East
From Johnson Ave. north for
250 ft. (RNK)
No parking —
Chestnut
Avenue/West
From 250 ft. north of
Chestnut Ave. to Johnson
Ave. (RNK)
No parking —
From Johnson Ave. south for
30 ft. (RNK)
No parking —
Chicago Avenue/
East
From Herkimer St. to
Greene St. (BSR) [Added
9-16-1986]
No parking —
From 35 ft. south of
Harrisburg St. to 35 ft.
north of Harrisburg St.
(NBS) [Amended
9-22-2015]
No parking —
Church Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 35 ft. (ISL) [Amended
8-22-2017]
No parking —
From 35 ft. to 200 ft. south
of Montauk Hwy. (ISL)
[Added 8-22-2017]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
Mon.-Fri.
Church Road/
North
From Great River Rd. west
for 215 feet (GRV) [Added
1-25-2011]
No parking —
Church Street/
East
From Suffolk Ave.
northeasterly for 100 ft.
(CIS) [Added 8-13-2002]
No parking —
Church Street/
South
From Ocean Ave. to Locust
Ave. (BHM) [Amended
6-4-1985]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1629
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Locust Ave. to Walnut
Ave. (BHM) [Amended
6-4-1985]
No parking —
From Walnut Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
[Added 6-4-1985]
No parking —
From Smithtown Ave. to
Artic Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
Claremont
Avenue/North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 9-15-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Clarinet Lane/— Perimeter of cul-de-sac
(beginning at west property
line of house No. 207)
located 530 ft. west of
Coates Ave. (HBK) [Added
7-17-1979; amended
3-8-2011]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Clark Drive/East From Schaefer Dr. north for
900 ft. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Clark Drive/West From 900 ft. north of
Schaefer Dr. to Schaefer Dr.
(HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Clarke Street/
South
From Jefferson Ave. to
Washington Ave. (BWD)
[Amended 5-10-2020]
No
stopping
—
Clayton Street/
North
From Audwin Dr. to
Kenmore St. (CIS) [Added
6-6-1978]
No parking —
From Kenmore St. to
Carleton Ave. (CIS) [Added
6-6-1978]
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. to 70 ft.
west of Carleton Ave. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1630
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Clayton Street/
South
From 50 ft. west of Carleton
Ave. to Carleton Ave. (CIS)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. east for
180 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
Cleveland
Avenue/West
From 250 ft. south of South
Second St. to 350 ft. south
of South Second St. (EDG)
[Added 8-22-2017]
No
standing
—
From South Fehr Way to
South Third St. (EDG)
[Added 3-3-2015]
No
standing
—
Cleveland
Street/North
From Carleton Ave. west for
120 ft. (EIS) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking —
Cleveland
Street/South
From 200 ft. west of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (EIS) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking —
Clinton Avenue/
East
From its terminus at 420 ft.
south of Reil Pl. to 280 ft.
south of Reil Pl. (BSR)
[Added 8-19-1986]
No
stopping
—
From South Union St. to
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-5-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
Montauk Hwy. [Added
12-17-1985]
No
stopping
—
From South Union Blvd. to
Union Blvd. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. to
Ackerson St. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Howells Rd. north for
250 ft. (BSR) [Added
12-18-1979]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Clinton Avenue/
West
From 250 ft. north of
Howells Rd. to Howells Rd.
(BSR) [Added 12-18-1979]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Ackerson St. south for
300 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1631
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 275 ft. to 400 ft. south
of Cooper La. (BSR) [Added
8-13-2002; amended
2-4-2003]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From 510 ft. south of
Cooper La. southerly for
100 ft. (BSR) [Added
5-7-1985; amended
9-16-1986; 3-1-1988]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 500 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
From 370 ft. south of Reil
Pl. to its terminus at 420 ft.
south of Reil Pl. (BSR)
[Added 8-19-1986]
No
stopping
—
Clyde Street/
North
From Babylon Ave. to
Higbie La. (WIS) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
Clyde Street/
South
From Atlantic Ave. to 125 ft.
east of Atlantic Ave. (WSV)
[Added 12-12-1995]
No parking —
From Higbie La. to Babylon
Ave. (WIS) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
Cole Court Counterclockwise from
Academy St. to Academy St.
(BPT) [Added 2-6-1990]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.
school days
Colin Drive/East From Andrea Rd. north to
Nicolls Rd. (HBK) [Added
1-26-2010]
No parking —
Colin Drive/West From Nicolls Rd. south to
Andrea Rd. (HBK) [Added
1-26-2010]
No parking —
Colin Drive/
North
From Andrea Rd. west to
Beacon Dr. (HBK) [Added
1-26-2010]
No parking —
Colin Drive/
South
From Beacon Dr. east to
Andrea Rd. (HBK) [Added
1-26-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1632
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Collington Drive From 700 ft. east of
Woodlawn Ave. for 300 ft.
around cul-de-sac (RNK)
[Added 3-20-1979]
No parking —
Collins Avenue/
East
From 320 ft. south of
Middle Rd. to Middle Rd.
(SVL) [Amended
6-18-2013]
No parking —
Collins Avenue/
West
From Middle Rd. south for
200 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Colorado
Avenue/North
From 125 ft. east of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (NBS)
[Added 3-3-1981]
No parking —
Colton Avenue/
East
From Elm St. to Poplar St.
(SVL) [Added 3-10-2009]
No parking —
Colton Avenue/
East
From Poplar Street north
for 150 feet (SVL) [Added
7-16-2019]
No parking April 1 to
November 1
Colton Avenue/
West
From 400 ft. north of Elm
St. to 100 feet north of Elm
St. (SVL) [Added
9-19-1995; amended
3-19-2019]
No parking April 1 to
November 1
From Edwards St. south for
250 ft. (SVL) [Added
12-17-2019]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
nightly, April
1 to October
1
Comac Loop From north intersection of
Thirteenth St. to south
intersection of Thirteenth
St. (LKL) [Added
9-20-1988]
No parking —
Comac Street/
North
From Fifth Ave. to
Thirteenth Ave. (LKL)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Comac Street/
South
From Thirteenth Ave. to
Fifth Ave. (LKL) [Added
9-20-1988]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1633
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Commack Road/
East
From 325 ft, north of
Montauk Ave. to Brentwood
Rd. (BWD) [Added
8-19-1986]
No parking —
Commercial
Avenue/North
From 150 ft. west of
Oakdale Ave. to Vanderbilt
Blvd. (OKD) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking —
From Vanderbilt Blvd. to
Forbes St. (OKD) [Added
11-18-2003; amended
6-21-2011]
No parking —
Commercial
Avenue/South
From Forbes St. to
Vanderbilt Blvd. (OKD)
[Added 11-18-2003;
amended 6-21-2011]
No parking —
From Vanderbilt Blvd. to
Oakdale Ave. (OKD) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking —
Commercial
Boulevard/South
From Fulton St. to
Ridgewood Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking —
From 630 ft. west of Fulton
St. to Fulton St. (BWD)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
From Lexington Ave. to
Church Dr. (CIS) [Added
9-25-2012]
No parking —
Community
Drive/East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 125 ft. (BSR) [Added
4-23-2013]
No parking —
Connecticut
Avenue/South
For 132 ft. west of Illinois
Ave. (BWD) [Added
9-29-2009]
No
stopping
—
Connetquot
Avenue/East
From 1,166 ft. north of
Napoli St. to Sportsmen St.
(CIS) [Added 6-14-2005]
No
stopping
—
From Sportsmen St. to 370
ft. north of Sportsmen St.
(CIS) [Added 6-14-2005]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1634
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 175 ft. south of LIRR
P/L to East Madison St.
(EIS) [Added 6-20-1978;
amended 10-6-1981;
6-5-1990]
No parking —
From Amityville St. to
Oceanside St. (NGR)
[Added 8-28-79]
No
stopping
—
From 250 ft. north of
Westbury St. to Jericho St.
(EIS) [Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Jericho St. to East
Roslyn St. (GRV) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From East Roslyn St. to
Craig Rd. (GVR) [Added
5-1-1979; amended
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Craig Rd. north for 60
ft. (EIS) [Added 5-1-1979]
No parking —
From Rock Rd. to Woodcliff
St. (NGR) [Added
1-15-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Woodcliff St. to
Woodmere St. (NGR)
[Added 1-15-1985]
No
stopping
—
Connetquot
Avenue/West
From 500 ft. south of
Pinewood Ave. to Sportsmen
St. (CIS) [Added
6-14-2005]
No
stopping
—
From Sportsmen St. to 360
ft. south of Sportsmen St.
(CIS) [Added 6-14-2005]
No
stopping
—
From Oceanside St. to
Lowell Ave. (NGR)
No
stopping
—
From Lowell Ave. to
Amityville St. (NGR)
[Added 11-20-1979;
amended 1-15-1980]
No
stopping
—
From Woodmere St. to
Manhattan Blvd. (NGR)
[Added 1-15-1985]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1635
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Manhattan Blvd. to
Merrick St. (NGR) [Added
1-15-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Merrick St. to 150 ft.
south of Merrick St. (NGR)
[Added 1-15-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Piney St. to East
Nassau St. (EIS) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From East Nassau St. to
East Roslyn St. (EIS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From East Roslyn St. to
Jericho St. (GRV) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From 80 ft. south of the
Sunrise Hwy. center line to
180 ft. south of the Sunrise
Hwy. center line (GRV)
[Added 6-3-1980]
Bus stop —
From Jericho St. to Freeport
St. (GRV) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From Freeport St. to
Westbury St. (GRV) [Added
4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
From East Madison St. to
Hawthorne Ave. (EIS)
[Added 10-6-1981;
amended 6-5-1990]
No parking —
From Hawthorne Ave. south
for 100 ft. (EIS) [Added
10-6-1981]
No parking —
Connetquot
Drive/East
From Chateau Dr. to
Biltmore Ave. (OKD)
No parking —
Connetquot
Drive/West
From Biltmore Ave. to
Chateau Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
Connetquot
Road/East
From 800 ft. to 675 ft. south
of Cross Rd. (OKD)
[Amended 1-3-1984]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1636
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 400 ft. south of
Middle Rd. to Middle Rd.
(BPT) [Added 1-31-2012;
amended 9-24-2013]
No parking —
Connetquot
Road/West
From 675 ft. to 800 ft. south
of Cross Rd. (OKD)
[Amended 1-3-1984]
No
stopping
—
From Middle Rd. south for
100 ft. (BPT) [Added
1-31-2012]
No parking —
Consuelo Place/
West
From Shore Rd. to terminus
(OKD) [Added 1-30-1996;
amended 11-14-2006]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
Corbin Avenue/
East
From 85 ft. south of South
Second St. to South Second
St. (EDG) [Added
4-28-2009]
No parking —
From South Second St.
North to 620 ft. south of
Pine Aire Dr. (EDG) [Added
4-28-2009]
No parking —
Corbin Avenue/
West
From 660 ft. south of Pine
Aire Dr. to South Second St.
(EDG) [Added 4-28-2009]
No parking —
From South St. south for 95
ft. (EDG) [Added
4-28-2009]
No parking —
From a point 115 ft. north of
South Fourth St. north for
60 ft. (PNR) [Added
6-10-1997]
No
stopping
—
Cordello Avenue/
West
From 30 ft. north of the
north driveway to 30 ft.
south of the south driveway
(CIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Cottage Avenue/
East
From the Great South Bay
to South Bay Ave. (BSR)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Cottage Avenue/
West
From Great South Bay to
South Bay Ave. (BSR)
[Added 6-21-2011;
amended 5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1637
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Country Greens
Court/North
From dead end to Higbie
La. (WIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs. and
Sat.
Country Greens
Court/South
From Higbie La. to dead
end (WIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., Fri.
and Sun.
County Road
13A/East
From Ackerson St. to Reil
Pl. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Reil Pl. to Fifth Ave.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
County Road
13A/West
From Fifth Ave. to Reil Pl.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Reil Pl. to Ackerson
St. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
Craig Road/
North
From 60 ft. east of
Connetquot Ave. to
Connetquot Ave. (EIS)
[Added 5-1-1979]
No parking —
Craig Road/
South
From Connetquot Ave. east
for 60 ft. (EIS) [Added
5-1-1979]
No parking —
Craig B. Gariepy
Avenue/East
From Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. to Islip Blvd.
(EIS) [Added 9-10-2002]
No parking —
From 290 + ft. north of
Nassau St. to 385 + ft.
north of Nassau St. [Added
8-11-2009]
No parking —
From 385 + ft. north of
Nassau St. to 640 ft. north
of Nassau St. (EIS) [Added
9-13-2005; amended
8-11-2009]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From 640 ft. north of
Nassau St. to 680 ft. north
of Nassau St. (EIS) [Added
2-27-2007]
No parking —
From 680 ft. north of
Nassau St. to Redman St.
(EIS) [Amended
2-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1638
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Redman St. to Richard
Ave. (EIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Craig B. Gariepy
Avenue/West
From Richard Ave. to
Fairview Ave. (EIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fairview Ave. to
Lincoln Ave. (EIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Lincoln Ave. south for
160 ft. (EIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Crescent Drive/
North
From 310 +/- ft. east of
Washington Ave. to
Washington Ave. (BWD)
[Added 12-2-2008]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Crooked Hill
Road (CR
13)/East
From Wicks Rd. (CR 7)
north for 45 ft. (BWD)
[Added 6-5-1990;
amended 11-14-2006]
No
stopping
—
From 45 ft. north of Wicks
Rd. (CR 7) to Community
College Dr. (CR 106) (BWD)
[Added 11-14-2006]
No parking —
Crooked Hill
Road (CR
13)/West
From Community College
Dr. (CR 106) to Merril St.
(BWD) [Added 6-5-1990]
No parking —
Cross Road/
North
From Vanderbilt Blvd. to
Bellevue Rd. (OKD) [Added
6-23-2009]
No parking 3:00 p.m. to
12:00
midnight, Fri.
Cross Road/
South
From Bellevue Rd. to
Vanderbilt Blvd. (OKD)
[Added 6-23-2009]
No parking 3:00 p.m. to
12:00
midnight, Fri.
Crossway East/
East
From 550 ft. south of
Veterans Memorial Highway
(13th Avenue signal) south
for 250 ft. (BHM) [Added
1-24-2017]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1639
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Dakota Avenue/
South
From 75+ ft. west of Illinois
Ave. to Illinois Ave. (NBS)
[Added 3-28-2006]
No parking —
Dalton Road/
North
From Stein Dr. west for 580
ft. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 150 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
Dalton Road/
South
From 150 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Stein Dr. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
DaVinci Drive/
North
From Johnson Ave. west for
300 +/- ft. (BHM) [Added
2-6-2007]
No
stopping
—
DaVinci Drive/
South
From 300 +/- ft. west of
Johnson Ave. east to
Johnson Ave. (BHM) [Added
2-6-2007]
No
stopping
—
Davison Lane
East/East
From south terminus at
1,480 ft. south of Davison
La. north for 440 ft. (WIS)
[Added 1-18-1983;
amended 5-3-2005]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Davison Lane
East/West
From 1,100 ft. south of
Davison La. to 1,500 ft.
south of Davison La. at
south terminus (WIS)
[Added 1-18-1983;
amended 5-3-2005]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
DeForest
Avenue/East
From Oakley Place to 275 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 3-21-2017]
No parking —
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
1-7-1992]
No parking —
DeForest
Avenue/West
From Frontage Rd. to 200
ft. south of Frontage Rd.
(WIS) [Added 10-15-1991]
No parking —
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 450 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 10-25-2011]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Mon.-
Fri.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1640
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Degnon
Boulevard/East
From 172 ft. south of Mallar
Ave. to Mallar Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Degnon
Boulevard/West
From Green Ave. to Mallar
Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Denver Avenue/
East
From 75 ft. south of Sunrise
Hwy. to Sunrise Hwy. (BSR)
[Added 7-17-2018]
No parking —
From 375 ft. south of
Sunrise Hwy. to 75 ft. south
of Sunrise Hwy. (BSR)
[Added 11-20-2018]
Limited
parking
2 hours
Denver Avenue/
West
From Sunrise Hwy. south
for 300 ft. (BSR) [Added
7-17-2018]
No parking —
Departure Drive/
North
From Arrival Ave. south and
west to MacArthur
Memorial Hwy. (southerly
roadway) (HBK) [Added
5-7-1985]
No parking —
Departure Drive/
South
From Arrival Ave. south and
east to MacArthur Memorial
Hwy. (southerly roadway)
(HBK) [Added 5-7-1985]
No parking —
Depot Street/
North
From Railroad Ave. to
Greene Ave. (SVL) [Added
10-6-1981]
No
stopping
—
Depot Street/
South
From Greeley Ave. to
Greene Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 10-6-1981]
No parking
From Greene Ave. to
Railroad Ave. (SVL) [Added
10-6-1981]
No
stopping
—
Devon Road/
North
From 100 ft. east of
Standish Rd. to Standish Rd.
(BWD) [Added
12-15-2015]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Diamond Street/
North
From Manor La. to Hynian
Ave. (BSR)
No
standing
—
Division Avenue/
East
From Second St. northerly
for 530 ft. (WSV) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1641
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 400 ft. south of the
LIRR tracks to the LIRR
tracks (EIS) [Added
9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Washington Ave. to
Jefferson Ave. (EIS) [Added
9-7-1982; amended
11-16-1982]
No
stopping
—
Division Avenue/
West
From 140 ft. south of
Jefferson Ave. to
Washington St. (EIS)
[Added 9-7-1982;
amended 11-16-1982;
2-7-1989]
No
stopping
—
From the LIRR tracks south
for 400 ft. (EIS) [Added
9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
From north terminus at the
LIRR tracks south to a point
100 ft. north of Second St.
(WSV) [Added 4-5-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Division Street/
East
From 335 ft. south of Brook
St. (Town of Islip
Playground) north for 125
ft. (WSV)
No parking —
Dolores Place/
North
From Brown St. to Forest Pl.
(CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Forest Pl. to Wheeler
Rd. (CIS) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Dolores Place/
South
From Wheeler Rd. to Forest
Pl. (CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Forest Pl. to Brown St.
(CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Donald
Boulevard/South
From 140 ft. west of Grundy
Ave. to Grundy Ave. (HBK)
[Added 11-15-1988]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1642
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Doris Place/
North
From School House Rd. to
150 ft. west of School House
Rd. (EIS) [Added
4-16-1996]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Doris Place/
South
From 150 ft. west of School
House Rd. to School House
Rd. (EIS) [Added
4-16-1996]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Dovecote Lane/
East
From 40 ft. north of Suffolk
Ave. to 220 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. (CIS) [Added
3-19-1991]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Dow Street/West From 150 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS)
No parking —
Dowsing Avenue/
North
From 50 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 8-19-1990]
No parking —
From Fifth Ave. west for 50
ft. (BSR) [Added
8-19-1980]
No parking —
Dowsing Avenue/
South
From 50 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 8-19-1980]
No parking —
From Fifth Ave. east for 50
ft. (BSR) [Added
8-19-1980]
No parking —
Drayton Avenue/
North
From 440 ft. west of Stein
Dr. to 530 ft. west of Stein
Dr. (BWD) [Added
2-7-1984]
No parking —
Dubois Road/
North
From Barnard St. to dead
end (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Barnard St. to Higbie
La. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Dubois Road/
South
From Higbie La. to Barnard
St. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1643
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Barnard St. to dead
end (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Dunton Avenue/
East
From 110 ft. south of Pine
Aire Dr. to Pine Aire Dr.
(PNR) [Added 3-19-1991]
No parking —
Dunton Avenue/
West
From Pine Aire Dr. to 130 ft.
south of Pine Aire Dr. (PNR)
[Added 3-19-1991]
No parking —
Dunwoodie
Road/East
From Jackson Ave. to North
Monroe Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Dunwoodie
Road/West
From North Monroe Ave. to
Jackson Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Earle Street/
North
From 220 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (CIS) [Added
12-18-1990]
No parking —
East Bay Drive/
East
From 400 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 100 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 1-6-1981;
amended 2-27-2007]
Limited
parking
4 hours
—
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS)
No parking —
East Bay Drive/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 100 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 300
ft. (WIS) [Added 1-6-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
East Cherry
Street/South
From Boulevard Ave. east
for 280 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-6-1982; amended
2-7-1989]
No
stopping
bus stop
School days
East
Farmingdale
Street/North
From Rocket Dr. to Spur Dr.
north (EIS) [Added
2-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1644
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
East
Farmingdale
Street/South
From Spur Dr. north to
Rocket Dr. (EIS) [Added
2-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
East Forks Road/
East
From terminus south of
Oakridge Rd. to Oakridge
Rd. (BWD) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking —
East Forks Road/
West
From Oakridge Rd. to
terminus south of Oakridge
Rd. (BWD) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking —
East Golf Street/
North and South
From Cedar Ave. to 120 ft.
east of Cedar Ave. (SVL)
[Added 4-2-1991]
No parking —
East Madison
Street/South
From Carleton Ave. east for
180 ft. (EIS) [Added
6-23-2015]
No parking —
East Park Lane/
East
From 150 ft. south of Grady
St. to Grady St. (BPT)
[Added 11-18-2008]
No parking —
East Park Lane/
West
From Grady St. south for
170 ft. (BPT) [Added
11-18-2008]
No parking —
East Third
Avenue/West
From 400 ft. north of
Sunrise Hwy. to Sunrise
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
11-16-1993]
No parking —
From Walbridge Ave. to
Farrington Ave. (BWD)
[Added 2-5-2008;
amended 6-24-2008]
No parking —
East Williams
Street/North
From Brook Ave. to Perkal
St. (BSR)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
East William
Street/South
From Perkal St. to Brook
Ave. (BSR)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Easton Street/
East
From Smithtown Ave. north
for 100 ft. (LKL) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1645
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Easton Street/
North
From 650 ft. east of
Railroad Ave. Ext. to
Railroad Ave. Ext. (BHM)
[Added 11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
Easton Street/
South
From Railroad Ave. Ext. to
650 ft. east of Railroad Ave.
Ext. (BHM) [Added
11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 220 ft. east of Marion
St. east and south for 100 ft.
(LKL) [Added 7-6-1982]
No parking —
From 80 ft. west of Marion
St. to Marion St. (LKL)
[Added 7-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
Easton Street/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Smithtown Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (LKL)
[Added 7-6-1982]
No parking —
Easton Street/
Cul-de-sac
From the west property line
of house No. 277 to the west
property line of house No.
276 (LKL) [Added
7-7-1987; amended
10-20-1992]
No
stopping
—
Eastover Road/
North
From 30 ft. east of Lakeland
Ave. to Lakeland Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
Eastover Road/
South
From Lakeland Ave. east for
30 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Eastview Drive/
East
From Spur Dr. North to
Courthouse Dr. (CIS)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No
stopping
—
Eastview Drive/
West
From Courthouse Dr. to
Spur Dr. North (CIS)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No
stopping
—
Eastview Road/
North
From east terminus west for
30 ft. (RNK) [Added
9-11-2012]
No parking —
Eastview Road/
South
From 1,115 ft. east of
Rosevale Ave. 150 ft. east to
terminus (RNK) [Added
9-11-2012]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1646
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Easy Street/
North
From 100 ft. east of
Roosevelt Ave. to 100 ft.
west of Roosevelt Ave. (SVL)
[Added 11-14-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Eaton Lane/East From the Great South Bay
to Sequams La. East (WIS)
[Amended 6-5-1984]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 470 ft. north of
Seaspray La. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
6-19-2012]
No parking —
From 380 ft. to 200 ft. south
of Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
[Added 6-19-2012]
No parking —
Eaton Lane/West From Montauk Hwy. south
for 150 ft. (WIS) [Added
2-28-1978]
No
standing
—
From Sequams La. East to
the Great South Bay (WIS)
[Amended 6-5-1984]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Edgewater
Avenue/East
From Great South Bay to
Harriet Rd. (BPT)
[Amended 11-15-1983]
No parking —
Edgewater
Avenue/West
From 600 ft. north of Great
South Bay to Great South
Bay (BPT) [Amended
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Edgewater Road/
East
From Forest Ave. to
Featherbed La. (OKD)
[Added 3-2-1982]
No parking —
Edgewater Road/
West
From Featherbed La. to
Forest Ave. (OKD) [Added
3-2-1982]
No parking —
Edison Avenue/
West
From 265 ft. north of Motor
Pkwy. north for 350 ft.
(HPG) [Added 4-26-2011]
No parking —
Edmore Lane/
North
From Everdell Ave. to dead
end (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1647
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Edmore Lane/
South
From dead end to Everdell
Ave. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Edmore Lane
North/North
From Center Dyre Ave. to
Everdell Ave. (WIS) [Added
1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Edmore Lane
North/South
From Everdell Ave. to
Center Dyre Ave. (WIS)
[Added 1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Edmore Lane
South/North
From South Drye Ave. to
Everdell Ave. (WIS) [Added
1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Edmore Lane
South/South
From Everdell Ave. to South
Dyre Ave. (WIS) [Added
1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Edwards
Avenue/East
From the Great South Bay
to Elm St. (SVL)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Edwards
Avenue/West
From Elm St. to the Great
South Bay (SVL)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Edwards Street/
North
From Foster Ave. west for
90 +/- (SVL) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking 10:00 p.m to
6:00
a.m.,nightly
4/1 to 10/1
From Gillette Ave. to
Candee Ave. (SVL) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking 10:00 p.m to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly 4/1 to
10/1
Edwards Street/
South
From 235 +/- ft. west of
Foster Ave. to Foster Ave.
(SVL) [Added 6-10-2008;
amended 10-21-2008]
No parking —
Eighth Avenue/
North
From Fourth St. west for
150 ft. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Second
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1648
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Eighth Avenue/
South
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to Third
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 150 ft. west of Fourth
St. to Fourth St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Eighth Street/
East
From 230 ft. north of
Second Ave. to its terminus
at 970 ft. north of Second
Ave. (BWD) [Added
7-16-2002]
No parking —
From 660 ft. north of
Second Ave. to 760 ft. north
of Second Ave. (BWD)
[Added 5-15-1990]
No
stopping
—
From its terminus 970 ft.
north of Second Ave. south
to 260 ft. north of Second
Ave. [Added 7-16-2002]
No parking —
Eighth Street/
North
From 517 +/- ft. west for
136 +/- ft. (BHM) [Added
6-24-2008]
No parking —
Eighth Street/
South
From 720 +/- ft. west of
Norman Dr. east for 160 +/-
ft. (BHM) [Added
6-24-2008]
No parking —
Eleventh Street/
North
From Lakeland Ave. west
for 20 ft. (SVL) [Amended
11-18-1980]
No
standing
—
From 20 ft. west of
Lakeland Ave. to Franklyn
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Franklyn Ave. to
Sayville Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Sayville Ave. to Fulton
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1649
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Fulton Ave. to Hudson
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Hudson Ave. to
Bohemia Pkwy. (SVL)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Eleventh Street/
South
From Bohemia Pkwy. to
Hudson Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Hudson Ave. to Fulton
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Fulton Ave. to Sayville
Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Sayville Ave. to
Franklyn Ave. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Franklyn Ave. to 20 ft.
west of Lakeland Ave. (SVL)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 20 ft. west of
Lakeland Ave. to Lakeland
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
11-18-1980]
No
standing
—
Ellery Street/
North
From 640 ft. west of Lincoln
Ave. to 990 ft. west of
Lincoln Ave. (BWD) [Added
10-1-1985]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ellery Street/
South
From west property line to
east property line of park
(BWD) [Added
11-20-1984]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Elm Avenue/East From Cedar Ave. to Peconic
St. (LKL) [Added
1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
Elm Avenue/
West
From Peconic St. to Cedar
Ave. (LKL) [Added
1-15-1991]
No
stopping
—
Elm Street/North From Edwards Ave. east for
400 +/- ft. (SVL) [Added
11-17-2009]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1650
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Foster Ave. to 60 ft.
west of Colton Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 9-19-1995]
No parking —
From Foster Ave. to Colton
Ave. (SVL)
No parking Sat., Sun. and
holidays, 4/15
to 9/30
Elm Street/South From 200 ft. west of Foster
Ave. to Foster Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
From 375 ft. west of Foster
Ave. to Foster Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 5-1-1979]
No parking Sat., Sun. and
holidays, 4/15
to 9/30
Elsmere Avenue/
North
From 220 ft. east of Idle
Hour Blvd. to Idle Hour
Blvd. (OKD) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking —
From Idle Hour Blvd. to the
Connetquot River (OKD)
No parking —
Elsmere Avenue/
South
From the Connetquot River
to Connetquot Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
From Connetquot Dr. to
Guilford Ave. (OKD)
No parking —
From Guilford Ave. to Idle
Hour Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
From Idle Hour Blvd. east
for 220 ft. (OKD) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking —
Emjay
Boulevard/East
From Suffolk Ave. north to
Eisenhower Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-11-2009]
No
stopping
From Eisenhower Ave. west
and north for 730 ft. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
Emjay
Bouelvard/West
From 1200 ft. south of
Eisenhower Ave. to 1320 ft.
south of Eisenhower Ave.
(BWD) [Added 5-24-2011]
No parking —
From 1320 ft. south of
Eisenhower Ave. to Suffolk
Ave. (BWD) [Added
8-11-2009; amended
5-24-2011]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1651
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Emkay Street/
East
From 310 ft. south of Spur
Dr. N. to 260 ft. south of
Spur Dr. North (BWD)
[Added 8-25-1992]
No parking Nightly, 8:00
p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Emkay Street/
West
From 250 ft. south of Spur
Dr. N. to 320 ft. south of
Spur Dr. North (BWD)
[Added 8-25-1992]
No parking Nightly, 8:00
p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Erwin Street/
North
From River Rd. to Foster
Ave. (SVL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
4/15 to 10/15
Erwin Street/
South
From Foster Ave. to River
Rd. (SVL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
4/15 to 10/15
Esplanade Way/
East
From Paulanna Ave. to
Montauk Hwy. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Esplanade Way/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to
Gerritsen Ave. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Esther Avenue/
East
From Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. to Mildred Pl.
(NBS) [Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
Esther Avenue/
West
From Mildred Pl. to Sunrise
Hwy. North Service Rd.
(NBS) [Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
Evans Place/East From its terminus located
270 ft. north of Roosevelt to
Roosevelt St. (BSR) [Added
8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Evans Place/
West
From Roosevelt St. to its
terminus located 270 ft.
north of Roosevelt St. (BSR)
[Added 8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Evelyn Road/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 150 ft. (WIS) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
12-18-2001]
No
stopping
—
Evelyn Road/
West
From 300 ft. south of
Church La. to Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 2-28-1978;
amended 12-18-2001;
6-8-2004]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1652
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Everdell Avenue/
East
From Merritt St. to Edmore
Ln. South (WIS) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Edmore La. South to
Edmore La. North (WIS)
[Added 1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Edmore Ln. North to
Burling Ln. South (WIS)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Everdell Avenue/
West
From 75 ft. south of Burling
La. North to 130 ft. south of
Burling La. North (WIS)
[Added 1-30-1996]
No
stopping
—
From Burling Ln. South to
Edmore Ln. North (WIS)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Edmore La. North to
Edmore La. South (WIS)
[Added 1-3-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Edmore Ln. South to
Merritt St. (WIS) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Executive Drive/
East
From Long Island Ave. to
Rodeo Dr. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
Executive Drive/
West
From Rodeo Dr. to Long
Island Ave. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
Express Drive
North/North
From the Village of Islandia
to 600 ft. west of Gloria
Blvd. (HPG) [Added
10-7-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Wheeler Rd. (NY 111)
to Simeon Woods Rd. (HPG)
[Added 6-5-1984]
No
stopping
—
From 750 ft. west of Ranick
Rd. west to Caleb's Path
(HPG) [Amended
6-20-1978]
No parking —
From Caleb's Path to Motor
Pkwy. (HPG)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1653
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Motor Pkwy. to
Washington Ave. (HPG)
[Added 4-9-2008]
No
stopping
From Cedar St. to Pine Ave.
[Amended 8-27-1991]
No
stopping
—
Express Drive
North/South
From Motor Pkwy. to Ranick
Rd. (HPG)
No
stopping
—
From Wheeler Rd. (NY 111)
to Simeon Woods Rd. (HPG)
[Added 6-5-1984]
No
stopping
—
Express Drive
South/North
From Caleb's Path east to
the Long Island Expwy.
entrance ramp (HPG)
[Added 1-17-1978]
No
stopping
—
Express Drive
South/South
From Caleb's Path east to
the Long Island Expwy.
entrance ramp (HPG)
[Added 1-17-1978]
No
stopping
From 220+/- ft. west of
Haven Ave. to Haven Ave.
(RNK) [Added 9-29-2009]
No
stopping
—
From 250 ft. west of
Sycamore Ave. easterly to
Chestnut St. (RNK) [Added
8-27-1991]
No
stopping
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fairfax Avenue/
East
From Hunter Ave. north for
125 ft. (WIS) [Added
9-24-2013]
No parking —
Fairfax Avenue/
West
From 125 ft. north of
Hunter Ave. to Hunter Ave.
(WIS) [Added 9-24-2013]
No parking —
Fairtown Road/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Fairtown Road/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1654
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fairview Avenue/
North
From Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
west for 500 ft. (EIS)
[Amended 2-28-1989;
10-20-1998]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Fairview Avenue/
South
From Carleton Ave. east for
144 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 100 ft. east of
Kunigunda Pl. to Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. (EIS)
[Amended 5-5-1998;
11-9-1999; 5-4-2004]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Farm Lane/North From school property line to
Higbie La. (WIS) [Added
7-7-1987]
No parking —
Farm Lane/South From Higbie La. east to
school property line (WIS)
[Added 7-7-1987]
No parking —
Farmardie Drive/
North
From West Dr. to Lake
Shore Dr. (RNK) [Added
5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Lake Shore Dr. to
Rose Dr. (RNK) [Added
5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Farmardie Drive/
South
From Rose Dr. to Lake
Shore Dr. (RNK) [Added
5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Lake Shore Dr. to
West Dr. (RNK) [Added
5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Fern Avenue/
West
From 260 ft. south of Viola
Pl. to Montauk Hwy. (EIS)
[Added 5-3-1983]
No parking —
Ferndale
Boulevard/West
From 200 ft. north of
Brightside Ave. to
Brightside Ave. (CIS)
No parking —
Feuereisen
Avenue/East
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Sixth St. (LKL)
[Added 3-20-2001]
No
stopping
fire zone
—
Fifth Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 100 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1655
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fifth Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to a point
170 ft. north of Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
2-5-1991]
No parking
loading
zone
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 330 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 7-1-1980;
amended 2-5-1991;
4-23-2013]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 330 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 7-1-1980]
No parking —
From 35 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
From 250 ft. south of
Garfield St. to Garfield St.
(BSR)
Limited
parking
30 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Reil Pl. to Oscar St.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Oscar St. to Henry Pl.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Henry Pl. to Juliet St.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Juliet St. to Howells
Rd. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Howells Rd. to
Sunrise Hwy. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Brewster St. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Brewster St. to
Hansen St. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Hansen St. to
Dowsing Ave. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1656
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Dowsing Ave. to Smith
St. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Smith St. to Lee Ave.
(NBS) [Added 5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Lee Ave. to Palfrey St.
(NBS)
No parking —
From Palfrey St. to
Frederick Ave. (NBS)
[Added 5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Frederick Ave. to
Joseph St. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Joseph St. to Mickel
Ave. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Mickel St. to Brook
Ave. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Brook Ave. to Santam
Ct. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Santam Ct. to Spur
Dr. S. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Spur Dr. N. to Bailey
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Bailey Ave. to
Farrington Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Farrington Ave. to
Wallbridge Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Walbridge Ave. to
Frederick Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Frederick Ave. to
Drayton Ave. (BWD) [Added
8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Drayton Ave. to
Connecticut Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1657
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Connecticut Ave. to
Massachusetts Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Massachusetts Ave. to
New Hampshire Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From New Hampshire Ave.
to Oklahoma Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Oklahoma Ave. to
Arizona Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Arizona Ave. to
Claremont Ave. (BWD)
[Added 12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Claremont Ave. to
Belgrave Ave. (BWD)
[Added 12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Belgrave Ave. to
Abingdon Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Abingdon Ave. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Candlewood Rd. to
Fairtown Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Fairtown Rd. to Kirk
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Kirk Rd. to Jensen Rd.
(BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Jensen Rd. to
Inchcape Rd. (BWD)
[Added 12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Inchcape Rd. to
Dalton Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Dalton Rd. to Marvin
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Marvin Rd. to
Bancroft Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1658
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Bancroft Rd. to Anna
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Anna Rd. to Fourth
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Third Ave. to Suffolk
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. north for 500 ft. (LKL)
[Added 4-8-1997]
No
stopping
—
Fifth Avenue/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to
Pineaire Dr. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Pineaire Dr. to Anna
Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Anna Rd. to Bancroft
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Bancroft Rd. to
Marvin Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Marvin Rd. to Dalton
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Dalton Rd. to
Inchcape Rd. (BWD)
[Added 12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Inchcape Rd. to
Jensen Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Jensen Rd. to Kirk Rd.
(BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Kirk Rd. to Fairtown
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Fairtown Rd. to Eden
Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Eden Rd. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1659
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Candlewood Rd. to
Spence St. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Spence St. to Drexel
Dr. (BWD) [Added
12-19-1978; amended
5-3-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Drexel Dr. to
Sweenydale Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Sweenydale Ave. to
Donohue Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Donohue Ave. to
MacAdam St. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From MacAdam St. to
Independence Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Independence Ave. to
Industry Ct. (BWD) [Added
8-17-1982]
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Industrial Ct. to
Spur Dr. N. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Spur Dr. S. to Joseph
St. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
Fifth Avenue/
West
From Joseph St. to
Frederick Ave. (NBS)
[Added 5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Frederick Ave. to
Dowsing Ave. (NBS) [Added
5-19-1992]
No parking —
From Dowsing Ave. to the
Sunrise Hwy. entrance ramp
(NBS)
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Howells Rd. (BSR) [Added
5-5-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Howells Rd. to CR
13A (BSR)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1660
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From CR 13A to Reil Pl.
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Reil Pl. to Ackerson
St. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Ackerson St. to Union
Blvd. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. to South
Union Blvd. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From South Union Blvd.
south for 300 ft. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
290 ft. north of Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
7-1-1980]
No parking —
From 290 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 50 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 7-1-1980]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
From 500 ft. north of
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
south to Veterans Memorial
Hwy. (LKL) [Added
7-7-1987; amended
4-8-1997]
No
stopping
—
Fifth Industrial
Court/North
From Wicks Rd. to cul-desac
(BWD) [Added
3-15-1988]
No parking —
Fifth Industrial
Court/South
From culdesac to Wicks Rd.
(BWD) [Added 3-15-1988]
No parking —
Fifth Industrial
Court/West
From Spur Dr. North to 200
ft. north of Spur Dr. North
(BWD) [Added
12-12-1995]
No parking —
Fifth Street/
North
From Cherry St. 200+/- ft.
west (WSV) [Added
11-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Division Ave. 200+/-
ft. east (WSV) [Added
11-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1661
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Cherry Ave. 220+/- ft.
west (WSV) [Added
11-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Fire Road Drive/
North
From Gardiner Dr. east to
terminus (NBS) [Added
10-16-1984; amended
11-19-1991]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Fire Road Drive/
South
From 90 ft. east of Gardiner
Dr. to terminus (NBS)
[Added 10-16-1984;
amended 11-19-1991]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
First Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 5-1-1979]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to
Lakeview Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Lakeview Ave. to
Brook St. (BSR)
No parking —
First Avenue/
East
From Carleton Ave. east for
100 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
First Avenue/
North
From Brentwood Rd. west
for 50 ft. (BWD) [Amended
12-3-1991]
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to 100 ft.
east of Fourth St. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 100 ft. east of Fourth
St. to Fourth St. (BWD)
[Amended 12-3-1991]
No
stopping
—
First Avenue/
South
From Fourth St. east for 60
ft. (BWD)
No
standing
—
From 60 ft. east of Fourth
St. to 50 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 50 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
[Amended 12-3-1991]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1662
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
First Avenue/
South
From Carleton Ave. to a
point 125 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. (CIS) [Added
2-19-2002]
No parking —
First Avenue/
West
From 780 ft. south of First
St. to Montauk Hwy. (BPT)
[Added 5-27-2014]
No parking —
First Avenue/
West
From Brook St. to the LIRR
(BSR)
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to
Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
First Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS)
No parking —
First Avenue/
West
From Carleton Ave. east for
100 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
First Street/East From 400 ft. south of Ninth
Ave. to Ninth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Ninth Ave. to Eighth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. to Sixth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Fourth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First Ave. south for 90
ft. (BWD)
No parking All, except
Sundays and
holidays
First Street/West From Third Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1663
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Sixth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to Seventh
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Seventh Ave. to
Eighth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. to Ninth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Ninth Ave. south for
400 ft. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Fischer Avenue/
North
From 200 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (EIS)
No parking —
From 435 ft. to 305 ft. east
of Lilmar Dr. (EIS) [Added
8-14-2007]
No
stopping
—
From 120 ft. east of Lilmar
Dr. for 315 ft. (EIS) [Added
7-15-2008]
No
stopping
Fischer Avenue/
South
From 200 ft. south of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (ElS) [Addd 7-11-1989]
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. east for
200 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 305 ft. to 385 ft. east
of Lilmar Dr. (EIS) [Added
8-14-2007]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. east of Lilmar
Dr. for 185 ft. (EIS) [Added
7-15-2008]
No
stopping
Floral Park
Street/South
From 300 ft. to 400 ft. east
of Belmore Ave. (NGR)
[Added 6-5-1984]
No parking —
Forbes Street/
East
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to
Commercial Ave. (OKD)
[Added 4-26-2011]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1664
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Commercial Ave.
north for 150 ft. (OKD)
[Added 4-26-2011]
No parking —
Forbes Street/
West
From 200 ft. south of
Station St. south for 350 ft.
(OKD) [Added 4-26-2011]
No parking —
Fordham Place/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 500 ft. (BSR) [Amended
6-24-2008]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Fordham Place/
West
From 680 ft. north of
Fordham Pl. (north
terminus) to 200 ft. north of
Fordham Pl. (BSR) [Added
4-3-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 200 ft. north of
Fordham Pl. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
4-3-2012]
No parking —
Forest Avenue/
North
From 142 +/- ft. east of
Tower Mews to Tower Mews
(OKD) [Added 7-15-2008]
No parking —
Forest Place/
East
From Adams Rd. to Dolores
Pl. (CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dolores Pl. north for
175 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Forest Place/
West
From 175 ft. north of
Dolores Pl. to Dolores Pl.
(CIS) [Added 7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dolores Pl. to Adams
Rd. (CIS) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Forty-Seventh
Street/South
From Commack Rd. east for
150 ft. (ISL) [Added
3-24-1992]
No parking —
Foster Avenue/
East
From Browns River Rd. to
Erwin St. (SVL)
No parking —
From Browns River Rd. to
Terry St. (SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1665
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Terry St. to Willow St.
(SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From Willow St. to River St.
(SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From River St. to Erwin St.
(SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From 60 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 245 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(SVL) [Added 2-4-1992]
No
stopping
—
Foster Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to
Middle Rd. (SVL) [Added
11-1-1988]
No parking —
From Edwards St. to Poplar
St. (SVL)
No parking —
From Edwards St. to Poplar
St. (SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From Poplar St. to Elm St.
(SVL)
No parking —
From Poplar St. to Elm St.
(SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From Elm St. south for 400
ft. (SVL) [Amended
4-29-2008]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From 400 ft. south of Elm
St. to 125 ft. south of
Browns River Rd. (SVL)
[Amended 10-5-1993]
No parking —
Fourth Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. (West
Main St.) to Mechanicsville
Rd. (BSR) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
140 ft. south of Union Blvd.
(BSR) [Added 1-15-1980;
amended 4-25-2006]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1666
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 140 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 4-25-2006]
No
standing
From Railroad Plaza (Park
Plaza) to 75 ft. south of
Garfield St. (BSR)
[Amended 8-30-1988]
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 75 ft. south of Garfield
St. to Garfield St. (BSR)
[Added 8-30-1988]
No parking —
From Garfield St. to 50 ft.
north of Garfield St. (BSR)
[Added 6-17-1980]
No parking —
North of Main St. and south
of Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Fourth Avenue/
North
From Brentwood Rd. to
Fourth St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth St. to Third St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Second
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to the
Brentwood H.S. gate (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 100 ft. east of Stein
Dr. to Stein Dr. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Fourth Avenue/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1667
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Stein Dr. east for 100
ft. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From the Brentwood H.S.
gate to First St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to Third
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Fourth St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth St. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Fourth Avenue/
West
From 415 ft. south of
Benjamin St. to Garfield St.
(BSR) [Added 6-17-1980]
No parking —
From Garfield St. to 75 ft.
south of Garfield St. (BSR)
[Added 6-17-1980]
No parking —
From 75 ft. south of Garfield
St. to Railroad Plaza (Park
Plaza) (BSR) [Amended
6-17-1980]
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From Union Blvd. south for
191 ft. (BSR) [Added
4-25-2006]
No
standing
—
From 191 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Mechanicsville Rd.
(BSR) [Amended
4-25-2006]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Mechanicsville Rd.
south for 180 ft. (BSR)
[Amended 11-17-1981;
5-18-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1668
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 180 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. to 300 ft.
south of Mechanicsville Rd.
(BSR) [Amended
11-17-1981; 5-18-1982;
10-8-2013]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 300 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. to West
Main St. (BSR) [Amended
11-17-1981]
No parking —
North of Main St. and south
of Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Fourth Street/
East
From Seventh Ave. to Sixth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Fourth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third Ave. to Second
Ave. (BWD) [Added
5-15-1990; amended
5-7-1991]
No
stopping
—
From Second Ave. north for
50 ft. (BWD)
No
standing
—
From 40 ft. north of Second
Ave. to the LIRR (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 50 ft. north of Second
Ave. north for 150 ft. (BWD)
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 200 ft. north of
Second Ave. to First Ave.
(BWD)
No parking —
From the LIRR to Suffolk
Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
Fourth Street/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to the
LIRR (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1669
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From the LIRR south for
385 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From the south property
line of the LIRR to 40 ft.
north of Second Ave. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 90 ft. north of Second
Ave. to Second Ave. (BWD)
No
standing
—
From Second Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD) [Amended
7-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
From Fourth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Sixth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to Seventh
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Franklin Road/
South
From 440 ft. east of Lincoln
Dr. to Bridle Way (OKD)
[Added 10-1-1985]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Franklyn
Avenue/East
From Eleventh St. to its
terminus 580 ft. north of
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
8-19-1980; amended
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Franklyn
Avenue/West
From its terminus 570 ft.
north of Eleventh St. south
to Eleventh St. (SVL)
[Added 8-19-1980;
amended 11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Freeman
Avenue/East
From Princeton St. to
Amherst St. (ISL) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From 250 ft. south of Bates
St. to Bates St. (ISL)
No parking —
From 720 ft. south of Spur
Dr. South to south terminus
(ISL) [Added 4-25-2006;
amended 3-27-2007;
4-16-2019]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1670
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Freeman
Avenue/West
From Studley St. south for
125 ft. (BWD) [Added
5-22-2007]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 370 ft. south of Bates
St. to Amherst St. (ISL)
[Added 8-22-2017]
No parking —
Frontage Road/
North
Between DeForest Ave. and
West Islip Rd. (WIS) [Added
1-7-1992]
No parking —
Frontage Road/
South
Between DeForest Ave. and
West Islip Rd. (WIS) [Added
10-15-1991]
No parking —
Fulton Avenue/
East
From Eleventh St. to its
terminus 380 ft. north of
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Ridgewood Ave. to
Commercial Blvd. (BWD)
[Added 11-16-2010]
No parking —
Fulton Avenue/
West
From its terminus 380 ft.
north of Eleventh St. to
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Fulton Street/
East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Fulton Street/
West
From Ralph Ave. to
Nostrand Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From 100 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(BWD)
No parking —
Furrows Road/
North
From 2,100 ft. west of
Singingwood Rd. to 2,600 ft.
west of Singingwood Rd.
(HBK) [Added 9-8-1998]
No
stopping
—
Furrows Road/
West
From Nicolls Rd.
southbound entrance/exit
ramp and Nicolls Rd.
northbound entrance/exit
ramp (HBK) [Added
6-7-2016]
No parking
or standing
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1671
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Garfield Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 150 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 450+/- ft. north of
Brook St. for 500+/- ft.
(SVL) [Added 3-10-2009]
No parking —
From Moffitt Blvd. north for
100 ft. (EIS) [Added
4-18-1989]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Garfield Avenue/
West
From 300 ft. south of
Madison St. south to Moffitt
Blvd. (EIS) [Added
12-13-2005]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Garfield Street/
North
From Fourth Ave. west for
30 ft. (BSR) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
Garfield Street/
South
From Fourth Ave. east for
30 ft. (BSR) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
Garner Lane/
East
From its terminus north for
300 ft. (BSR) [Amended
l2-6-1977; 8-19-1980]
No parking —
From Manatuck La. to
Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
Garner Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to
Manatuck La. (BSR)
No parking —
From 2,700 ft. south of
Manatuck La. south for 200
ft. (BSR)
No parking —
From 300 ft. north of its
terminus to its terminus
(BSR) [Added 12-6-1977;
amended 8-19-1980]
No parking —
Gate Lane/North From 180 ft. west of
Driftwood Dr. to Beach Dr.
(WIS) [Added 2-5-2008]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Gate Lane/South From 125 ft. east of Beach
Dr. to 100 ft. west of Cedar
Point Dr. (WIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Gerritsen
Avenue/East
From William St. to James
St. (BPT) [Added
9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1672
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From James St. to Henry St.
(BPT) [Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From Henry St. to
Esplanade Way (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Gerritsen
Avenue/West
From Esplanade Way to
Henry St. (BPT) [Added
9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From Henry St. to James St.
(BPT) [Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From James St. to William
St. (BPT) [Added
9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Gibbs Road/East From Half Mile Rd. to Gibbs
Rd. to terminus (CIS)
[Added 1-2-1990]
No parking —
Gibbs Road/West From Gibbs Rd. terminus to
Half Mile Rd. (CIS) [Added
1-2-1990]
No parking —
Gibson Street/
North
From East Main St. (Homan
Ave.) to Shore La. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Shore La. to Maple
Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Maple Ave. to South
Park Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Maple Ave. west for
155 ft. (BSR) [Added
11-20-1979]
No parking —
From 155 ft. west of Maple
Ave. west for 165 ft. (BSR)
[Added 11-20-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 320 ft. west of Maple
Ave. to South Park Ave.
(BSR) [Added 11-20-1979]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1673
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From South Park Ave. west
for 50 ft. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978; amended
7-17-1979]
No parking —
From 50 ft. west of South
Park Ave. west for 130 ft.
(BSR) [Added 7-17-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 180 ft. west of South
Park Ave. west for 85 ft.
(BSR) [Added 7-17-1979]
No parking —
From 265 ft. west of South
Park Ave. west for 325 ft.
(BSR) [Added 7-17-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 590 ft. west of South
Park Ave. west for 50 ft.
(BSR) [Added 7-17-1979]
No parking —
From Ocean Ave. west for
50 ft. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From 50 ft. west of Ocean
Ave. west for 70 ft. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 180 ft. west of Ocean
Ave. to Bay Ave. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Bay Ave. to South
Clinton Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Bay Ave. to South
Clinton Ave. (BSR) [Added
8-21-2018]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From South Clinton Ave. to
Main St. (BSR) [Added
3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Gibson Street/
South
From South Clinton Ave. to
Bay Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Bay Ave. east for 40
ft. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1674
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 40 ft. east of Bay Ave.
east for 90 ft. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 130 ft. east of Bay
Ave. to Ocean Ave. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Ocean Ave. to South
Park Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From South Park Ave. to
Maple Ave. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Maple Ave. east for 30
ft. (BSR) [Amended
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From 215 ft. east of Maple
Ave. east for 85 ft. (BSR)
[Amended 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From 415 ft. east of Maple
Ave. east for 105 ft. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Shore La. east for 50
ft. (BSR) [Amended
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of Shore
La. east for 515 ft. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978;
amended 1-24-2017]
Limited
parking
8 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 515 ft. east of Shore
La. to Homan Ave. (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Homan Ave. to East
Main St. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From South Clinton Ave. to
Main St. (BSR) [Added
3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Gillette Avenue/
East
From 75 ft. south of
Railroad St. to Railroad St.
(BPT) [Added 1-16-1979]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1675
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Gillette Avenue/
East
From 500 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. north for 370
ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 130 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL)
Bus stop —
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BPT) [Added
12-3-1996]
No
stopping
—
Gillette Avenue/
West
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 100
ft. (SVL) [Amended
8-17-1982]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 140 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 180
ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Gilpin Avenue/
East
From 200 ft. north of Motor
Pkwy. north for 300 ft.
(HPG) [Added 6-7-1988]
No parking —
Gilpin Avenue/
West
From 610 ft. south of
Newton Pl. to Motor Pkwy.
(HPG) [Added 6-7-1988;
amended 5-4-2004]
No parking —
Gladstone
Avenue/West
From 50 ft. south of Newton
Ave. to Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
[Added 1-2-1990]
No parking —
Glenwood Court/
East
From Inwood St. north for
95 ft. (BPT) [Added
10-17-2006]
No
stopping
—
Grace Street/
North
From its terminus, 250 ft.
east of Second Ave. to
Second Ave. (BSR) [Added
7-10-2001]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Grace Street/
South
From Second Ave. to its
terminus, 250 ft. east of
Second Ave. (BSR) [Added
7-10-2001]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Grady Street/
North
From 400 ft. west of
Snedecor Ave. for 345 ft.
(BPT) [Added 11-18-2008;
amended 10-13-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1676
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Grady Street/
South
From East Park La. east for
170 ft. (BPT) [Added
11-18-2008]
No parking —
Grand
Boulevard/East
From Alkier Street to Grand
Blvd. North (BWD) [Added
4-16-2019]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Grand
Boulevard/West
From Grand Blvd. North to
Alkier Street (BWD) [Added
4-16-2019]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Grand Boulevard
North/North
From Grand Blvd. to 1,050
ft. west of Grand Blvd.
terminus (BWD) [Added
2-14-2012; amended
4-16-2019]
No parking 12:00
midnight to
6:00 a.m.
Grand Boulevard
North/South
From terminus at 1,050 ft.
west of Grand Blvd. to
Grand Blvd. (BWD) [Added
2-14-2012; amended
4-16-2019]
No parking 12:00
midnight to
6:00 a.m.
Grant Avenue/
East
From 775 ft. north of South
Second St. to its terminus
850 ft. north of South
Second St. (EDG) [Added
4-22-2003]
No parking —
Grant Avenue/
West
From its terminus 850 ft.
north of South Second St. to
585 ft. north of South
Second St. (EDG) [Added
4-22-2003]
No parking —
From 585 ft. to 480 ft. north
of South Second St. (EDG)
[Added 4-22-2003]
No parking
Loading
zone
—
Grant Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 422 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From Moffitt Blvd. north for
110 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From 850 ft. north of Moffit
Blvd. to 400 ft. north of
Moffit Blvd. (ISL) [Added
9-20-1994]
No parking —
Grant Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1677
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Grassmere
Avenue/East
From terminus to 95 ft.
north of terminus (OKD)
[Added 6-11-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Hollywood Dr. to dead
end (OKD)
No parking —
Grassmere
Avenue/West
From dead end to
Hollywood Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
From Middlesex Ave. to 225
ft. south of Middlesex Ave.
(OKD) [Added 6-11-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Great River
Road/East
From River Rd. to Provost
St. (GRV)
No parking —
From 345 ft. south of
Church Rd. to Church Rd.
(GRV) [Added 7-17-1979;
amended 5-5-1981]
No parking —
From 1,820 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (GRV)
No parking —
Great River
Road/West
From Montauk Hwy.
southerly for 1,800 ft. (GRV)
[Added 8-13-2002]
No parking —
From Church Rd. to 105
feet north therefrom
[Added 1-25-2011]
No parking —
Greeley Avenue/
East
For 150 ft. north and south
of the Walkers Gate
Elementary School (SVL)
Bus stop School days
Greeley Avenue/
West
From Bohack Ct. to
Montauk Hwy. (SVL)
No parking —
Greenbelt
Parkway/East
From 180 ft. north of
Thunder Rd. to Patchogue-
Holbrook Rd. (HTV) [Added
1-17-1978]
No parking —
Greenbelt
Parkway/North
From 82 ft. east of its
terminus to its terminus
(HTV) [Added 8-29-1989]
No
stopping
—
Greenbelt
Parkway/South
From its terminus to 30 ft.
east of its terminus (HTV)
[Added 8-29-1989]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1678
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Greenbelt
Parkway/West
From 320 ft. south of Blue
Point Rd. to Patchogue-
Holbrook Rd. (HTV) [Added
1-17-1978]
No parking —
Greenbelt
Parkway West/
North
From terminus to 260 ft.
west of terminus (HBK)
[Added 10-17-1989;
amended 7-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
Greenbelt
Parkway West/
South
From 275 ft. west of
terminus (HBK) [Added
10-17-1989; amended
7-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
Greene Avenue/
East
From Center St. to Swayze
St. (SVL) [Added
12-17-2019]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
school days
From the Great South Bay
to Westgate Dr. (SVL)
[Amended 8-29-1989]
No parking —
From 50 ft. south of
Oversouth La. to 50 ft. north
of Oversouth La. (SVL)
[Added 1-5-1988]
No parking —
From Oversouth La. to
Montauk Hwy. (SVL)
[Added 7-14-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Montauk Hwy. to
Center St. (SVL)
No parking —
For 95 ft. north of Center
St. (SVL) [Added
7-7-1987]
No parking —
From 200 ft. north of
Swayze St. north for 130 ft.
(SVL) [Amended
11-15-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sun.
From 530 ft. south of Depot
St. to Depot St. (SVL)
[Added 4-7-1987;
amended 11-15-2005]
No parking —
Greene Avenue/
West
From Depot St. south for 75
ft. (SVL) [Added
7-11-1978]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1679
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 520 ft. south of Depot
St. south for 220 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From Center St. south for
310 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 310 ft. south of Center
St. to Montauk Hwy. (SVL)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 170 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From Westgate Dr. to the
Great South Bay, including
terminus area (SVL)
[Amended 8-29-1989]
No parking —
From 30 ft. north of Post
Office to 30 ft. south of Post
Office (SVL) [Added
10-2-1984]
No parking —
Greene Street/
North
From Saxon Ave. to west
terminus at 110 ft. west of
South Chicago Ave. (BSR)
[Added 9-25-2012;
amended 12-11-2012]
No parking —
Greene Street/
South
From 75 ft. west of Saxon
Ave. to Saxon Ave. (BSR)
[Added 9-25-2012]
No parking —
Greenlawn
Avenue/East
From Atlantic St. to
Cranberry St. (CIS) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
From Cedarhurst St. to
Rockaway St. (NGR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
From Rockaway St. north
for 210 ft. (NGR) [Added
6-17-1980]
No parking —
Greenlawn
Avenue/West
From Cranberry St. to
Atlantic St. (CIS) [Added
9-18-1990]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
From 250 ft. north of
Rockaway St. to Rockaway
St. (NGR)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1680
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Rockaway St. to
Cedarhurst St. (NGR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Greentree Drive/
East
From 200 ft. north of
Riverdale Ave. to Riverdale
Ave. (OKD) [Added
3-21-2017]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Greentree Drive/
West
From 200 ft. north of
Riverdale Ave. to Riverdale
Ave. (OKD) [Added
3-21-2017]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Greenwood
Avenue/East
From 60 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 130
ft. (EIS) [Amended
10-10-2000]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 190 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 80
ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Grundy Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. south of St.
James St. to St. James St.
(HBK) [Added 7-6-1982;
amended 8-17-1982]
No parking —
From 75 ft. south of Pearl
St. to Pearl St. (HBK)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
From Pearl St. north for 75
ft. (HBK) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From Victor St. to Parkside
St. (HBK) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Parkside St. to Erie
St. (HBK) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Erie St. to Poulsen St.
(HBK) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Poulsen St. to Silva St.
(HBK) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Terry Blvd. north and
south for 100 ft. (HBK)
No
standing
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1681
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Potomac La. to its
terminus 150 ft. north of
Potomac La. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking —
Grundy Avenue/
West
From Main St. south for 350
ft. (HBK) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking —
From Terry Blvd. north and
south for 100 ft. (HBK)
No
standing
—
From Terry Blvd. to Donald
Blvd. (HBK)
No parking —
From Donald Blvd. to 100 ft.
south of Donald Blvd. (HBK)
[Added 11-15-1988]
No parking —
From St. James St. to
Veteran's Hwy. (HBK)
[Added 8-30-1983]
No parking —
From its terminus 150 ft.
north of Potomac La. to
Potomac La. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Half Mile Road/
North
From Cloverlook La. to
Hoffman La. (CIS) [Added
10-16-1979]
No parking —
From Hoffman La. to
Hawthorne Ave. (CIS)
[Added 10-16-1979]
No parking —
Halley Lane/
North
From 1,200 ft. west of
Church St. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 12-6-1977]
No parking —
Halley Lane/
South
From Wheeler Rd. east for
200 ft. (CIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
No parking —
Hamilton Place/
West
From Martin Dr. to Sunrise
Hwy. N. Service Rd. (WIS)
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1682
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hamilton Street/
North
From east terminus west for
915 +/- ft. (150 ft. east of
Foster Ave.) (SVL) [Added
9-11-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
4/1 to 11/1
From 150 ft. east of Foster
Ave. to Foster Ave. (SVL)
[Added 7-14-2009]
No parking —
Hamilton Street/
South
From Foster Ave. east for
100 ft. (SVL) [Added
7-14-2009]
No parking —
From 100 ft. east of Foster
Ave. east for 970+/- ft. (to
terminus) (SVL) [Added
9-11-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
4/1 to 11/1
Hancock Avenue/
East
From Jackson Ave. to North
Monroe Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Hancock Avenue/
West
From North Monroe Ave. to
Jackson Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Thurs.-Sat.
Handsome
Avenue/East
From dead end to Cele Ct.
(SVL) [Amended
8-14-2007]
No parking —
From 340 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Handsome
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 340 ft. (SVL)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Cele Ct. to dead end
(SVL) [Amended
8-14-2007]
No parking —
Harding Street/
North
From Lakeland Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
Harding Street/
South
From Smithtown Ave. to
Lakeland Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
Harold Court/
West
From Candlewood Rd. to
800 ft. south of Candlewood
Rd. (BWD) [Added
2-4-1997]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1683
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Harrisburg
Street/North
From Chicago Ave. west for
50 ft. (NBS) [Amended
9-22-2015]
No parking —
Harrisburg
Street/South
From 50 ft. west of Chicago
Ave. to Chicago Ave. (NBS)
No parking —
Harrison
Avenue/East
From First Ave. to Second
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From a point 770 ft. north of
Kings Hwy. continuing
northerly to the terminus
(HPG) [Added 7-7-1987;
amended 10-20-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Harrison
Avenue/East
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 150 ft. (EIS) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
Harrison
Avenue/West
From the northerly terminus
southerly for a distance of
40 ft. (760 ft. north of Kings
Hwy.) (HPG) [Added
7-7-1987; 10-20-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From a point 100 ft. north of
Kings Hwy. to Kings Hwy.
(HPG) [Added 3-5-2002]
No parking —
Harrison
Avenue/East
From Second Ave. to First
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 160
ft. (EIS) [Amended
8-30-1988]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Harrison
Avenue/East
From 190 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Duval St.
(EIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Hawley Avenue/
North
From Higbie La. west for 30
ft. (WIS) [Added 7-7-1987]
No
stopping
—
From 30 ft. west of Higbie
La. to 125 ft. west of Higbie
La. (WIS) [Added
6-19-2012]
Limited
parking 1/2
hour
—
From 510 ft. to 550 ft. west
of Higbie Ln. (WIS) [Added
11-16-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1684
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 550 ft. west of Higbie
La. to the west terminus at
John St. (WIS) [Added
6-6-1989; amended
11-16-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Hawley Avenue/
South
From the west terminus at
John St. to 150 ft. west of
Higbie La. (WIS) [Added
6-6-1989; amended
11-16-2010]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 150 ft. west of Higbie
La. to Higbie La. (WIS)
[Added 6-19-2012]
No parking —
Hawthorne
Avenue/East
From Half Mile Rd. to Motor
Pkwy. (CIS)
No parking —
From 820 ft. north of Half
Mile Rd. north for 100 ft.
(CIS) [Added 6-5-1984]
Bus stop —
From Suffolk Ave. north for
125 ft. (CIS) [Added
5-5-1998]
No
stopping
—
Hawthorne
Avenue/West
From 200 ft. north of Feller
Dr. to 300 ft. north of Feller
Dr. (CIS) [Added
1-5-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. north of Feller
Dr. to Feller Dr. (CIS)
[Added 5-19-1984]
Bus stop —
From 100 ft. north of Feller
Dr. to 100 ft. south of Feller
Dr. (CIS) [Amended
5-1-1984; 7-10-1990;
1-15-1991]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of Feller
Dr. to 300 ft. north of Adams
Rd. (CIS) [Added
1-15-1991]
1 hour
parking
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 100 ft. south of Feller
Dr. to 300 ft. north of Adams
Rd. (CIS) [Added
1-15-1991]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1685
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 300 ft. north of Adams
Rd. to Adams Rd. (CIS)
[Added 1-15-1991]
No parking —
From 125 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS) [Added 5-5-1998]
No
stopping
—
Heartland
Boulevard/East
From Long Island Ave. to
Mercedes Dr. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
From Long Island Ave. to
Mercedes Way (EDG)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
Heartland
Boulevard/West
From Mercedes Dr. to Long
Island Ave. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
From Mercedes Way to
Long Island Ave. (EDG)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
Heckscher Spur
Drive/South
From 830 ft. west of Adams
St. east for 1,175 ft. (EIS)
[Added 11-15-2005]
No parking —
Heller Place/
North
From 700+/- ft. west of
Atlantic Pl. to Dione La.
(HPG) [Added 8-15-2006]
No parking —
Hellwig Lane/
West
From Merrit St. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
1-3-1989; amended
10-17-1989]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Hemlock Drive/
North
From Pine Acres Blvd. to
Baldwin Blvd. (PNR)
[Amended 10-21-2008]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 60 ft. east of Pine
Acres Blvd. to Pine Acres
Blvd. (PNR) [Added
10-21-2008]
No parking —
Hemlock Lane/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 30 ft. (BSR) [Added
9-20-1988]
No
standing
—
From 30 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 214
ft. (BSR) [Amended
9-20-1988]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1686
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hemlock Lane/
West
From 35 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
Hemlock Street/
North
From 30 ft. east of Islip Ave.
to Islip Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
Henry Street/
North
From Cleveland Ave. to
Lakeland Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 3-2-1982]
No parking —
From Paulanna Ave. to
Gerritsen Ave. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Henry Street/
South
From Lakeland Ave. east for
100 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Hering Drive/
East
From Gerritsen Ave. to
Paulanna Ave. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From Schaefer Dr. north for
1,000 ft. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Hering Drive/
West
From 290 ft. north of
Schaefer Dr. to Schaefer Dr.
(HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Herkimer Street/
North
From Saxon Ave. west for
50 ft. (BSR) [Added
12-11-2012]
No parking —
Herkimer Street/
South
From 50 ft. west of Saxon
Ave. to Saxon Ave. (BSR)
[Added 12-11-2012]
No parking —
Herkimer Street/
North
From a point 100 ft. east of
Chicago St. to Chicago St.
(BSR) [Added 1-27-2004]
No parking —
From Chicago St. west for
150 ft. (BSR) [Added
1-27-2004]
No parking —
Herkimer Street/
South
From a point 150 ft. west of
Chicago St. to 100 ft. east of
Chicago St. (BSR) [Added
1-27-2004]
No parking —
Heyward Street/
North
From Washington Ave. to
Jefferson Ave. (BWD)
[Amended 9-22-2015]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1687
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Jefferson Ave. west for
150 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Heyward Street/
South
From 150 ft. west of
Jefferson Ave. to Jefferson
Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
Heyward Street/
South
From 275 ft. west of
Washington Ave. to
Washington Ave. (BWD)
[Added 5-14-2019]
Limited
parking 2
hours
—
Hiddink Street/
North
From 180 ft. west of Smith
St. to 30 ft. east of Railroad
Ave. (SVL) [Added
8-25-1987]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
From 30 ft. east of Railroad
Ave. to Railroad Ave. (SVL)
[Added 8-25-1987]
No parking —
Hiddink Street/
South
From Railroad Ave. east for
125 ft. (SVL) [Amended
12-18-1979; 4-15-1980]
No parking —
Higbie Drive/
North
From 50 ft. east of Udall Rd.
to Udall Rd. (WIS)
No parking —
Higbie Drive/
South
From Udall Rd. east for 50
ft. (WIS)
No parking —
Higbie Lane/East From Montauk Hwy. to
Lions Path (WIS)
[Amended 9-11-2012]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Highland Ave. north to
Highland Ave. (WIS)
[Added 9-23-2014]
No parking —
From Wavecrest Ave. north
for 120 ft. (WIS) [Added
11-13-2001]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From Union Blvd. to
Prospect Ave. (WIS)
[Amended 12-18-1984;
9-20-1988]
No
stopping
From Prospect Ave. to the
LIRR (WIS) [Added
4-5-1983; amended
4-2-1985]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1688
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 ft. south of
Paprocki Ave. to Paprocki
Ave. (WIS)
No
standing
—
From Paprocki Ave. north
for 154 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From Oakwood Ave. north
for 450 ft. (WIS) [Added
4-4-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Udall Rd. north for
300 ft. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. south of Hunter
Ave. to Hunter Ave. (WIS)
[Added 8-30-1983]
No parking —
Higbie Lane/
West
From 50 ft. north of Hunter
Ave. to Hunter Ave. (WIS)
[Added 8-30-1983]
No parking —
From Aster Rd. to Kurzon
Rd. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
From Kurzon Rd. to
Paumanake Ave. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
From Paumanake Ave. south
for 160 ft. (WIS) [Added
4-2-1985]
No
standing
—
From 160 ft. south of
Paumanake Ave. to 50 ft.
north of Carnation Rd.
(WIS) [Added 9-20-1988]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From 50 ft. north of
Carnation Rd. to Carnation
Rd. (WIS)
No
standing
—
From Carnation Rd. south
for 50 ft. (WIS)
No
standing
—
From 50 ft. south of
Carnation Rd. to 235 ft.
south of Carnation Rd.
(WIS) [Added 9-20-1988]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From 170 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (WIS)
[Amended 9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. south for
175 ft. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1689
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 175 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to 30 ft. north of
Hawley Ave., a distance of
90 ft. (WIS) [Added
7-7-1987]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From 30 ft. north of Hawley
Ave. south to Hawley Ave.
(WIS) [Added 7-7-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Hawley Ave. south for
30 ft. (WIS) [Added
7-7-1987]
No
stopping
—
From 30 ft. south of Hawley
Ave. to North St. (WIS)
[Added 1-18-1983;
amended 6-5-1981;
9-9-1997]
No parking
From Roman La. south for
50 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From Edgewood R. to
Wilherm La. (WIS)
No parking —
From Wilherm La. to
Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
No
stopping
—
Highland
Avenue/North
From 120 ft. east of Higbie
La. to Higbie La. (WIS)
[Added 6-5-1984]
No parking —
Highland
Avenue/South
From Higbie La. east to
Sunset Pl. (WIS) [Added
9-11-2012]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
Hill Drive/East From the Connetquot High
School property line to
Nathan Dr. (BHM)
No parking —
Hill Drive/West From Nathan Dr. to the
Connetquot High School
property line (BHM)
No parking —
Hilltop Drive/
West
From 50 ft. north of Second
Ave. to Second Ave. (BWD)
[Added 8-21-1984]
No parking —
Hoffman Avenue/
East
From 70 ft. north of the
Long Island Motor Pkwy. to
its terminus (HPG) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking From 6:00
p.m. to 6:00
a.m. nightly
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1690
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hoffman Avenue/
West
From its terminus south for
860 ft. (HPG) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking From 6:00
p.m. to 6:00
a.m. nightly
Hoffman Lane/
East
From 350 ft. north of
Veterans Memorial Hwy. to
Motor Pkwy. (HPG) [Added
12-18-1984]
No parking —
Hoffman Lane/
West
From Motor Pkwy. to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(HPG) [Added
12-18-1984]
No parking —
Hollins Lane/
South
From 800 ft. south of
Brushwood Ct. to 1,250 ft.
south of Brushwood Ct.
(EIS) [Added 7-7-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hollins Lane/
Terminus
Perimeter of island located
1,200 ft south of Brushwood
Ct. (EIS) [Added 7-7-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hollywood Drive/
North
From Jade St. west for 250
ft. (OKD) [Added
2-6-1979]
No parking —
Hollywood Drive/
South
From Quality St. to Jade St.
(OKD) [Added 2-6-1979]
No parking —
Holmes Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. north of Jaycox
Ave. to Root Ave. (ISL)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No parking —
Homestead
Road/North
From Lincoln Dr. to West
Shore Rd. (OKD) [Added
8-12-2008]
No parking —
Homestead
Road/South
From West Shore Rd. to
Lincoln Dr. (OKD) [Added
8-12-2008]
No parking —
Howells Road/
East
From Bay Shore Rd. north
for 50 ft. (WBW) [Added
7-12-2005]
No
stopping
—
Howells Road/
North
From Centre St. to Fifth
Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. to Clinton
Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
From Clinton Ave. west for
190 ft. (BSR)
No
stopping
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1691
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 ft. east of Brooklyn
Blvd. to Brooklyn Blvd.
(BSR) [Added 11-15-1988]
No parking —
From Brooklyn Blvd. to 50
ft. west of Brooklyn Blvd.
(BSR) [Added 2-19-2002]
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of
Manatuck Blvd. to
Manatuck Blvd. (NBS)
[Added 9-15-1987]
No parking —
From Pine Dr. to Asharoken
Blvd. (NBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Asharoken Blvd. to
Montauk Dr. (NBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
Howells Road/
South
From Muncey Rd. to
Asharoken Blvd. (WBS)
[Added 11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Asharoken Blvd. to
Pine Dr. (WBS) [Added
11-16-1993]
No
stopping
—
From 250 ft. west of Clinton
Ave. to Clinton Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Clinton Ave. to Fifth
Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. to Fourth
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
6-18-1991]
No
stopping
—
Howells Road/
West
From Udall Rd. south for
260 ft. (WBW) [Added
3-3-2015]
No parking —
From 220 ft. north of Bay
Shore Rd. to Bay Shore Rd.
(WBW) [Added 7-12-2005]
No parking —
From Storey Blvd. south for
300 ft. (BSR) [Added
12-15-2009]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hubal Street/
North
From Mid Pl. to 200 ft. east
of Mid Pl. (BHM) [Added
10-15-1991]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1692
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hudson Avenue/
East
From Eleventh St. to its
terminus 300 ft. north of
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hudson Avenue/
West
From its terminus 300 ft.
north of Eleventh St. to
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hyman Avenue/
East
From Babe Ruth St. to 150
ft. north of Babe Ruth St.
(WBS) [Added 9-17-1991]
No parking —
Hyman Avenue/
West
From Sunrise Hwy. South
Service Rd. to Diamond St.
(WBS) [Added 6-18-2013]
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Idaho Avenue/
North
From Elayne Ave. to
Penataquit Ave. (NBS)
No parking —
Idaho Avenue/
South
From Penataquit Ave. to
Elayne Ave. (NBS)
No parking —
Idle Hour
Boulevard/East
From Elsmere Ave. to
Chateau Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
From Chateau Dr. to
Woodlawn Ave. (OKD)
No parking —
From Biltmore Ave. to
Montauk Hwy. (OKD)
[Added 3-20-1979;
amended 6-6-1989]
No parking —
From Connetquot Dr. to
Elsmere Ave. (OKD) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking —
Idle Hour
Boulevard/West
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 180 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(OKD) [Added 6-6-1989]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From Woodlawn Ave. to
Chateau Dr. (OKD)
No parking —
From Chateau Dr. to
Elsmere Ave. (OKD)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1693
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Elsmere Ave. to 300
ft. south of Elsmere Ave.
(OKD) [Added
12-19-1989; amended
3-20-1990]
No parking —
From Connetquot Dr. south
for 100 +/- ft. (OKD)
[Added 9-9-2008]
No parking —
From Middlesex Ave. to
Hollywood Dr. (OKD)
[Added 10-9-2001]
No parking —
Idle Hour Road/
South/West
From Vanderbilt Blvd. for 45
ft. east and 500 ft. south
(OKD) [Added 5-21-1991;
amended 11-14-2006]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
Illinois Avenue/
East
From Wisconsin Ave. to
Nebraska Ave. (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
From Nebraska Ave. to
Michigan Ave. (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
From Michigan Ave. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
Illinois Avenue/
West
From Candlewood Rd. to
Wisconsin Ave. (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
From 285 ft. south of New
Hampshire Ave. to
Massachusetts Ave. (BWD)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
From Connecticut Ave.
south for 232 ft. to New
York Ave. (BWD) [Added
9-29-2009]
No
stopping
—
Inchcape Road/
North
From Stein Dr. west for 600
ft. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 150 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1694
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Inchcape Road/
South
From 150 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Stein Dr. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Inlet View/East From Bay Pl. north for 160
ft. (ISL) [Added
6-21-2011]
No parking —
Inwood Street/
North
From Barrett Ave. to
Glenwood Ct. (BPT) [Added
10-17-2006]
No
stopping
—
From Barrett Ave. to
Bayport Ave. (BPT) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking —
Inwood Street/
South
From Bayport Ave. to
Barrett Ave. (BPT) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking —
Iris Place/North From Barberry Rd. to
Larkspur Dr. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Iris Place/South From Larkspur Dr. to
Barberry Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Irish Lane/East From Montauk Hwy. to 175
ft. north of Montauk Hwy.
(EIS) [Added 8-27-1991]
No
stopping
—
From Carey St. to 70 ft.
south of Union Blvd. (EIS)
[Added 7-11-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 210 ft. north of Carey
St. north for 130 ft. (to
Carousel Ct.) (EIS) [Added
9-25-2012]
No parking —
From 70 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (EIS)
[Amended 7-11-1978]
No
standing
—
From W. Adams St. to
Sunrise Hwy. (EIS)
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
From Jackson St. north 225
feet to Bel-Cul Ct. (EIS)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1695
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From North Sunrise Service
Rd. to Islip Blvd. (EIS)
[Added 11-18-2008]
No parking —
Irish Lane/West From 175 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. [Added 8-27-1991]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (EIS)
No
standing
—
From Islip Blvd. to North
Sunrise Service Rd. (EIS)
[Added 11-18-2008]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. south for
310 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 460 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to 525 ft. south of
Union Blvd. (EIS) [Added
12-18-2018]
No parking —
Island
Boulevard/South
From Walnut Ave. to Oak
Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
From Oak Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
Islip Boulevard/
South
From Islip Ave. east for 135
ft. (ISL) [Added
8-22-2017]
No
stopping
—
From 175 ft. west of Irish
La. to Irish La. (EIS)
[Added 11-18-2008]
No parking —
From Irish La. east for 200
ft. (EIS) [Added
11-18-2008]
No parking —
Islip Parking
Field No. 9/
South
From 320 ft. west of Islip
Ave. west for 36 ft. (4 stalls)
(ISL)
Taxi stand —
Ivy Court/North From dead end west to
Barberry Rd. (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Ivy Court/South From Barberry Rd. east to
dead end (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1696
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Jackson Avenue/
North
From dead end west to
Dunwoodie Rd. (WIS)
[Added 9-18-1979;
amended 9-15-1992]
No
stopping
6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Dunwoodie Rd. to
Hancock Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Thurs.-Sat.
Jackson Avenue/
South
From Hancock Ave. to
Dunwoodie Rd. (WIS)
[Added 4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
From Dunwoodie Rd. east to
dead end (WIS) [Added
9-18-1979; amended
9-15-1992]
No
stopping
6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Jackson Street/
North
From 250 ft. east of Irish
La. to Irish La. (EIS)
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
Jackson Street/
South
From Irish La. east for 250
ft. (EIS)
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
Jade Street/East From 65 ft. south of
Hollywood Dr. to Hollywood
Dr. (OKD) [Added
2-6-1979]
No parking —
Jade Street/West From Hollywood Dr. to
Featherbed La. (OKD)
No parking —
James Street/
North
From Paulanna Ave. to
Gerritsen Ave. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
James Street/
South
From Gerritsen Ave. to
Paulanna Ave. (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
James Street/
North
From Wingan-Hauppauge
Rd. to Commack Rd. (ISL)
No parking —
James Street/
South
From Commack Rd. to
Wingan-Hauppauge Rd.
(ISL)
No parking —
Jane Road/South From 200 ft. east of Queen
Anne Pl. to Woodbury Rd.
(HPG) [Added 5-18-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1697
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Woodbury Rd. east for
350 ft. (HPG) [Added
5-18-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Jefferson
Avenue/East
From Heyward St. to Clarke
St. (BWD)
No
standing
—
Jefferson
Avenue/West
From Clarke St. to Heyward
St. (BWD)
No
standing
Jefferson Avenue At north terminus (300 +/-
ft. north of Madison St.)
(EIS) [Added 9-29-2009]
No parking —
Jefferson Street/
North
From Connetquot Ave. west
for 100 ft. (EIS) [Added
7-10-1990]
No parking —
Jefferson Street/
South
From 100 ft. west of
Connetquot Ave. to
Connetquot Ave. (EIS)
[Added 7-10-1990]
No parking —
From 100 ft. east of
Jefferson St. to 184 ft. east
of Jefferson St. (EIS)
[Added 7-11-1989]
No parking —
Jensen Road/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Jensen Road/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Jericho Street/
North
From Pacific Ave. west for
60 ft. (EIS) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking —
Jetson Lane/West From Motor Pkwy. south for
50 ft. (CIS) [Added
6-20-1978; amended
1-2-1979; 6-18-2013]
No parking —
Joanne Drive/
Cul-de-sac
Perimeter of cul-de-sac
located 762 ft. west of Bovie
Ct. (HBK) [Added
8-25-1987]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
John Avenue/
East
From 1,500 ft. north of
Church St. to terminus
(BPT) [Added 11-13-2001]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1698
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
John Avenue/
West
From terminus to 1,500 ft.
north of Church St. (BPT)
[Added 11-13-2001]
No parking —
Jericho Street/
South
From Belmore Ave. east for
105 ft. (EIS) [Added
12-13-2005]
No parking —
Johnson Avenue/
East
From the north property
line of the Garden
Apartments south for 825 ft.
(SVL)
No parking —
From 200 ft. north of Laurel
Dr. to Virginia Ct. (SVL)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Johnson Avenue/
West
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Veterans Hwy. (BHM)
No
stopping
—
From Winmar Ln. south for
125 ft. (SVL) [Added
12-10-2013]
No
stopping
Johnson Avenue/
North
From Pond Rd. to Locust
Ave. (RNK) [Added
9-20-1994]
No
standing
—
Johnson Avenue/
South
From 100 ft. west of
Chestnut Ave. to Chestnut
Ave. (RNK)
No parking —
From Chestnut Ave. east for
200 ft. (RNK)
No parking —
Johnson Avenue/
West
From Veterans Hwy. to
Sunrise Hwy. (BHM)
No
stopping
—
From the north property
line of the Garden
Apartments south for 825 ft.
(SVL)
No parking —
Julia Goldbach
Avenue/East
From Seventh Ave. to
Veterans Hwy. (BHM)
[Added 11-15-1983]
No parking —
From 157 ft. north of
Veterans Hwy. to Sixth St.
(LKL) [Added 1-17-1989]
No
stopping
—
Julia Goldbach
Avenue/West
From Seventh Ave. to
Veterans Hwy. (BHM)
[Added 11-15-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1699
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Kay Court/South From 130 ft. west of Quail
Run to Quail Run (EIS)
[Added 3-16-2010]
No parking —
Keith Lane/East From Montauk Hwy. north
for 75 ft. (WIS) [Added
12-18-2001; amended
11-22-2016]
No parking —
From 150 ft. to 350 ft. north
of Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
[Added 9-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
From 290 ft. north of Ryan
St. north for 135 ft. (WIS)
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Keith Lane/West From 55 ft. north of
Everdell Ave. to Everdell
Ave. (WIS) [Added
11-22-2016]
No parking —
From 725 ft. south of
Burling La. south for 140 ft.
(WIS)
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 355 ft. to 150 ft. north
of Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
[Added 9-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
From 150 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
12-18-2001; amended
1-31-2012]
No parking —
Kemp Street/
North
From Bayview Ave. west for
150 +/- ft. (EIS) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
Kemp Street/
South
From 150 +/- ft. east of
Bayview Ave. to Bayview
Ave. (EIS) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
Kenwood Drive/
East
From Seventh St. north for
135 ft. (BHM) [Added
2-16-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 120+ ft. south of
Veterans Hwy. (BHM)
[Added 8-14-2007]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1700
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Kenwood Drive/
West
From Veterans Hwy. south
for 90+ ft. (BHM) [Added
8-14-2007]
No
stopping
—
From 175 ft. north of
Seventh St. to Seventh St.
(BHM) [Added 2-16-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 90+ ft. north of
Norman Dr. to Norman Dr.
(BHM) [Added 8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 80+ ft. south of
Norman Dr. (BHM) [Added
8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Kime Avenue/
North
From 25 ft. north of Arbour
St. to 281 ft. south of
Arbour St. (WIS) [Added
12-19-1989; amended
11-20-1990]
No
stopping
7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
Kime Avenue/
South
From 210 ft. east of Babylon
Town line east for 780 ft.
(WIS) [Added 11-20-1990]
No
stopping
7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
Kings Highway/
North
From 260 ft. to 360 ft. west
of White Spruce La. (HPG)
[Added 8-17-1999]
No parking —
Kings Highway/
South
From 674+/- ft. east of
Ridgefield Rd. to 1,177+/-
ft. east of Ridgefield Rd.
(HPG) [Added 8-15-2006]
No parking
From Simeon Woods Rd. to
Wheeler Rd. (HPG) [Added
12-13-2005]
No parking —
Kirk Avenue/
North
From Rosevale Ave. to
Woodlawn Ave. (RNK)
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
from 5/31 to
9/30
Kirk Avenue/
South
From Woodlawn Ave. to
Rosevale Ave. (RNK)
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
from 5/31 to
9/30
Kirk Road/North From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1701
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Kirk Road/South From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Koehler Place/
East
From the crosswalk lines
south for 10 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Koral Street/
North
From Third Ave. to 320 ft.
west of Third Ave. (BSR)
[Amended 6-11-2002]
No parking —
From 320 ft. west of Third
Ave. to Dewey Pl. (BSR)
[Added 6-11-2002]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Koral Street/
South
From its west terminus at a
point 330 ft. west of Dewey
Pl. to Dewey Pl. (BSR)
[Added 10-12-2004]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lace Lane/East From 220 ft. south of
McGowan La. to 30 ft. south
of McGowan La. (CIS)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lace Lane/West From 80 ft. south of
McGowan La. to 533 ft.
south of McGowan La. (CIS)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lake Drive
South/East
From 120 ft. to 265 ft. north
of Parkwood Rd. (south
intersection) (WIS) [Added
12-12-1995; amended
8-12-2008]
No
stopping
—
From 900 ft. south of
Parkwood Rd. to 470 ft.
south of Parkwood Rd.
(north intersection) (WIS)
[Added 10-16-1984;
amended 8-12-2008]
No parking —
From 400 ft. south of
Parkwood Rd. to 200 ft.
south of Parkwood Rd.
(north intersection) (WIS)
[Added 12-12-1995;
amended 8-12-2008]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1702
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lake Drive
South/West
From 200 ft. south of
Parkwood Rd. (north
intersection) to 400 ft. south
of Parkwood Rd. (WIS)
[Added 12-12-1995;
amended 8-12-2008]
No
stopping
—
From 470 ft. to 900 ft. south
of Parkwood Rd. (north
intersection) (WIS) [Added
10-16-1984; amended
8-30-1995; 8-12-2008]
No parking —
From 400 ft. north of
Parkwood Rd. to Parkwood
Rd. (south intersection)
(WIS) [Added 12-12-1995;
amended 8-12-2008]
No
stopping
—
Lake Street/East From Richmond Blvd. to
Victory Dr. (RNK) [Added
4-30-1996]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Lake Street/West From Victory Dr. to
Richmond Blvd. (RNK)
[Added 4-30-1996]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Lakeland
Avenue/East
From the LIRR (Montauk
Division) to the north
property line of the
Municipal Parking Field
(SVL)
No parking —
From Johnson Ave. north for
930 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 1,500+/- ft. north of
Tariff St. for 140+/- ft. to
Marion St. (SVL) [Added
10-17-2006]
No parking —
From George St. to 85 ft.
north of George St. (SVL)
[Added 1-18-1983]
No parking —
From Eastover Rd. north to
40 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 200 ft. south of
Chester Rd. to 300 ft. north
of Eleventh St. (SVL)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1703
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Thirteenth St. to
1,200 ft. north of Thirteenth
St. (BHM) [Added
7-2-1985; amended
5-21-1991; 8-27-1991]
No
stopping
—
From 1,015 ft. north of
Wilson St. to Kitty Hawk
Ave. (BHM) [Added
11-17-2015]
No parking —
From 350 ft. south of
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(Route 454) to Veterans
Memorial Hwy. (BHM)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Smithtown Ave.
(LKL) [Added 1-14-2003]
No
stopping
—
From Smithtown Ave. to
McArthur St. (BHM)
No parking —
From Smithtown Ave. to
Fifteenth St. (LKL) [Added
4-7-1987]
No parking —
From Fifteenth St. to
Fourteenth St. (LKL)
[Added 4-7-1987]
No parking —
From Fourteenth St. to 30
ft. north to Pond Rd. (LKL)
[Added 11-21-1989]
No parking —
From Marconi Ave. to 150
ft. south of Ocean Ave.
(south intersection) (LKL)
[Added 5-4-1999;
amended 4-10-2007]
No
stopping
—
Lakeland
Avenue/West
From Ocean Ave.
southbound to 400 ft. south
of Ocean Ave. northbound
(LKL) [Added 11-19-1985;
amended 4-7-1987]
No parking —
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. (Route 454) to
McArthur St. (BHM)
[Added 9-20-1988;
amended 5-15-2001]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1704
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 150 ft. north of
Nemeth St. to Nemeth St.
(BHM) [Added 4-1-1986]
No
stopping
—
From Nemeth St. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
[Added 4-1-1986]
No parking —
From 150 ft. north of
McArthur St. to McArthur
St. (BHM) [Added
6-7-1988]
No parking —
From McArthur St. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
From 960 ft. south of
Smithtown Ave. to 1,140 ft.
south of Smithtown Ave.
(BHM) [Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
From 740 ft. north of
Karshick St. to Karshick St.
(BHM) [Added 8-17-1999]
No
stopping
_____
From 360 ft. north of
Karshick St. to Thirteenth
St. (BHM) [Added
9-17-1991; amended
6-22-1999]
No
stopping
—
From 300 ft. north of
Eleventh St. to 200 ft. south
of Chester Rd. (SVL)
No parking —
From 260 ft. south of
Crosby St. to Tariff St. (SVL)
No parking —
From the LIRR (Montauk
Division) to the north
property line of the
Municipal Parking Field
(SVL)
No parking —
Lake Shore
Drive/East
From 195 ft. south of
Farmardie Dr. to Famardie
Dr. (RNK) [Added
2-23-1993]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Lake Shore
Drive/West
From Farmardie Dr. to 235
ft. south of Farmardie Dr.
(RNK) [Added 2-23-1993]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1705
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lakeview
Avenue/East
From Montauk Hwy. north
50 ft. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978]
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 400
ft. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Union Blvd. north for
125 feet (BSR) [Added
3-10-2020]
No parking —
From 250 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Archie Pl.
(WIS) [Added 6-20-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lakeview
Avenue/West
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978]
No parking —
From Archie Pl. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Railroad Ave. to Union
Blvd. (BSR) [Added
9-23-2014]
No parking —
Lanier Lane/East From 180 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 200
ft. (BSR) [Amended
4-7-1987]
No
standing
—
From 480 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 800 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 7-14-2009]
Limited
parking
2 hours
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
except Sun.
From 360 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 4-7-1987]
No
standing
—
Lanier Lane/
West
From Union Blvd. south for
90 ft. (BSR) [Amended
4-7-1987]
No
standing
—
From 320 ft. south of
Cooper La. to 510 ft. south
of Cooper La. (BSR) [Added
7-14-2009]
Limited
parking
2 hours
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
except Sun.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1706
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 350 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 170 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 4-7-1987]
No
standing
—
Larkspur Drive/
East
From 520 ft. south of Iris Pl.
to Iris Pl. (WIS) [Amended
6-7-1988; 12-13-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Larkspur Drive/
West
From Iris Pl. south for 300
ft. (WIS) [Amended
12-13-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Laurel Avenue/
East
From 210 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 335
ft. (EIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Lawrence
Avenue/North
From Ocean Ave. to South
Clinton Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Lawrence
Avenue/South
From South Clinton Ave. to
Ocean Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Lawrence Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to West
La. (BSR)
No parking —
Lazare Lane/
East
From 150 ft. to 330 ft. north
of Richardson La. (ISL)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lazare Lane/
West
From 275 ft. to 140 ft. north
of Richardson La. (ISL)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Leahy Avenue/
North
From 1,135 ft. west of
Wicks Rd. to 180+/- ft. east
of Crooked Hill Rd. (BWD)
[Added 11-14-2006]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Leahy Avenue/
South
From 180 ft. east of
Crooked Hill Rd. to 1,135 ft.
west of Wicks Rd. (BWD)
[Added 11-14-2006]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Lexington
Avenue/South
From 110 ft. to 160 ft. east
of Orient Ave. (BWD)
[Added 3-25-2003]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1707
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lincoln Avenue/
East
From South First St. north
for 100 ft. (EDG) [Added
10-10-2000]
No parking —
From Peachtree Ct. north
for 275 +/- ft. (HBK)
[Added 6-23-2009]
No parking —
From 1,005 +/- ft. north of
Veterans Hwy. north for 275
+/- ft. to Peachtree Ct.
(HBK) [Added 6-23-2009]
No parking —
From 2,210 ft. north of
Church St. to 2,550 ft. north
of Church St. (HBK) [Added
1-19-1993]
No parking —
From 150 ft. south of WRAP
Center driveway to WRAP
Center driveway (SVL)
[Added 1-17-1989]
No parking —
From Partington St. to 200
ft. north of Partington St.
(SVL) [Added 4-21-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
Lincoln Avenue/
North
From 80 ft. east of Carleton
Ave. to Carleton Ave. (EIS)
No parking —
From 300 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. to 205 ft. east
of Carleton Ave. (EIS)
[Added 9-7-2011]
No parking —
From Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
to 700 ft. west of Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. (EIS) [Added
2-29-2000]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Lincoln Avenue/
South
From Carleton Ave. east for
300 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 700 ft. west of Craig
B. Gariepy Ave. to Craig
Gariepy Ave. (EIS) [Added
2-29-2000]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Lincoln Avenue/
West
From 1,500 +/- ft. north of
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
south for 200 +/- ft. (BHM)
[Added 4-29-2008]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1708
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Railroad Ave. to
Furrows Rd. (HBK) [Added
1-14-2003]
No
stopping
—
From 5,700 ft. south of
Furrows Rd. to 6,450 ft.
south of Furrows Rd. (HBK)
[Added 1-14-2003]
No
stopping
—
From 265 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 360 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(SVL) [Added 1-25-2000]
No
stopping
fire zone
—
From 650 ft. south of
Veteran's Hwy. to 850 ft.
south of Veteran's Hwy.
(SVL) [Added 12-18-1990]
No
stopping
—
Lincoln
Boulevard/East
From Veterans Hwy. to Boos
La. Ext. (HPG)
No parking —
From Boos La. Ext. north for
700 ft. (HPG)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Lincoln
Boulevard/West
From 265 ft. south of Town
Line Rd. south for 1,340 ft.
(HPG)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Locust Avenue/
East
From 300 ft. south of
Bourne Blvd. to Bourne
Blvd. (WSV)
No parking —
From Bourne Blvd. north for
50 ft. (BHM)
No parking —
Locust Avenue/
West
From Bourne Blvd. to
Wichard Dr. (OKD) [Added
2-9-2010]
No parking —
From Wichard Dr. to Ocean
Ave. (OKD) [Added
2-9-2010]
No parking —
From 228 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL)
No parking —
From 200 ft. north of
Katherine Pl. to Katherine
Pl. (OKD) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1709
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 300 ft. north of
Bourne Blvd. to 100 ft.
south of Bourne Blvd. (OKD)
No parking —
Lombardy
Boulevard/East
From Howells Rd. to
terminus (BSR) [Added
11-19-1985; amended
12-17-1985]
No parking —
Lombardy
Boulevard/West
From 500 ft. north of
Howells Rd. to Howells Rd.
(BSR) [Added 12-18-1979]
No parking —
Long Island
Avenue/North
From Heartland Blvd. to
Rodeo Dr. (EDG) [Added
12-10-2013]
No parking —
From Rodeo Dr. to
Executive Dr. (EDG) [Added
12-10-2013]
No parking —
Long Island
Avenue/South
From Islip Town Line to
Executive Dr.; Executive Dr.
to 1,030 ft. west of
Executive Dr. (EDG) [Added
5-5-1998]
No
stopping
All
From Executive Dr. to
Heartland Blvd. (EDG)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
Lorraine Circle/
Inner Circle
Counterclockwise from
Brook St. to Brook St. (SVL)
[Added 10-6-1987]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Lorraine Circle/
Outer Circle
Clockwise from Brook St. to
Brook St. (SVL) [Added
10-6-1987]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Louis Kossuth
Avenue/West
From Sixth St. to Veterans
Memorial Hwy. (LKL)
[Added 3-20-2001]
No
stopping
fire zone
—
Lowell Avenue/
East
From East Chestnut St. to
East Cedar St. (CIS)
No parking —
From East Cedar St. to East
Walnut St. (CIS)
No parking —
From the LIRR to Suffolk
Ave. (CIS)
No parking —
From Oceanside St. for 330
ft. (NGR) [Added
2-26-2008]
No
stopping
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1710
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lowell Avenue/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to
Clayton St. (CIS) [Added
2-7-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 470 ft. south to
Cedarhurst St. to Oceanside
St. (NGR) [Added
2-26-2008]
No
stopping
From Oceanside St. to
Connetquot Ave. (NGR)
No
stopping
—
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
MacArthur
Memorial
Highway/East
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. north and west to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(HBK) [Added 5-7-1985]
No parking —
MacArthur
Memorial
Highway/West
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. west and south to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(HBK) [Added 5-7-1985]
No parking —
MacArthur
Resource
Recovery Facility
Access Road/
East
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. north for 300 ft. (LKL)
[Added 10-8-2002]
No parking —
MacArthur
Resource
Recovery Facility
Access Road/
West
From 300 ft. north of
Veterans Memorial Hwy. to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(LKL) [Added 10-8-2002]
No parking —
Macon Avenue/
East
From Overton St. north for
50 ft. (SVL)
No
standing
—
Macon Avenue/
West
From 50 ft. north of Overton
St. to Overton St. (SVL)
No
standing
—
Madison Avenue/
East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
200 ft. (BWD) [Amended
10-16-1990]
No parking —
From 316 ft. south of
Hancock St. north for 216
ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Madison Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. south of
Hancock St. south for 216
ft. (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1711
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 200 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(BWD) [Amended
10-16-1990]
No parking —
Madison Street/
North
From 220 ft. west of
Feuereisen Ave. to Louis
Kossuth Ave. (BHM) [Added
11-20-1979]
No parking —
Madison Street/
South
From Louis Kossuth Ave. to
Feuereisen Ave. (BHM)
[Added 11-20-1979]
No parking —
Madison Street/
West
From Independence Ave. to
Kobb Blvd. (WIS) [Added
1-3-1984]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Manatuck
Boulevard/East
From Howells Rd. to
Sunrise Hwy. (NBS)
[Amended 9-15-1987]
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. north for 150 ft.
(NBS) [Added 6-7-1983]
No parking —
From 150 ft. south of Pine
Aire Dr. to Pine Aire Dr.
(PNR) [Added 4-22-2003]
No
standing
—
Manatuck
Boulevard/West
From Pine Aire Dr. south for
150 ft. (PNR) [Added
4-22-2003]
No
standing
—
From 350 ft. south of
Montauk Dr. southerly to
the Sunrise Hwy. North
Service Rd. (NBS) [Added
6-7-1983]
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Howells Rd. (NGR)
No parking —
Manatuck Lane/
North
From Garner La. to
Lawrence La. (BSR)
No parking —
Manatuck Lane/
South
From Lawrence La. to
Garner La. (BSR)
No parking —
Manhattan
Boulevard/South
From 865 ft. east of
Belmore Ave. east for 190 ft.
(EIS)
No
stopping
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1712
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Manitton Court/
North
From Nassau Ave. east for
430 ft. (ISL) [Amended
11-18-1986]
No parking —
Manor Lane/East From Montauk Hwy. north
for 600 ft. (WBS) [Added
12-19-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Penataquit Dr. to
Sunrise Hwy. (BSR)
No
standing
—
From Howells Rd. to Bay
Shore Rd. (WBS)
No parking —
From Bay Shore Rd. to
Chenango Dr. (NBS)
No parking —
From Chenango Dr. north
for 100 ft. (NBS) [Added
2-12-2013]
No parking —
Manor Lane/
West
From Bay Shore Rd. to
Howells Rd. (WBS)
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Diamond St. (BSR)
No
standing
—
From Tern Ct. to Montauk
Hwy. (WBS) [Added
12-19-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Maple Avenue/
East
From Maple Ave. Dock
north for 300 ft. (BSR)
[Added 5-26-2015]
4-hour
parking
—
From 300 ft. north of Maple
Ave. Dock to Aldrich Ct.
(BSR) [Added 5-26-2015;
amended 6-7-2016]
No parking —
From 490 ft. south of
Aldrich Ct. to 250 ft. south
of Aldrich Ct. (BSR)
[Amended 9-5-1978;
9-15-1981; 11-17-2009]
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 250 ft. south of
Aldrich Ct. to Aldrich Ct.
(BSR) [Added 9-5-1978]
Taxi stand —
From Aldrich Ct. to Maple
Ct. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1713
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Maple Ct. north for
555 ft. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 115 ft. south of
Gibson St. to Gibson St.
(BSR)
No parking —
From 30 ft. to 80 ft. north of
Gibson St. (BSR) [Added
2-7-1984]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Gibson St. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
From Main St. to its
terminus, to and including
Maple Avenue Dock (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Maple Avenue/
West
From Main St. to Gibson St.
(BSR) [Amended
7-14-1993; 9-19-1995;
4-10-2007]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From Gibson St. to 440 ft.
south of Gibson St. (BSR)
[Added 3-7-2006]
Limited
parking
3 hours
All
From 440 ft. south of
Gibson St. to Aldrich Ct.
(BSR) [Amended
9-18-1979; 9-15-1981;
3-7-2006]
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From Aldrich Ct. south for
500 ft. (BSR) [Added
5-26-2015; amended
6-7-2016]
No parking —
From 500 ft. south of
Aldrich Ct. to Maple Ave.
Dock (BSR) [Added
5-26-2015]
4-hour
parking
—
From Main St. to its
terminus, to and including
Maple Avenue Dock (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Maple Court/
North
From 550 ft. east of Maple
Ave. to Maple Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1714
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Maple Court/
South
From 30 ft. east of Maple
Ave. east for 140 ft. (BSR)
[Amended 1-6-1987]
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 170 ft. east of Maple
Ave. to its terminus at 550
ft. east of Maple Ave. (BSR)
[Amended 1-6-1987]
No parking —
Maple Street/
North
From Champlin Creek to St.
Marks La. (ISL) [Amended
11-21-1989]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Maple Street/
South
From St. Marks La. to
Champlin Creek (ISL)
[Amended 11-21-1989]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Marconi Avenue/
North
From Smithtown Ave. west
for 200 ft. (LKL) [Added
10-18-1988]
No parking —
Marilyn Street/
East
From 220 ft. north of
Cynthia La. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Amended
8-30-1988]
No
standing
—
From Cynthia La. to 30 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(EIS) [Added 2-24-2009;
amended 4-28-2009]
No parking —
Marilyn Street/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 30 ft. (EIS) [Amended
8-30-1988]
No
standing
—
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 160 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(EIS) [Added 6-6-1989]
No
stopping
—
Mariner Circle/
North
From Snedecor Ave. west
for 30 ft. (WIS) [Added
11-17-1981]
No parking —
Mariner Circle/
South
From 30 ft. west of
Snedecor Ave. to Snedecor
Ave. (WIS) [Added
11-17-1981]
No
stopping
—
Marion Street/
South
From Lakeland Ave. east for
200+/- ft. (SVL) [Added
2-9-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1715
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Martin Drive/
North
From Kane St. to Hamilton
Pl. (WIS) [Added 4-5-1988;
amended 9-15-2009]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Martin Drive/
South
From Kane St. to Hamilton
Pl. (WIS) [Added 4-5-1988;
amended 9-15-2009]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Martinstein
Avenue/East
From 350 ft. north of E.
Lakeland St. north for 175
ft. (WBW)
No parking —
Martinstein
Avenue/West
From 525 ft. north of E.
Lakeland St. south 175 ft.
(WBW)
No parking —
Marvin Lane/
East
From Raymond St. to 300 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy. (ISL)
[Amended 11-18-1986]
No parking —
From 300 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL) [Added
11-18-1986]
No
stopping
—
Marvin Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to 300
ft. south of Montauk Hwy.
(ISL) [Added 11-18-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 350 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Raymond
St. (ISL) [Amended
11-18-1986]
No parking —
Marvin Road/
North
From Stein Dr. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Marvin Road/
South
From Fifth Ave. to Stein Dr.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Massachusetts
Avenue/North
From 15 ft. west of Illinois
Ave. to its terminus (BWD)
[Added 1-5-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
nightly
Massachusetts
Avenue/South
From west terminus to 320
ft. west of Illinois Ave.
(BWD) [Added 2-9-2016]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
McAdam Street/
North
From Fifth Ave. west for
850 ft. (BWD) [Added
9-18-1979; amended
8-31-1994]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1716
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
McAdam Street/
South
From 850 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
[Added 9-18-1979;
amended 8-31-1994]
No parking —
McArthur Street/
North
From Lakeland Ave. to 70 ft.
west of Lakeland Ave.
(BHM) [Added 6-7-1988]
No parking —
McArthur Street/
South
From 60 ft. west of
Lakeland Ave. to Lakeland
Ave. (BHM) [Added
6-7-1988]
No parking —
McCall Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. to
Archie Pl. (WIS) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
McConnell
Avenue/East
From 75 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BPT)
No parking —
McConnell
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 75 ft. (BPT)
No parking —
McCormick
Avenue/North
From 100 ft. west of
Knickerbocker Ave. west for
100 ft. (BHM) [Added
11-16-2010]
No parking —
McGowan Lane/
North
From Wheeler Rd. west for
680 ft. (CIS) [Added
7-16-2019]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
McGowan Lane/
South
From 680 ft. west of
Wheeler Rd. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 7-16-2019]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Mechanicsville
Road/North
From Third Ave. to Fourth
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Fourth Ave. to Park
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
10-13-2015]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
—
From Park Ave. to Smith
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Smith Ave. to Fifth
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Fifth Ave. to Clinton
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1717
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Mechanicsville
Road/South
From Clinton Ave. to Fifth
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Fifth Ave. to Smith
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Smith Ave. to Park
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Park Ave. for 200 feet
east (BSR) [Amended
8-22-2017]
No parking —
From 200 ft. east of Park
Ave. to Fourth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 8-22-2017]
Limited
time
parking
12 hour, Bay
Shore
employee
permits (BSE)
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Third Ave. to Bay
Shore Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Bay Shore Ave. to
Second Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Second Ave. to First
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
Mercedes Drive/
North
From Heartland Blvd. to
Rodeo Dr. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
Mercedes Drive/
South
From Rodeo Dr. to
Heartland Blvd. (EDG)
[Added 9-18-1990]
No parking —
Meroke Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 200 +/- ft. (EIS) [Added
5-12-2009]
No parking —
Merrick Street/
North
From Connetquot Ave. west
for 600 ft. (EIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Merrick Street/
South
From 550 ft. east of
Bellmore Ave. east for 200
ft. (EIS) [Added
10-13-2010]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Merrill Street/
North
From Crooked Hill Rd. to
110 ft. west of MacArthur
Ave. (BWD) [Amended
1-12-1994]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1718
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Merrill Street/
South
From 250 ft. west of
Crooked Hill Rd. to Crooked
Hill Rd. (BWD)
No parking —
Miami Road/East From Fifth Ave. to
Connetquot Dr. (OKD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking —
Miami Road/
West
From Connetquot Dr. to
Shore Dr. (OKD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
Michigan
Avenue/North
From Candlewood Rd. to
Illinois Ave. (BWD) [Added
6-6-1978]
No parking —
Michigan
Avenue/South
From Illinois Ave. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 6-6-1978]
No parking —
Michigan Street/
North
From 100 feet west of
Ocean Ave. to Pine St.
(RNK) [Added 5-11-2010]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., Fri.
through Sun.
Michigan Street/
South
From Ocean Ave. to
Chestnut Dr. (RNK) [Added
5-11-2010]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., Fri.
through Sun.
From 190 feet east of Pine
St. to Ocean Ave. (RNK)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., Fri.
through Sun.
Middle Road/
North
From 125 ft. east of Ocean
Ave. to Ocean Ave. (BPT)
[Added 4-5-1988]
No parking —
From Ocean Ave. to
Howell's Ct. (BPT)
No parking —
From Howell's Ct. to
Bayport Ave. (BPT)
No parking —
From Bayport Ave. to Slone
Ct. (BPT)
No parking —
From Foster Ave. west for
310 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 310 ft. west of Foster
Ave. west for 170 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1719
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Collins Ave. to 75 ft.
east of Montauk Hwy. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 am. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 60 ft. east of Montauk
Hwy. to Montauk Hwy.
(SVL)
No parking —
Middle Road/
South
From 125 ft. east of Ocean
Ave. to 125 ft. west of
Ocean Ave. (BPT) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking —
From Bayport Ave. east for
300 ft. to Howells Ct. (BPT)
[Added 5-11-2010]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From 40 feet east of
Bayport Ave. to Bayport
Ave. (BPT) [Added
5-11-2010]
No parking —
From Esplanade east for
490 ft. (BPT) [Added
5-11-2010]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From 75 ft. west of Suydam
La. (BPT) [Added
7-7-1987]
No
standing
—
From Foster Ave. east for
900 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From Collins Ave. to Foster
Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
From 180 ft. west of Collins
Ave. to Collins Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. east for
210 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Middlesex
Avenue/North
From terminus to 75 ft. west
of terminus (OKD) [Added
5-20-1997]
No parking —
Mildred Place/
North
From Brook Ave. west for 70
ft. (NBS) [Added
3-7-2006]
No parking
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1720
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 320 ft. west Brook
Ave. to Esther Ave. (NBS)
[Added 1-5-1982;
amended 3-7-2006]
No parking —
Mildred Place/
South
From Esther Ave. to East
Forks Rd. (NBS) [Added
1-5-1982]
No parking —
Miller Avenue/
West
From Shauna St. to Suffolk
Ave. (CIS) [Added
9-17-1991]
No parking —
Milligan Lane/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 280 ft. [Amended
2-29-2000]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From 280 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Merritt St.
[Added 2-29-2000;
amended 8-15-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Milligan Lane/
West
From Merritt St. to 280 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
[Added 2-29-2000;
amended 8-15-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 280 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. [Amended
2-29-2000]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Milmay Avenue/
North
From its terminus west for
1,200 ft. (HPG) [Added
2-2-1988]
No parking —
Milmay Avenue/
South
From 20 ft. east of
Blydenburgh Rd. to its
terminus (HPG) [Added
2-2-1988]
No parking —
Moffitt
Boulevard/North
From 760 ft. east of
Brentwood Rd. west to
Brentwood Rd. (BSR)
[Amended 8-19-1986]
No parking —
From 150 ft. east of New
York State Route 111 to
New York State Route 111
(ISL) [Added 5-5-1998]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 275 ft. west of Islip
Avenue to Robbins Avenue
(ISL) [Added 5-12-2020]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1721
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 180 ft. east of Grant
Ave. to Grant Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
From Grant Ave. west for 30
ft. (ISL) [Amended
1-3-1978; 10-24-2017]
No parking —
From Roosevelt Ave. east
for 135 ft. (ISL) [Added
9-20-1988]
No parking —
Moffitt
Boulevard/South
From 100 +/- ft. west of
Garfield Ave. for 230 +/- ft.
west (EIS) [Added
6-10-2008]
No parking
From New York State Route
111 for 180 ft. east (ISL)
[Added 5-5-1998]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 65 ft. west of Grant
Ave. to Grant Ave. (ISL)
[Added 9-15-1987]
No parking —
From 60 ft. to 130 ft. east of
Roosevelt Blvd. (ISL)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Monell Avenue/
East
From 450 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL)
No parking —
Monell Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 50 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From 40 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 180
ft. (ISL) [Added
12-6-1977]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Montauk
Boulevard/North
From Oakdale-Bohemia Rd.
to terminus (OKD) [Added
1-28-1997]
No parking —
Montauk
Boulevard/South
From terminus to Oakdale-
Bohemia Rd. (OKD) [Added
1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
Montauk Drive/
North
From 150 ft. east of
Ackerson Blvd. to Ackerson
Blvd. (NBS) [Added
7-13-2004]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1722
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Pine Dr. to Asharoken
Blvd. (NBS) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking —
From Asharoken Blvd. to
Howells Rd./Bay Shore Rd.
(CR 57) (NBS) [Added
3-8-2011]
No parking —
Montauk Drive/
South
From Bay Shore
Rd./Howells Rd. (CR 57) to
Pine Dr. (NBS) [Added
6-21-2011]
No parking —
Montauk
Highway (Main
Street)
From Clinton Ave. to Gibson
St. (BSR) [Added
3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Montauk
Highway (Main
Street)/North
From Nicholls Rd. to
Gillette Ave. (BPT)
No
stopping
—
From Gillette Ave. to
Second Ave. (BPT)
[Amended 6-7-1988]
No parking —
From Bernice Dr. to
Lakeview Ave. (BPT)
[Added 3-21-1978;
amended 6-7-1988;
9-18-1990]
No
stopping
—
From Lakeview Ave. to Old
Broadway Ave. (BPT)
[Added 3-21-1978;
amended 6-7-1988]
No parking —
From Hiddink St. to Lincoln
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
3-21-1978]
No
standing
—
From Lincoln Ave. west for
180 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 180 ft. west of Lincoln
Ave. west for 220 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 400 ft. west of Lincoln
Ave. to 75 ft. east of
Railroad Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1723
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 75 ft. east of Railroad
Ave. to Railroad Ave. (SVL)
[Added 7-6-1982]
Bus stop —
From Railroad Ave. west for
75 ft. (SVL) [Amended
7-6-1982]
No
stopping
—
From 75 ft. west of Railroad
Ave. to 750 ft. west of
Railroad Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 10-3-1978]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 750 ft. west of
Railroad Ave. to Greene
Ave. (SVL) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking —
From Greene Ave. west for
100 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 100 ft. west of Greene
Ave. to Greeley Ave. (SVL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 150 ft. west of Greeley
Ave. to 475 ft. west of
Greeley Ave. (SVL) [Added
6-5-1979]
No parking Sun.
From Greeley Ave. west for
275 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 150 ft. west of Greeley
Ave. to 256 ft. west of
Greeley Ave. (SVL) [Added
2-27-1996]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From 275 ft. west of Greeley
Ave. to 100 ft. east of
Garfield Ave. (SVL) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
5-5-1981]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Greeley Ave. to
Garfield Ave. (SVL) [Added
5-5-1981; amended
7-18-1995]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1724
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Garfield Ave. west for
130 ft (SVL) [Added
5-5-1981]
No parking —
From Saxon Ave. to
Baymens Ct. (SVL) [Added
4-4-1978]
No parking —
From Baymens Ct. west for
200 ft. (SVL) [Added
4-4-1978]
No parking —
From 300 ft. east of Cherry
Ave. for 200 ft. +/- (WSV)
[Added 2-9-2010]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 100+/- feet east of
Cherry Ave. to Cherry Ave.
(WSV) [Added 2-9-2010]
No
stopping
—
From Rollstone Ave. west
for 100 ft. (WSV)
Bus stop —
From 590 ft. west of
Rollstone Ave. (aka
Greenview Circle) for 415 ft.
to Washington Ave. (WSV)
[Added 4-23-2013]
No
stopping
—
From 800 ft. west of
Munson La. to 875 ft. west
of Munson La. (WSV)
[Added 11-20-1979]
No parking —
From 265 ft. west of Berard
Blvd. west for 100 ft. (OKD)
Bus stop —
From 130 ft. east of Ockers
Dr. (west leg) to Ockers Dr.
(west leg) (OKD) [Amended
4-18-1989]
Bus stop —
From 1,400 ft. east of
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. to
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. (OKD)
No
stopping
—
From 80 ft. west of Idle
Hour Blvd. easterly to
Oakdale Ave. (OKD) [Added
9-16-1986]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1725
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Lakeview Ave. to
McCall Ave. (on town
property around lake) (WIS)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Montauk
Highway (Main
Street)/South
From 80 west of Atlantic
Ave. to Atlantic Ave. (WSV)
[Added 3-27-2007;
amended 8-17-2010]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From 145 ft. east of West
Ave. to 80 ft. west of
Atlantic Ave. (WSV) [Added
3-27-2007; amended
8-17-2010]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From Sequams La. to 100 ft.
east of Sequams La. (WIS)
[Added 11-21-1989]
No parking —
From West Shore Dr. east
for 90 ft. (OKD) [Added
11-18-1980]
Bus stop —
From 80 ft. west of Idle
Hour Blvd. easterly to
Oakdale Ave. (OKD) [Added
9-16-1986]
No
stopping
—
From Bridle Way to Bayview
Dr. (OKD) [Added
6-20-1978]
No
stopping
From Bayview Dr. east for
1,100 ft. (OKD)
No
stopping
—
From East Shore Road to 60
ft. east of Ockers Dr. (west
leg) (OKD) [Amended
8-17-1999; 8-22-2017]
Bus stop,
No
standing
—
From 320 ft. west of Berard
Blvd. east for 140 ft. (OKD)
Bus stop —
From Washington Ave. to
Rollstone Ave. (WSV)
No parking —
From 170 ft. west of West
La. to West La. (SVL)
[Added 11-17-2015]
No parking —
From West La. to Sunset Dr.
(SVL) [Added 4-4-1978]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1726
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Sunset Dr. east for
200 ft. (SVL) [Added
4-4-1978]
No parking —
From 200 ft. east of Sunset
Dr. to Benson Ave. (SVL)
[Added 6-17-1980]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Benson Ave. to
Handsome Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
From Handsome Ave. east
for 190 ft. (SVL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 30 ft. east of
Handsome Ave. east for 190
ft. (SVL) [Amended
7-10-1990]
No parking Sundays
From 190 ft. east of
Handsome Ave. east for 85
ft. (SVL)
No
stopping
—
From 275 ft. east of
Handsome Ave. to 30 ft.
west of Greene Ave. (SVL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From Greene Ave. east for
50 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of Greene
Ave. to 600 ft. east of
Greene Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 7-1-1986]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 600 ft. east of Greene
Ave. to Gillette Ave. (SVL)
[Amended 7-1-1986]
No
stopping
—
From 60 ft. east of Candee
Ave. to Gillette Ave. (SVL)
No
stopping
—
From Gillette Ave. east for
54 ft. (SVL)
No
standing
—
From a point 106 ft. east of
Gillette Ave. east for 50 ft.
(SVL) [Added 5-7-1985]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1727
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 54 ft. east of Gillette
Ave. to Middle Rd. (SVL)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 165 ft. east of Middle
Rd. to 270 ft. east of Middle
Rd. (SVL) [Added
11-14-1995]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 230 ft. east of Middle
Rd. to a point 380 ft. east of
Middle Rd. (SVL) [Added
7-10-1990]
No
stopping,
Bus stop
—
From Bayport Ave. to
Gillette Ave. (BPT)
[Amended 6-7-1988;
9-20-1988]
No parking —
From Gillette Ave. to the
Brookhaven Town line (BPT)
[Amended 6-6-1978]
No
stopping
—
From Old Broadway Ave. to
Oakwood Ave. (BPT)
[Added 3-21-1978;
amended 6-7-1988]
No parking —
From Oakwood Ave. to
Bayport Ave. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978; amended
6-7-1988]
No parking —
Motor Parkway/
East
From 580 ft. north of
Hawthorne Ave. to Bridge
Rd. (CIS) [Added
3-20-1979]
No parking —
From Bridge Rd. to Express
Dr. S. (CIS)
No parking —
From Express Dr. N. to
Veterans Hwy. (HPG)
[Added 6-16-1981]
No parking —
Motor Parkway/
North
From Bedford Ave. to
Hoffman La. (HPG) [Added
8-25-1992]
No
stopping
—
From 750 ft. east of
Wheeler Rd. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1728
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Wheeler Rd. to Islip
Ave. (CIS) [Added
8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
Motor Parkway/
South
From Wicks Rd. to Thomas
St. (BWD) [Added
5-1-1984; amended
4-16-1985]
No parking —
From Thomas St. to Lincoln
Ave. (BWD) [Added
5-1-1984; amended
4-16-1985]
No parking —
From Lincoln Ave. to
Jefferson Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-16-1985]
No parking —
From Jefferson Ave. to
Washington Ave. (BWD)
[Added 4-16-1985]
No parking —
From Washington Ave. to
Brentwood Pkwy. (BWD)
[Added 9-16-1980;
amended 3-3-1981;
4-16-1985]
No parking —
From 350 ft. west of
Wheeler Rd. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
From 750 ft. east of
Wheeler Rd. to Wheeler Rd.
(CIS) [Added 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
Motor Parkway/
West
From 250 ft. north of
MacArthur Blvd. to
MacArthur Blvd. (HPG)
[Added 3-20-1979]
No parking —
From Veterans Hwy. to
Express Dr. N. (HPG)
[Added 6-16-1981]
No parking —
Mowbray
Avenue/East
From 40 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
Mowbray
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 40 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1729
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Mowbray Place/
East
From Homan Pl. north for
280 ft. (BSR) [Added
12-11-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
From 280 feet north of
Homan Pl. to Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 2-9-2016]
No parking —
Muncey Road/
South
From Manor Ln. east for
240 ft. (WBS) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Nassau Avenue At a traffic island opposite
Manitton Ct. (ISL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No parking
on
perimeter
of island
—
Nassau Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 60 ft. (ISL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No
stopping
—
From 120 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 30
ft. (ISL) [Added 3-2-1982]
No parking —
From Main St. to 80 ft.
south of Manitton Ct. (ISL)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 3-2-1982;
10-19-1982]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 80 ft. south of
Manitton Ct. to Manitton Ct.
(ISL) [Added 9-18-1979;
amended 10-19-1982]
No parking —
From Manitton Ct. to
Amuxen Ct. (ISL)
No parking —
From Amuxen Ct. north for
72 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From 80 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (ISL)
No parking —
Nassau Avenue/
West
From 88 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (ISL)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1730
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 450 ft. north of Main
St. to Main St. (ISL) [Added
6-5-1979; amended
3-2-1982]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 310 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 270 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy. (ISL)
[Added 3-2-1982]
No parking —
From 130 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No
stopping
—
From 130 ft. south of
Chestnut St. to 280 ft. south
of Chestnut St. (ISL)
[Added 5-7-1991]
No parking —
Nassau Avenue
(inner circle)
Counterclockwise from 542
ft. south and east and north
of Pole L-4X to 582 ft.
beyond same (ISL) [Added
2-6-1979; amended
3-2-1982]
No parking
except for
vehicles
with
handicapped
permit
—
Counterclockwise from 360
ft. south and east of Pole
L-4X to 484 ft. beyond same
(ISL) [Added
2-6-1979;amended
3-2-1982]
No parking —
Counterclockwise from 60
ft. south of Pole L-4X to 127
ft. south of same (ISL)
[Added 2-6-1979;
amended 3-2-1982]
No parking —
Counterclockwise from 618
ft. to 643 ft. south and east
and north and west of Pole
L-4X (ISL) [Added
3-2-1982]
No parking —
Nassau Avenue
(Town Hall
circle)
Along traffic circle around
Town Hall (ISL) [Added
5-27-2009; amended
10-8-2013]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1731
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Nassau Street/
South
From Carleton Ave. east for
100 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Nemeth Street/
North
From Smithtown Ave. west
for 200 ft. (BHM) [Added
1-5-1982]
No parking —
Nemeth Street/
South
From 180 ft. west of
Smithtown Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
[Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
New Jersey
Avenue/South
From 270 ft east of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
Newport Street/
North
From Gillete Ave. to
Fairview Ave. (BPT)
No parking —
Newport Street/
South
From Fairview Ave. to
Gillete Ave. (BPT)
[Amended 11-20-1990]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 am.,
nightly
New York
Avenue/North
From Illinois Ave. west for
314 ft. (end of sump) (BWD)
[Added 9-29-2009]
No
stopping
—-
Nichols Road/
West
From Dewey St. to North
Connecting Rd. (CIS)
No parking —
From North Connecting Rd.
to Express Dr. N. (CIS)
No parking —
From South Connecting Rd.
south for 680 ft. (CIS)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
Nicolls Road/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 200 ft. (BPT)
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north to the
Islip Town line (HTV, BPT)
[Added 11-18-1986]
No parking —
Nicolls Road/
North
Northbound ramp from
Nicolls Rd. for 650 ft. to
Furrows Rd. (HBK) [Added
2-12-2013]
No
standing
—
Nicolls Road/
South
Southbound ramp from
Furrows Rd. for 650 ft. to
Nicolls Rd. (HBK) [Added
2-12-2013]
No
standing
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1732
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Nicolls Road/
West
From the Islip Town line
south to 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. (BPT, HTV)
[Added 11-18-1986]
No parking —
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BPT)
No
stopping
—
Nicon Court/East From terminus north to 100
ft. south of Rabro Dr. (HPG)
[Added 12-16-2003;
amended 9-25-2018]
No parking,
fire zone
—
From 100 ft. north of Rabro
Dr. north to terminus (HPG)
[Added 12-16-2003;
amended 9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. south of Rabro
Dr. to Rabro Dr. (HPG)
[Added 4-6-1982;
amended 9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
From Rabro Dr. north for
100 ft. (HPG) [Added
4-6-1982; amended
9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
Nicon Court/
West
From 100 ft. north of Rabro
Dr. to Rabro Dr. (HPG)
[Added 4-6-1982;
amended 9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
From Rabro Dr. south for
100 ft. (HPG) [Added
4-6-1982; amended
9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
From terminus south to 100
ft. north of Rabro Dr. (HPG)
[Added 12-16-2003;
amended 9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. south of Rabro
Dr. to terminus (HPG)
[Added 12-16-2003;
amended 9-25-2018]
No
stopping
—
Ninth Avenue/
East
From terminus to Veterans
Memorial Hwy. (BHM)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No Parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1733
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to terminus (LKL)
[Added 10-8-2002]
No parking —
Ninth Avenue/
North
[Amended
8-16-2005]
From Third St. to Second
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to Bishop Rd.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Ninth Avenue/
South
[Amended
8-16-2005]
From Bishop Rd. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to Owens
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From Owens St. to Third St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Ninth Avenue/
West
From 150 feet south of
Veterans Memorial Hwy. to
terminus (BHM) [Added
5-11-2010]
No parking —
From terminus to Veterans
Memorial Hwy. (LKL)
[Added 10-8-2002]
No parking —
Noble Street/
North
From 950 ft. east of Ferris
Ave. to 1,400 ft. east of
Ferris Ave. (BWD) [Added
4-6-1999]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 800 ft. east of
Broadway to 530 ft. east of
Broadway (BWD) [Added
1-16-1990]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
nightly
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1734
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Norman Drive/
North
From Kenwood Dr. west for
125+ ft. (BHM) [Added
8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Norman Drive/
South
From 125+ ft. west of
Kenwood Dr. to Kenwood Dr.
(BHM) [Added 8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
North Champlain
Drive/East
From North Research Pl.
north for 350 ft. to terminus
(CIS) [Added 11-17-2009]
No
stopping
—
North Clinton
Avenue/East
From Kristin Ct. to 145 ft.
south of Spur Dr. South
(NBS) [Added 3-24-1992]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
From 200 ft. south of
Howells Rd. to Howells Rd.
(BSR) [Added 9-18-1979]
No parking —
North Clinton
Avenue/West
From 142 ft. south of Spur
Dr. South to Kristin Ct.
(NBS) [Added 3-24-1992]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri.
North
Connecting
Road/North
From Nichol's Rd. to Shafter
St. (CIS)
No parking —
North First
Avenue/East
From Brook Ave. to
Lakewood St. (BSR)
No parking —
North First
Avenue/West
From Lakewood St. to Brook
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
North Fourth
Street/East
From Victory Dr. north for
200 ft. (RNK) [Added
5-5-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
North Gardiner
Drive/West
From 180 ft. north of Privet
Pl. to Privet Pl. (PNR)
[Added 11-18-1980;
amended 4-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
North Gillette
Avenue/East
From 260 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 480
ft. (BPT)
No parking —
North
Montgomery
Avenue/East
From 275 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Union
Blvd. (BSR) [Added
12-19-1978; amended
5-12-2009]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1735
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Union Blvd. to north
terminus (BSR) [Added
5-23-2017]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
North
Montgomery
Avenue/West
From north terminus to
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
5-23-2017]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 425 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to 600 ft. south of
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
4-21-1998; amended
4-28-2009]
No parking —
From 60 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
10-3-1978; amended
4-28-2009]
No
standing
—
North Seventh
Street/East
From Clifford Pl. to Victory
Dr. (RNK)
No parking —
Nostrand
Avenue/South
[Amended
5-15-2018]
From 50 ft. west of Fulton
St. to Fulton St. (BWD)
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Oak Road/North From 200 ft. east of Seaman
Ave. to Seaman Ave. (BPT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oak Road/South From Seaman Ave. east for
250 ft. (BPT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oak Street/
North
From Park Ave. to Fifth Ave.
(BSR) [Added 2-9-2016]
No parking —
Oak Street/South From Park Ave. to the west
end of the Town parking lot
(BSR)
No parking —
Oak Neck Road/
West
From Thayer Pl. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
10-24-2017]
No parking 11:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Oak Tree Drive/
North
From 340 ft. east of Saxon
Ave. to 265 ft. east of
Saxton Ave. (ISL) [Added
3-20-2001]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1736
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Oak Tree Drive/
South
From Saxon Ave. east for
340 ft. (ISL) [Added
3-20-2001]
Oakdale Avenue/
East
From Iroquois St. north for
225 ft. (RNK) [Added
2-27-1990]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oakdale Avenue/
West
From 101 ft. south of
Pawnee St. to 202 ft. south
of Pawnee St. (RNK)
[Added 2-27-1990]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oakdale-
Bohemia Road/
West
From 1,900 ft. south of
Sunrise Hwy. to 2,600 ft.
south of Sunrise Hwy. (OKD)
[Added 5-15-1990]
No
stopping
—
Oakland Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 300 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Oakland Avenue/
West
From 590 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking
Oakridge Road/
South
From Mel Ct. to East Forks
Rd. (BWD) [Added
8-30-1983]
No parking
Oakwood
Avenue/East
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 am.
Oakwood
Avenue/North
From 150 ft. west of Stein
Dr. to terminus (BWD)
[Added 12-6-1983]
No parking —
Oakwood
Avenue/South
From Higbhie La. east for
100 ft. (WIS) [Added
12-19-1978]
No parking —
Oakwood
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 200 ft. (BPT) [Added
3-21-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oakwood
Boulevard/North
From Washington Ave. to
Brentwood Rd. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
Oakwood
Boulevard/South
From Brentwood Rd. to
Washington Ave. (NBS)
[Added 4-5-1983]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1737
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Ocean Avenue/
East
From the Great South Bay
to Saltmeadow La. (BPT)
No parking —
From Bayview Ave. to 100
ft. north of Brewster's
Shipyard (BSR)
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
From Bayview Ave. to
Gibson St. (BSR) [Added
5-1-1984]
No parking 4/15 to 10/15
From Gibson St. to 140 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(Main St.) (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All
From 140 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
Limited
parking
30 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 110 ft. north of
Dwight Ct. to Union Blvd.
(ISL) [Added 6-14-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Easton St. to Johnson
Ave. (RNK)
No parking —
From Johnson Ave. to 350 ft.
north of Johnson Ave. (RNK)
[Added 7-11-2006;
amended 4-29-2008]
No parking —
From 450 ft. north of Erie
St. to Express Dr. South
(RNK) [Added 1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Express Dr. North
north to 320 ft. north of
Express Dr. North (RNK)
[Added 4-2-1991;
amended 1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Main St. to its
terminus, to and including
Ocean Avenue Dock (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Ocean Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 140 ft. (BSR)
Limited
parking
30 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1738
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 140 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Gibson St.
(BSR)
No parking —
From 661 ft. south of
Linden Pl. to Lawrence Ave.
(BSR) [Added 12-17-1985;
amended 10-6-1987]
No parking 4/15 to 10/15
From 100 ft. north of
Bayview Ave. to Bayview
Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Saltmeadow La. to the
Great South Bay (BPT)
No parking —
From Union Blvd. south for
900 ft. (ISL) [Added
6-14-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 100 ft. north of
Michigan Street to
Michigan Street (RNK)
[Added 5-12-2020]
No parking —
From Michigan St. south for
150 ft. (RNK) [Added
5-11-2010]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., Fri.
through Sun.
From 320 ft. north of
Express Dr. North to
Express Dr. North (RNK)
[Added 1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Express Dr. North to
Express Dr. South (RNK)
[Added 1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Express Dr. South to
450 ft. north of Erie St.
(RNK) [Added 1-28-1997]
No
stopping
—
From Johnson Ave. to
Easton St. (RNK) [Added
9-18-1990]
No
stopping
—-
From 485 ft. south of
Veterans Hwy. to 1,170 ft.
south of Veterans Hwy.
[Added 1-7-1992]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1739
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Main St. to its
terminus, to and including
Ocean Avenue Dock (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Ocean Avenue
Extension/North
From Ocean Ave. to the
Great South Bay (ISL)
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ocean Avenue
Extension/South
From Great South Bay to
Ocean Ave. (ISL)
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Oceanside
Street/South
From Lowell Ave. to
Connetquot Ave. (NGR)
No
stopping
—
Ogden Road/
North
From dead end to Barnard
St. (WIS)
No parking
school days
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Ogden Road/
South
From Higbie La. to Barnard
St. (WIS)
No parking
school days
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
From Barnard St. to dead
end (WIS)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Old Montauk
Highway North/
South
Between Old Broadway Ave.
and Broadway Ave. (SVL)
[Added 4-8-1997]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Old Railroad
Avenue/East
From Railroad Ave. north
for 220 ft. (HBK)
[Amended 11-18-1980]
No parking —
Old Railroad
Avenue/West
From 100 ft. north of
Smithtown Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (HBK)
[Amended 11-18-1980]
No parking —
Old Shore Drive/
East
From 100 ft. south of Shore
Dr. to Shore Dr. (010)
No parking —
Old Shore Drive/
West
From Shore Dr. south for
330 ft. (OKD)
No parking —
Orgill Avenue/
West
From Pine Aire Dr. to 700 ft.
south of Pine Aire Dr. (EDG)
[Added 9-19-1995]
No parking —
Orinoco Drive/
North
From Brightwaters village
line west to Asharaken Blvd.
(BSR) [Added 4-1-1986]
No parking —
From 100 ft. east of
Asharoken Blvd. west for 70
ft. (WBS) [Added
2-6-1990]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1740
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Orinoco Drive/
South
From 80 ft. west of
Asharoken Blvd. to 70 ft.
east of Asharoken Blvd.
(WBS) [Added 6-5-1984]
No parking —
Osprey Lane/
North
From Par La. North to west
terminus at a distance of
280 ft. west of Par La. North
(BWD) [Added 4-26-2011]
No parking —
Osprey Lane/
South
From west terminus to Par
La. North (BWD) [Added
4-26-2011]
No parking —
Oval Drive/East From 750 ft. south of Bridge
Rd. (east intersection) to
650 ft. south of Bridge Rd.
(east intersection) (HPG)
[Added 3-6-1984]
Bus stop —
Oversouth Lane/
North
From Collins Ave. to Gillette
Ave. (SVL) [Added
12-61988]
No
stopping
—
Overton Street/
North
From Macon Ave. west for
50 ft. (SVL)
No
standing
—
Owens Street/
East
From 400 ft. south of Ninth
Ave. to Ninth Ave. (BWD)
No parking
school days
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Owens Street/
West
From Ninth Ave. south for
400 ft. (BWD)
No parking
school days
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Pacific Street/
East
From Prime Pl. to Central
Ave. (CIS) [Added
11-9-1999]
No parking —
Pacific Street/
East
From 150 ft. north to 350 ft.
north of Pacific St. (HPG)
[Added 7-16-1996]
No parking,
except for
New York
State
Department
of Motor
Vehicles
use
—
Paprocki Avenue/
North
From 460 ft. west of
Chestnut Pl. to 660 ft. west
of Chestnut Pl. (WIS)
[Added 7-17-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1741
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Paprocki Avenue/
South
From 150 ft. east of Higbie
La. to 350 ft. east of Higbie
La. (WIS) [Added
7-17-1979]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
Pardee Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 215 ft. (ISL) [Amended
6-3-1980]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From 650 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 1,400 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy. (ISL)
[Added 10-17-1995]
No
standing
—
From 30 ft. north of Dwight
Ct. north for 150 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From 480 ft. south of
Dwight Ct. to 90 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. (ISL) [Added
10-17-2006]
No parking —
Pardee Avenue/
West
From 480 ft. south of
Dwight Ct. to 90 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. (ISL) [Added
10-17-2006]
No parking —
From Dwight Ct. to 480 ft.
south of Dwight Ct. (ISL)
[Added 11-20-2018]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon. - Fri.
Park Avenue/
East
From West Main St. north
for 55 ft. (BSR) [Added
7-17-1979]
No parking —
From 55 ft. north of West
Main St. north for 180 ft.
(BSR) [Added 10-17-1978;
amended 7-17-1979;
4-10-2007
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
North of Main St. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
From 400 ft. north of West
Main St. to Mechanicsville
Rd. (BSR) [Added
10-17-1978]
No parking —
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
60 ft. south of Union Blvd.
(BSR) [Added 8-21-1984;
amended 2-27-2007]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1742
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 60 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 2-27-2007]
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to its north terminus
at the Railroad Tracks
(BSR) [Amended
8-18-1981; 8-17-2010]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. north for
50 ft. (BSR) [Amended
8-17-2010]
No
stopping
—
From 350 +/- ft. north of
Railroad Plaza to Garfield
St. (BSR) [Amended
6-24-2008]
No parking 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m., 4/
15 to 10/15
Park Avenue/
West
From Garfield St. to
Railroad Plaza (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 50 ft. south of the
LIRR to 50 ft. north of
Union Blvd. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 50 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Amended 11-18-1986;
8-17-2010]
No parking All
From Union Blvd. to
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 10-17-1978]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Mechanicsville Rd.
south for 140 ft. (BSR)
[Added 10-17-1978]
No parking —
From 340 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. to West
Main St. (BSR) [Added
10-17-1978; amended
4-10-2007]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
North of Main St. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Park Lane/East From 360 ft. to 50 ft. south
of Union Blvd. (WIS)
[Added 4-4-1989]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1743
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (WIS)
[Added 4-4-1989]
No
standing
—
Park Lane/West From Union Blvd. south for
50 ft. (WIS) [Added
4-4-1989]
No
standing
—
From 150 ft. to 300 ft. south
of Union Blvd. (WIS)
[Added 4-4-1989]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Parkway
Boulevard/West
From Motor Pkwy. to
Apache St. (RNK) [Added
9-23-2014]
No parking —
Partington
Street/North
From 200 ft. east of Lincoln
Ave. to Lincoln Ave. (SVL)
[Added 4-21-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
Pat Drive/East From Montauk Hwy. to
David Ct. (WIS) [Added
1-2-1979]
No parking —
Pat Drive/West From 250 ft. south of David
Ct. to Montauk Hwy. (WIS)
[Added 1-2-1979]
No parking —
Patchogue-
Holbrook Road
(Old
Roadway)/East
From 525 ft. to 575 ft. north
of Furrows Rd. (HBK)
[Added 10-19-1982]
Bus stop —
Patchogue-
Holbrook Road
(Old
Roadway)/West
From 72 ft. north of Grundy
Ave. (HBK)
No
standing
—
From 530 ft. north of
Furrows Rd. south for 100
ft. (HBK) [Added
10-19-1982]
Bus stop —
From 430 ft. north of
Furrows Rd. to Furrows Rd.
(HBK) [Amended
10-19-1982]
No parking —
Paulanna
Avenue/East
From William St. to James
St. [Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1744
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From James St. to Henry St.
(BPT) [Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From Henry St. to
Esplanade Way (BPT)
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Paulanna
Avenue/West
From Esplanade Way to
Henry St. (BPT) [Added
9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From Henry St. to James St.
[Added 9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
From James St. to William
St. (BPT) [Added
9-1-1993]
No boat
trailer
parking
—
Peachtree Court/
North
From terminus to Lincoln
Ave. (HBK) [Added
5-12-2009]
No parking —
Peachtree Court/
South
From Lincoln Ave. to
terminus (HBK) [Added
5-12-2009]
No parking —
Pearl Street/
North
From Smithtown Ave. west
for 200 ft. (BHM)
No parking —
Pearl Street/
South
From Grundy Ave. east for
50 ft. (HBK) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From 125 ft. east of Grundy
Ave. for 625 ft. (HBK)
[Added 9-11-2012]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pease Lane/East From Montauk Hwy. north
for 50 ft. (WIS) [Added
5-16-2000]
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Merritt St.
(WIS) [Added 4-14-2009;
amended 9-15-2009]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Pease Lane/West From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
5-16-2000]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1745
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Merritt St. to 50 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 4-14-2009;
amended 9-15-2009]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Peconic Street
West/North
From 250 ft. west of Louis
Kossuth Ave. to 200 ft. east
of First Ave. (LKL) [Added
5-5-1981]
No parking —
Peconic Street/
South
From 17th Ave. east for 600
ft. (LKL) [Added
10-21-2008]
No
stopping
—
Peconic Street
West/South
From 200 ft. east of First
Ave. to 150 ft. west of Louis
Kossuth Ave. (LKL) [Added
5-5-1981]
No parking —
Penataquit
Avenue/East
From Awixa Ave. north for
190 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 30 ft. (BSR) [Added
11-17-1987]
No parking —
From 110 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Amended 9-15-1987]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. north for
50 ft. (BSR) [Added
5-24-2011]
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to 300 ft. north of
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
5-24-2011]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From 300 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to the LIRR tracks
(BSR) [Added 2-29-2000;
amended 5-24-2011]
No parking —
Penataquit
Avenue/West
From Sunrise Hwy. South
Service Rd. south for 200 ft.
(BSR) [Added 1-30-2001]
No parking —
From 160 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 7-18-1995]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1746
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 30 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
11-17-1987]
No parking —
From 1,300 ft. south of
South Ct. to Awixa Ave.
(BSR)
No parking —
Pennsylvania
Avenue/East
From Prospect Dr. to 530 ft.
north of Prospect Dr. (BWD)
[Added 6-18-1991]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Perkal Street/
North
From Second Ave. west for
450 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Perkal Street/
South
From Third Ave. to Second
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
10-9-2001]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Perry Street/
North
From Washington Ave. west
for 100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Peters
Boulevard/East
From Privet Pl. north for
100 ft. (PNR) [Added
11-18-1980; amended
4-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
Pine Drive/West From Howells Rd. south for
150 ft. (WBS) [Added
1-14-2003]
No parking —
Pine Acres
Boulevard/East
From 712 ft. north of
Hemlock Dr. to Locust Dr.
(PNR) [Added 6-6-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Pine Acres
Boulevard/West
From Locust Dr. to Hemlock
Dr. (PNR) [Added
5-16-1989; amended
6-6-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
Pine Aire Drive/
North
From Heckscher Ave. to
Pine Grove Blvd. (PNR)
[Added 4-12-1995]
No
stopping
—
From Pine Grove Blvd. to 60
ft. east of Manatuck Blvd.
(PNR) [Added 4-22-2003]
No
stopping
—
From Corbin Ave. to Dunton
Ave. (PNR) [Added
3-19-1991; amended
8-15-2006]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1747
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Pine Aire Drive/
South
From Dunton Ave. to Corbin
Ave. (PNR) [Added
3-19-1991; amended
8-15-2006]
No parking —
From Washington Ave. to
Jefferson Ave. (EDG)
[Added 12-15-1992]
No
stopping
—
From 125 ft. west of
Manatuck Blvd. to
Manatuck Blvd. (PNR)
[Added 4-22-2003]
No
stopping
—
From Heckscher Ave. to
Pine Grove Blvd. (PNR)
[Added 4-12-1995]
No
stopping
—
Pine Aire Drive/
South
From Heckscher Ave. east
for 225 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From Peck Ave. to Princess
Ave. (PNR) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
Pine Grove
Boulevard/East
From 150 ft. south of Pine
Aire Dr. to Pine Aire Dr.
(PNR) [Added 8-29-1989]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
Pine Grove
Boulevard/West
From Pine Aire Dr. to 150 ft.
south of Pine Aire Dr. (PNR)
[Added 8-29-1989]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
Pineville Road/
East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
250 ft. (CIS) [Amended
11-20-2018]
No
standing
—
Pineville Road/
West
From 250 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS) [Amended
11-20-2018]
No
standing
—
Pinewood
Avenue/—-
From 1,440 ft. north of
Birch St. around the cul-desac
to 1,440 ft. north of
Birch St. (CIS) [Added
10-17-1989]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1748
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Piper Court/—- From 640 ft. south of
Skipper Dr. around the
perimeter of the cul-de-sac
(WIS) [Added 8-28-1979;
amended 11-18-1980]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pleasant Street/
North
From 100 ft. west of Van
Schack Pl. to Van Schack Pl.
(RNK) [Added 7-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pleasantview
Court/North
From terminus to Sky View
Ct. (HPG) [Added
6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
From Sky View Ct. to
Lincoln Blvd. (HPG) [Added
2-27-2001; amended
6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
Pleasantview
Court/South
From Lincoln Blvd. to Sky
View Ct. (HPG) [Added
6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
From Sky View Ct. to the
terminus (HPG) [Added
6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
Poet Place/East From 107 ft. south of Resiak
Ct. to Resiak Ct. (HBK)
[Added 4-7-1987]
No
standing
—
Pond Road/East From 700+ ft. south of
Sunrise Hwy. Service Rd. for
1,205+ ft. (OKD) [Added
8-14-2007]
No parking —
From 200 ft. north of Ninth
St. to Marconi Ave. (RNK)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking —
Pond Road/West From Easton St. to Johnson
Ave. (LKL, RNK) [Added
8-28-1979]
No parking —
From 250 ft. south of
Marconi Ave. for 500 ft.
(RNK) [Added 4-14-2009]
No parking —
Poplar Street/
North
From Foster Ave. to Colton
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
5-21-1996]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1749
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Poplar Street/
South
From Colton Ave. east for
270 ft. (SVL) [Amended
5-21-1996; 6-24-1997]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
Potters
Boulevard/East
From 650 ft. north of
Chestnut Dr. to Spur Dr.
South (NBS) [Added
10-25-2011]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From its terminus at 650 ft.
south of Cedar Dr. to Cedar
Dr. (BWD) [Added
12-16-1986]
No parking —
Potters
Boulevard/West
From Cedar Dr. to its
terminus at 650 ft. south of
Cedar Dr. (BWD) [Added
12-16-1986]
No parking —
From Spur Dr. South to 650
ft. north of Chestnut Dr.
(NBS) [Added
10-25-2011]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 430 ft. south of
Montauk Dr.
counterclockwise to 580 ft.
south of Montauk Dr.
(within cul-de-sac) at
Sunrise Highway North
Service Road (NBS) [Added
5-23-2017]
No parking —
Poulsen Street/
North
From 120 ft. east of Grundy
Ave. to Grundy Ave. (HBK)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Princess Avenue/
East
From 100 ft. south of Pine
Aire Dr. to Pine Aire Dr.
(BWD)
No parking —
Princess Avenue/
West
From Pine Aire Dr. south for
100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Privet Place/
North
From 300 ft. west of Peters
Blvd. to North Gardiner Dr.
(PNR) [Added 11-18-1980;
amended 4-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
Privet Place/
South
From North Gardiner Dr. to
Peters Blvd. (PNR) [Added
11-18-1980; amended
4-2-1991]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1750
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Prospect
Avenue/North
From South Clinton Ave. to
terminus (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
Prospect
Avenue/South
From terminus to South
Clinton Ave. (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
From Higbie La. to Chestnut
St. (WIS)
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Quail Run/West From Kay Ct. south for 130
ft. (EIS) [Added
3-16-2010]
No parking —
Quality Street/
West/South
From Hollywood Dr. to Jade
St. (OKD) [Added
2-6-1979]
No parking —
Quincy Place/
East
From Martin Dr. to North
Monroe Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Quincy Place/
West
From North Monroe Ave. to
Martin Dr. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Rabro Drive/
North
From Wheeler Rd. (NY 111)
to Nicon Ct (HPG) [Added
1-15-1980; amended
9-16-1980; 3-3-1987]
No parking —
From Nicon Ct. to Simeon
Wood Rd. (HPG) [Added
9-16-1980; amended
3-3-1987]
No parking —
From Simeon Wood Rd. to
Ranick Rd. (HPG) [Added
9-16-1980; amended
3-3-1987]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1751
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Ranick Rd. west for
210 ft. to the Smithtown
Town line (HPG) [Added
9-16-1980; amended
3-3-1987]
No parking —
Rabro Drive/
South
From the Smithtown Town
line to Ranick Rd. (HPG)
[Added 9-16-1980;
amended 3-3-1987]
No parking —
From Ranick Rd. to Simeon
Wood Rd. (HPG) [Added
9-16-1980; amended
3-3-1987]
No parking —
From Simeon Wood Rd. to
Nicon Ct (HPG) [Added
parking 9-16-1980;
amended 3-3-1987]
No —
From Nicon Ct. to Wheeler
Rd. (NY 111) (HPG) [Added
1-15-1980; amended
9-16-1980; 3-3-1987]
No parking —
Radcliff Drive/
East
From 50 ft. south of
Sheridan St. to Riddle St.
(BWD) [Added 9-9-2003]
No parking 10:00 p.m.to
5:00 a.m.,
nightly
Railroad Avenue/
East
From Main St. to Hiddink
St. (SVL)
No parking —
From 30 ft. north of Hiddink
St. to 230 ft. north of
Hiddink St. (SVL) [Added
8-17-1982]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
Railroad Avenue/
North
From Burchell Blvd. west
for 100 ft. (BSR) [Added
5-5-1992]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From Main St. (Patchogue-
Holbrook Rd.) to Railroad
Ave. terminus (HBK)
[Added 9-17-1991]
No parking
From 500 ft. east of
Railroad Ave. Ext. to
Railroad Ave. Ext (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1752
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Smithtown Ave. to
Lincoln Ave. (HBK) [Added
1-6-1987]
No
stopping
—
Railroad Avenue/
North and West
From Station St. to Railroad
Ave. Ext (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980; amended
1-5-1982]
No parking —
From Station St. to
Smithtown Ave. (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking —
Railroad Avenue/
South
From Lincoln Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (HBK)
[Added 1-6-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Smithtown Ave. to 140
ft. east of Station St. (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980;
amended 1-5-1982]
No parking —
From Railroad Ave. Ext east
for 500 ft. (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking —
From Main St. (Patchogue-
Holbrook Rd.) to Railroad
Ave. terminus (HBK)
[Added 9-17-1991]
No parking
From First Ave. to Lakeview
Ave. (BSR) [Added
9-23-2014]
No parking —
Railroad Avenue/
West
From Depot St. to 300 ft.
south of Depot St. (SVL)
[Amended 3-24-1992]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Hiddink St. to 150 ft. north
of Swayze St. (SVL) [Added
4-22-1968; amended
3-24-1992]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 150 ft. north of
Swayze St. to Swayze St.
(SVL) [Added 4-22-1986]
No parking —
From Swayze St. to Center
St. (SVL)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1753
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 30 ft. south to 140 ft.
south of Center St. (SVL)
[Amended 6-5-1979;
7-1-1986; 10-18-1988]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 140 ft. south of Center
St. to Main St. (SVL)
[Amended 6-5-1979;
7-1-1986; 10-18-1988]
No parking —
Railroad Avenue
Extension/East
From Railroad Ave. to
Easton St. (BHM) [Added
11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
Railroad Avenue
Extension/West
From Easton St. to Railroad
Ave. (BHM) [Added
11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
Railroad Plaza/
North
From 70 ft. west of Fourth
Ave. to Burchell Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 11-21-1989]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
Railroad Street/
North
From 700 ft. east of
Oakwood Avenue to
Oakwood Avenue (BPT)
[Added 5-15-2018]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. east of
Snedecor Ave. to Snedecor
Ave. (BPT)
No parking —
Railroad Street/
South
From 100 ft. east of East
Road to East Road (BPT)
[Added 5-15-2018]
No
stopping
—
From Snedecor Ave. east for
200 ft. (BPT)
No parking —
Redington
Street/South
From 30 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (BSR)
No parking —
Redmen Street/
North
From Spur Dr. South east
for 140 ft. (EIS) [Amended
2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 140 ft. to 210 ft. east
of Spur Dr. South (EIS)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
Bus stop
—
From 210 ft. to 300 ft. east
of Spur Dr. South (EIS)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1754
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 300 ft. to 450 ft. east
of Spur Dr. South (EIS)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
bus stop
—
From 450 ft. to 500 ft. east
of Spur Dr. South (EIS)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 500 ft. to 540 ft. east
of Spur Dr. South (EIS)
[Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
bus stop
—
From 540 ft. east of Spur
Dr. South to Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. (EIS) [Added
2-28-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Redmen Street/
South
From Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
east for 125 ft. (EIS)
[Amended 2-28-1989;
6-14-2005]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 125 ft. to 550 ft. east
of Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
(EIS) [Added 2-28-1989;
amended 6-14-2005]
No
stopping
—
From 550 ft. to 680 ft. east
of Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
(EIS) [Added 2-28-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 680 ft. to 735 ft. east
of Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
(EIS) [Added 2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 735 ft. to 795 ft. east
of Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
(EIS) [Added 2-28-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 795 ft. east of Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. to Spur Dr.
South (EIS) [Added
2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
Redmond
Avenue/East
From (its terminus) a point
410 ft. south of Redington
St. to 200 ft. south of
Redington St. (BSR) [Added
10-20-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1755
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Redmond
Avenue/West
From 200 ft. south of
Redington St. to a point 410
ft. (its terminus) south of
Redington St. (BSR) [Added
10-20-1992]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Reese Avenue/
East
From Suffolk Ave. to
McWhorter St. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
Except Sun.
and holidays
Reese Avenue/
West
From McWhorter St. to
Suffolk Ave. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
Except Sun.
and holidays
Reil Place/North From Fifth Ave. to C.R. 13A
(BSR)
No
stopping
—
Remington
Boulevard/East
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. north for 30 ft. (LKL)
[Added 2-23-1988]
No parking —
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Sixth St. (LKL)
[Added 3-20-2001]
No
stopping
fire zone
—
Rhodes Avenue/
North
From Second Ave. west on
Rhodes Ave. for 215 ft.
(BSR) [Added 10-2-1984]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Rhodes Avenue/
South
From 100 ft. west of Second
Ave. to Second Ave. (BSR)
[Added 1-18-1983]
No parking —
Richard Avenue/
North
From Craig B. Gariepy Ave.
to 450 ft. west of Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. (EIS) [Added
11-12-1996]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 450 ft. west of Craig
B. Gariepy Ave. to 610 ft.
west of Craig B. Gariepy
Ave. (EIS) [Added
11-19-1985; amended
4-27-2004]
No parking —
Richard Avenue/
South
From Carleton Ave. east for
206 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 360 ft. east of
Kunigunda Pl. to 200 ft. east
of Kunigunda Pl. (EIS)
[Added 4-27-2004]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1756
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Richard Avenue/
South
From 360 ft. east of
Kunigunda Pl. to 450 ft.
west of Craig B. Gariepy
Ave. (EIS) [Added
11-19-1985; amended
4-27-2004]
No parking —
From 450 ft. west of Craig
B. Gariepy Ave. to Craig B.
Gariepy Ave. (EIS) [Added
11-12-1996]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Richmond
Boulevard/North
From Lake St. to Third Ct.
(RNK) [Amended
4-30-1996]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Third Ct. to Second
Ct. (RNK)
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Second Ct. to First Ct.
(RNK)
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From First Ct to Rosevale
Ave. (RNK)
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Rosevale Ave. to West
First St. (RNK) [Added
8-14-2001]
No parking —
From 800 ft. to 1,000 ft.
west of Mohican Ave. (RNK)
[Added 11-16-2004]
No
stopping
—
Richmond
Boulevard/South
From 800 ft. east of Old
Nichol's Rd. (RNK) [Added
11-16-2004]
No
stopping
—
From Rosevale Ave. to Lake
St. (RNK) [Amended
4-30-1996]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Riddle Street/
South
From Radcliff Dr. easterly
for 125 ft. (BWD) [Added
9-9-2003]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
5:00 a.m.,
nightly
Ridge Avenue/
North
From Ridge Ave. terminus
to 30 ft. west of Ridge Ave.
terminus (CIS) [Added
11-21-1989]
No
stopping
—
Ridge Avenue/
South
From 250 ft. east of
Connetquot Ave. to Ridge
Ave. terminus (CIS) [Added
11-21-1989]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1757
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
River Road/East From Browns River Rd.
north for 615 ft. (SVL)
[Added 7-10-1990]
No parking —
From 1,066 ft. north of
Browns River Rd. north to
Terry St. (SVL) [Added
7-10-1990]
No parking —
From 615 ft. north of
Browns River Rd. to 1,066
ft. north of Browns River
Rd. (SVL) [Added
7-10-1990]
No
stopping,
FZ
—
From Terry St. to Willow St.
(SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From 230 ft. north of River
St. to Erwin St. (SVL)
[Added 3-2-1982]
No parking 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
From Erwin St. to 70 ft.
north of Erwin St. (SVL)
[Added 3-2-1982]
No parking 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
From 70 ft. north of Erwin
St. to Hamilton St. (SVL)
[Added 3-2-1982;
amended 4-1-1986;
9-11-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
4/1 to 11/1
River Road/
North
From 685 ft. east of New St.
west for 150 ft. (GRV)
No parking —
From Great River Rd. to
Widgeon Ct. (GRV)
No parking —
River Road/
South
From 565 ft. east of New St.
east for 100 ft. (GRV)
No parking —
River Road/West From Hamilton St. to Erwin
St. (SVL) [Added
3-2-1982; amended
4-1-1986; 9-11-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
4/1 to 11/1
From Erwin St. to River St.
(SVL) [Added 3-2-1983;
amended 4-1-1986;
12-16-1986]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1758
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Willow St. to 120 ft.
north of Willow St. (SVL)
[Added 12-17-1991]
No
stopping
—
From Willow St. to Terry St.
(SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From Terry St. to Browns
River Rd. (SVL) [Amended
11-15-1983; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
River Street/
North
From River Rd. west for 640
ft. (SVL) [Added 3-2-1982;
amended 10-2-1984;
4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
River Street/
South
From Foster Ave. to River
Rd. (SVL) [Added
3-2-1982; amended
10-2-1984; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
Riverdale
Avenue/South
From 30 ft. west of
Greentree Dr. to 240 ft. east
of Greentree Dr. (OKD)
[Added 3-1-1983]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Riviera Court/
South
From 690 ft. east of Great
River Rd. for 100 +/- ft. (to
encompass perimeter of culde-
sac) (GRV) [Added
1-15-2013]
No parking —
Rock Road/West From 80 ft. to 240 ft. south
of Connetquot Ave. (EIS)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Rockaway
Street/North
From 400 ft. east of
Greenlawn Ave. to
Greenlawn Ave. (NGR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Rockaway
Street/South
From 250 ft. west of
Greenlawn Ave. to
Greenlawn Ave. (NGR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
From Greenlawn Ave. east
for 400 ft. (NGR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Rocket Drive/
West
From 75+/- ft. north of East
Farmingdale St. to East
Farmingdale St. (EIS)
[Added 2-27-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1759
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Rodeo Drive/
East
From Long Island Ave. to
Mercedes Dr. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
Rodeo Drive/
West
From Mercedes Dr. to Long
Island Ave. (EDG) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking —
Roderick Road/
South
From 550 ft. east of Pine
Ave. to terminus (WIS)
[Added 1-3-1984]
No parking —
Roe Court
median/East
From 160 ft. north of
Richardson La. to 360 ft.
north of Richardson La.
(ISL) [Added 6-7-1988]
No parking —
Roe Court
median/West
From 360 ft. north of
Richardson La. to 160 ft.
north of Richardson La.
(ISL) [Added 6-7-1988]
No parking —
Rollstone
Avenue/East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 300 ft. (WSV) [Added
9-7-2011]
No parking —
From Weaver Rd. to
terminus (WSV) [Added
3-21-2017]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Rollstone
Avenue/West
From terminus to Weaver
Rd. (WSV) [Added
3-21-2017]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 200 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WSV) [Added
3-20-2001]
No parking —
Roman Street/
East
From Sunrise Hwy. to
Herbert St. (ISL)
No parking —
Ronkonkoma
Railroad Station
From Loop Rd. adjacent to
station (RNK) [Added
2-7-1989]
No parking —
Roosevelt
Avenue/East
From 150 ft. north of
Sunrise Dr. to 220 ft. north
of Sunrise Dr. (BHM)
[Added 1-17-1984]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1760
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 220 ft. north of
Sunrise Dr. to 320 ft. north
of Sunrise Dr. (BHM)
[Added 6-7-1983]
No parking —
Roosevelt
Avenue/West
No parking From 125 +/- ft.
south of Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Veterans Memorial
Hwy. (BHM) [Added
6-10-2008]
Roosevelt Place/
East [Added
5-12-2020]
From its terminus 355 ft.
south of Muncey Rd. north
for 170 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
Roosevelt Place/
West [Added
5-12-2020]
From 320 ft. south of
Muncey Rd. to its terminus
355 ft. south of Muncey Rd.
(WIS)
No parking —
Roosevelt Street/
North
From Third Ave. west for
410 ft. (at north spur) (BSR)
[Added 9-12-2006]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Evans Pl. to Dewey Pl.
(BSR) [Added 8-14-2007]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Roosevelt Street/
South
From 300 ft. east of Howells
Rd. to Winnifred St. (BSR)
[Added 9-13-2005;
amended 2-5-2008]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Root Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. south of
Palmetto St. to 350 ft. north
of Brier St. (CIS) [Added
8-27-2013]
No parking
Rose Drive/East From Rosevale Ave. to
Farmardie Dr. (RNK)
[Added 5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Mon.
Rose Drive/West From Farmardie Dr. to
Rosevale Ave. (RNK)
[Added 5-6-1986]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Mon.
Rosevale
Avenue/North
From Pond Rd. to Terrace
Dr. (RNK) [Added
10-8-2002]
No parking —
From the entrance to Islip
Town Beach east and west
for 200 ft. (RNK)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1761
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Rosevale
Avenue/South
From Kirk Ave. east and
west for 100 ft. (RNK)
No parking —
Rosevale
Avenue/West
From Lakeview Court to
Richmond Boulevard (RNK)
[Added 4-24-2012]
No parking —
Rossmore
Avenue/East
From Brightside Ave. north
for 300 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
St. James Street/
North
From Grundy Ave. to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(HBK) [Added 9-10-2002;
amended 12-17-2002]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
St. James Street/
South
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Grundy Ave. (HBK)
[Added 9-10-2002]
No parking —
St. Johns Street/
North
From 500 ft. west of Audwin
Dr. to 300 ft. east of
Kenmore St. (CIS) [Added
6-7-2016]
No parking —
From 1,020 ft. west of
Audwin Dr. west for 350 ft.
(CIS) [Added 7-17-1979]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From 30 ft. east of Carleton
Ave. to Carleton Ave. (CIS)
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. west for
100 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
St. Johns Street/
South
From 100 ft. west of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (CIS)
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. east for
30 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
St. Lawrence
Street/North
From 30 ft. east of
Wyandanch St. to the
terminus (SVL) [Added
1-3-1989]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
St. Lawrence
Street/South
From 30 ft. east of
Wyandanch St. to the
terminus (SVL) [Added
1-3-1989]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1762
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
St. Marks Lane/
East
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 100 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy. (ISL)
[Added 4-7-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Tappen Avenue to
Woodside Avenue (ISL)
[Added 6-24-2014]
No parking —
Saltmeadow
Lane/North
[Repealed
8-21-2018]
Saltmeadow
Lane/East
From south terminus to
Tranquil Court (BPT)
[Added 8-21-2018]
No parking —
Saltmeadow
Lane East/North
From 350 ft. east of South
Ocean Ave. to South Ocean
Ave. (BPT) [Added
7-17-1979]
No parking —
Saltmeadow
Lane East/South
From South Ocean Ave. to
350 ft. east of South Ocean
Ave. (BPT) [Added
7-17-1979]
No parking —
Saltmeadow
Lane/West
From Tranquil Court to
south terminus [Added
8-21-2018]
No parking —
Saxon Avenue/
East
From Great South Bay to
Dover Ct. (ISL) [Amended
12-19-1978; 1-6-1981;
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Kempster Ave. north
for 275 ft. (ISL) [Added
12-2-2014; amended
3-3-2015]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 210 ft. south of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (ISL)
[Added 11-18-1986]
No
stopping
—
From Union Blvd. to LIRR
(ISL) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 12-16-1980;
11-18-1986]
No
stopping
—
From LIRR to Moffit Blvd.
(ISL) [Added 11-18-1986]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1763
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Saxon Avenue/
West
From LIRR to Union Blvd.
(ISL) [Added 11-18-1986]
No
stopping
—
From Montauk Hwy. to
Kempster Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
From Angela La. to Great
South Bay (ISL) [Amended
12-19-1978; 1-6-1981;
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
Saxton Avenue/
East
From 500 ft. south of Brook
St. to Brook St. (SVL)
[Added 7-16-1996]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Saxton Avenue/
West
From Brook St. to 500 ft.
south of Brook St. (SVL)
[Added 7-16-1996]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Sayville Avenue/
East
From Eleventh St. to its
terminus 480 ft. north of
Eleventh St. (SVL) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Sayville Avenue/
West
From its terminus 480 ft.
north of Eleventh St. south
to Eleventh St. (SVL)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Schaefer Drive/
North
From Johnson Ave.
(westerly roadway) to Clark
Dr. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
From Clark Dr. to Hering
Dr. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
From Johnson Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (HBK)
[Added 11-15-1983;
amended 1-14-2003]
No
stopping
—
Schaefer Drive/
South
From Smithtown Ave. to
Hering Dr. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
From Hering Dr. to Clark
Dr. (HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1764
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Clark Dr. to Johnson
Ave. (westerly roadway)
(HBK) [Added
11-15-1983]
No parking —
Schneider Lane/
North
From Heller Pl. to Wheeler
Rd. (HPG)
No parking —
School House
Road/East
From Post Office Rd. to 560
ft. north of Post Office Rd.
(EIS) [Added 4-16-1996]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
School House
Road/West
From Arline La. to Post
Office Rd. (EIS) [Added
4-16-1996]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Scopelitis Court/
West
From 120 ft. north of
Furrows Rd. to Furrows Rd.
(HBK) [Added 6-18-2013]
No parking —
Scott Avenue/
North
From Dunwoodie Rd. to
Hancock Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Scott Avenue/
South
From Hancock Ave. to
Dunwoodie Rd. (WIS)
[Added 4-5-1988]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
Thurs.-Sat.
Seabreeze Lane/
North
From Snedecor Ave. west
for 100 ft. (WIS) [Added
11-12-2002]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
school days
Seabreeze Lane/
South
From 100 ft. west of
Snedecor Ave. to Snedecor
Ave. (WIS) [Added
11-12-2002]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
school days
Seafield Lane/
East
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 50 ft. (BSR) [Amended
2-4-1986]
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north for 100
ft. (BSR) [Added 2-4-1986]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
From 150 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. north to
Cooper La. (BSR) [Added
2-4-1986]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
Seafield Lane/
West
From Cooper La. south for
1,100 ft. (BSR) [Added
2-4-1986]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1765
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 150 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. south to
Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
[Added 2-4-1986]
No
stopping
—
Seaman Avenue/
East
From Oak Rd. north for 100
ft. (BPT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Seaman Avenue/
West
From 150 ft. north of
Browns River Rd. No. 3 to
Browns River Rd. No. 3
(BPT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Secatogue
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. (East
Main St) south for 200 ft.
(EIS) [Amended
10-3-1978]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
Secatogue Lane/
East
From Bay Fifth St. north for
100 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From 1,300 ft. north of Bay
Fifth St. to Montauk Hwy.
(WIS)
No parking —
Secatogue Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 400 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
Secatogue Lane
East/North
From 40 ft. west of dead
end to dead end (WIS)
No parking —
Secatogue Lane
West/South
From 160 ft. west of dead
end to dead end (WIS)
No parking —
Second Avenue/
East
From East Main St. north
for 35 ft. (BSR) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
10-18-1988]
No
standing
—
From 40 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. to
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 10-18-1988]
No
standing
—
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
Union Blvd. (BSR) [Added
2-28-1978]
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to Brook
St. (BSR)
No parking —
From Second Pl. to 300 ft.
north of Rhodes Ave. (BSR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1766
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Second Avenue/
North
From 500 ft. west of Eighth
St. to Sixth St. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Sixth St. west for 280
ft. (BWD)
Bus stop —
From 190 ft. west of Sixth
St. to Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Brentwood Rd. to
Fourth St. (BWD) [Added
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Fourth St. to Third St.
(BWD) [Amended 8-28-79]
No parking —
Second Avenue/
South
From 200 ft. east of Third
St. to Fourth St. (BWD)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 180 ft. east of Fourth
St. to Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 5-5-81]
No
stopping
—
From Brentwood Rd. east
for 250 ft. (BWD) [Added
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From a point 400 ft. west of
American Blvd. to American
Blvd. (BWD) [Added
11-17-1981]
No parking —
Second Avenue/
West
From Perkal St. to Rhodes
Ave. (BSR)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
From Rhodes Ave. south for
100 ft. (BSR) [Added
1-18-1983]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Rhodes Ave. to Second Pl.
(BSR) [Added 1-18-83]
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 320 ft. to 375 ft. south
of Second Pl. (BSR) [Added
6-23-2015]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
school days
From Brook St. to the LIRR
(BSR)
No parking —
From 50 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1767
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Mechanicsville Rd.
south for 60 ft. (BSR)
[Added 2-28-78]
No parking —
From 100 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to 30 ft.
north of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 10-20-1992]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 30 ft north of
Montauk Hwy. (Main St.) to
Montauk Hwy. (Main St.)
(BSR) [Amended
10-20-1992]
No
standing
—
Second Street/
East
From 400 ft. south of Ninth
Ave. to Ninth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Ninth Ave. to Eighth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. to
Seventh Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Seventh Ave. to Sixth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Fourth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 75 ft. south of Suffolk
Ave. to the LIRR (BWD)
No parking —
From 75 ft. south of Suffolk
Ave. to Suffolk Ave. (BWD)
No
standing
—
Second Street/
South
From Lakeview Ave. to
Cherokee Ave. (WIS)
[Added 5-3-1983]
No parking —
Second Street/
West
From Suffolk Ave. to the
LIRR (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1768
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Third Ave. to Fourth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Sixth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to Seventh
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Seventh Ave. to
Eighth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. to Ninth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Ninth Ave. south for
400 ft. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Sequams Lane/
East
From 350 ft. north of
Seaspray La. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
6-18-2013]
No
standing
—
Sequams Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 165 ft. (WIS) [Added
2-28-1978; amended
6-18-2013]
No
standing
—
Seusing
Boulevard/East
From Nichols Rd. to Serene
Pl. (HPG)
No parking —
Seusing
Boulevard/West
From projected south side
of Serene Pl. to Nichols Rd.
(HPG)
No parking —
Seventh Avenue/
North
From Fourth St. west for
100 ft. (BWD) [Added
5-6-1980]
No parking —
From First St. to dead end
(BWD)
No parking —
Seventh Avenue/
South
From dead end to First St.
(BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1769
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 ft. of Fourth St. to
Fourth St. (BWD) [Added
5-6-1980]
No parking —
Seventh Street/
North
From the school gate to
Belver Dr. (BHM)
[Amended 2-16-1999]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Seventh Street/
South
From Belver Dr. to Kenwood
Dr. (BHM)
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From the school gate to
Kenwood Dr. (BHM)
[Amended 2-16-1999]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Seville
Boulevard/East
From 550 ft. north of Versa
Pl. north for 50 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Seville
Boulevard/West
From 300+/- ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (SVL) [Added
9-22-2015]
No
stopping
—
From 600 ft. north of Versa
Pl. south for 50 ft. (SVL)
No
stopping
—
Sherman
Avenue/North
From Beach St. to 200 ft.
west of Beach St. (WIS)
[Added 4-20-1999]
No
stopping
2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Sherman
Avenue/South
From Higbie La. east for 30
ft. (WIS) [Added
9-20-1988]
No parking
Shinnecock Lane At west terminus (EIS)
[Added 5-25-2010]
No parking —
Shore Drive/East From 320 ft. south of
Oceanview Ave. to
Oceanview Ave. (OKD)
[Added 12-11-2012]
No parking —
From Oceanview Ave. north
for 825 ft. +/- (OKD)
[Added 12-11-2012]
No parking —
Shore Drive/
North
From Vanderbilt Ave. to
3,100 ft. west of Vanderbilt
Ave. (OKD) [Added
12-16-1997]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
From Grassmere Ave. to
Roxbury Ave. (OKD)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1770
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Shore Drive/
South
From Old Shore Dr. to
Vanderbilt Blvd. (OKD)
[Amended 3-24-1998;
11-14-2006]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
Shore Lane/East From Aldrich Ct. north for
140 ft. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From 140 ft. north of
Aldrich Ct. north for 280 ft.
(BSR)
No parking —
From 420 ft. north of
Aldrich Ct. to Gibson St.
(BSR)
No parking 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 420 ft. north of
Aldrich Ct. to Gibson St.
(BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Gibson St. north for
50 ft. (BSR) [Added
1-19-1993]
No
standing
—
From 50 ft. north of Gibson
St. to East Main St. (BSR)
[Amended 1-19-1993]
No parking —
Shore Lane/West From Main St. to Gibson St.
(BSR)
No parking —
From Gibson St. to 420 ft.
north of Aldrich Ct. (BSR)
No parking 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Gibson St. to 420 ft.
north of Aldrich Ct. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 420 ft. north of
Aldrich Ct. to 140 ft. north
of Aldrich Ct. (BSR)
No parking —
Shore Road/
South
No parking From 75 ft. west
of Atlantic Ave. east to
Atlantic Ave. (WSV) [Added
7-15-2008]
From West Ave. east for 130
ft. (WSV) [Added
7-15-2008; amended
6-21-2011]
No parking
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1771
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Silva Street/East From 700 ft. east of Grundy
Ave. east for 125 ft., north
175 ft. (HBK) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Sixth Avenue/
North
From Fourth St. to Third St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Second
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to dead end
(BWD)
No parking —
Sixth Avenue/
South
From dead end to First St.
(BWD)
No parking —
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to Third
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Fourth St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth St. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
No parking —
Sky View Court/
East
From Pleasantville Ct.
(HPG) [Added 6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
Sky View Court/
West
From terminus to
Pleasantview Ct. (HPG)
[Added 6-11-2002]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
Smith Avenue/
East
From 285 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (ISL)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. (Main
St.) to Mechanicsville Rd.
(BSR) [Added 4-5-1983]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1772
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Smith Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 285 ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From Mechanicsville Rd. to
Montauk Hwy. (Main St.)
(BSR) [Added 4-5-1983]
No parking —
Smithtown
Avenue/East
From 650 ft. north of Island
Blvd. to Sunrise Hwy.
(BHM) [Added 2-2-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 410 ft. north of John
St. continuing north for 490
ft. (BHM) [Amended
1-2-1979; 12-19-1989]
No parking —
From 900 ft. north of John
St. to Church St. (BIIM)
[Added 1-2-1979]
No
stopping
Bus stop
—
From 300 ft. south of Wilson
St. to Union St. (BHM)
No parking —
From Lakeland Ave. (CR 93)
to the Brookhaven-Islip
Town Line (BHM) [Added
11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Lakeland Ave. (CR93)
to Feldland St. (BHM)
[Added 6-18-1996]
No parking —
Smithtown
Avenue/West
From the Brookhaven-Islip
border to Lakeland Ave. (CR
93) (BHM) [Added
11-15-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Schaefer Dr. (HBK)
[Added 1-14-2003]
No
stopping
—
From 300 ft. north of
Church St. to Church St.
(BHM)
No parking —
From Sunrise Hwy. south
for 150 ft. (BHM) [Added
2-2-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 150 ft. south of
Sunrise Hwy. to 270 ft.
north of Island Blvd. (BHM)
[Added 2-2-1988]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1773
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Snedecor
Avenue/East
From 500+/- ft. south of
Academy St. (north leg) to
600+/- ft. north of Academy
St. (north leg) (BPT)
[Added 9-24-2013;
amended 10-22-2019]
No parking —
From 600 ft. south of
Academy St. (north leg) to
Railroad Ave. (BPT) [Added
10-22-2019]
Limited
parking
1 hour
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From Driftwood Dr. north to
77 ft. south of Seabreeze
La. (WIS) [Added
4-9-2008]
No parking —
From a point 70 ft. south of
Mariner Circle to Mariner
Circle (WIS) [Added
11-17-1981]
No
stopping
—
Snedecor
Avenue/West
From Railroad St. south for
200 ft. (BPT)
No parking —
From 850+/- ft. north of
Academy St. to 1,011+/- ft.
north of Academy St. (BPT)
[Added 7-7-1987;
amended 11-27-2007]
Limited
parking
1 hour
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holiday
From 850+/- ft. north of
Academy St. to Academy St.
(BPT) [Added 7-7-1987;
amended 11-27-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From Academy St. to Grady
St. (BPT) [Added
4-16-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From 30 ft. north of Mariner
Circle to Mariner Circle
(WIS) [Added 11-17-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Mariner Circle south
for 30 ft. (WIS) [Added
11-17-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Seabreeze La. to
Driftwood Dr. (WIS) [Added
4-9-2008]
No parking —
Somerset
Avenue/East
From Main St. to Court St.
(EIS) [Added 6-5-1979]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1774
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Somerset
Avenue/West
From 275 ft. south of Court
St. to Main St. (EIS)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 6-21-2011]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
South Court/
North
From Penataquit Ave. to
South Montgomery Ave.
(BSR) [Amended
8-12-2008]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From South Montgomery
Ave. to terminus at
Penataquit Creek (BSR)
[Added 12-19-1978;
amended 5-5-1992;
8-12-2008]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
South Court/
South
From terminus at
Penataquit Creek to 40 ft.
east of terminus (BSR)
[Added 12-16-1997;
amended 6-10-2008]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. "
South Bay
Avenue/East
From the Great South Bay
to the culvert 2,300 ft. north
of the Great South Bay (ISL)
[Amended 8-19-1980]
No
stopping
—
South Bay
Avenue/North
From S. Clinton Ave. west
for 240 ft. (BSR) [Added
2-2-1988]
No parking —
South Bay
Avenue/South
From 63 ft. east of west
terminus to Cottage Ave.
(BSR) [Added 2-2-1988]
No parking —
From Cottage Ave. to S.
Clinton Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
South Bay
Avenue/West
From the culvert 2,300 ft.
north of the Great South
Bay to the Great South Bay
(ISL) [Amended
8-19-1980]
No
stopping
—
South Clinton
Avenue/East
From Bayview Ave. to
Lawrence Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Lawrence Ave. to
Linden Pl. (BSR)
No parking —
From Gibson St. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Amended
4-30-1996]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1775
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Main St. ot its
terminus, to and including
the Bay Shore Marina (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
South Clinton
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 245 ft. (BSR) [Amended
4-30-1996]
No
stopping,
fire zone
—
From 300 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 535 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(BSR) [Added 4-30-1996]
No parking —
From 170 ft. south of
Linden Pl. to 360 ft. south of
Linden Pl. (BSR) [Added
11-20-1979; amended
4-15-1980]
No parking —
From Prospect Ave. to Great
South Bay (BSR) [Added
6-21-2011; amended
5-22-2012]
No parking,
except with
valid Town
of Islip
permit
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Memorial Day
to Labor Day
From 210 ft. north of
Prospect Ave. to Prospect
Ave. (BSR) [Added
8-21-2018]
No parking —
From 690 ft. south of
Linden Pl. to 790 ft. south of
Linden Pl. (BSR) [Added
9-9-2008]
No parking —
From Main St. ot its
terminus, to and including
the Bay Shore Marina (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
South Denver
Avenue/West
From Sunrise Hwy. south
for 175 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
South Fehr Way/
North
From 65 ft. +/- east of
Cleveland Ave. to Cleveland
Ave. (EDG) [Added
10-18-2005]
No parking —
South Fehr Way/
South
From 98 ft. to 188 ft. east of
Cleveland Ave. (EDG)
[Added 10-18-2005]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1776
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
South Fifth
Avenue/North
From Brentwood Rd. to
Fourth St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth St. to Third St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Second
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to First St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to dead end
(BWD) [Amended
8-15-2006]
No
stopping
—
South Fifth
Avenue/South
From dead end to First St.
(BWD) [Amended
8-15-2006]
No
stopping
—
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Second St. to Third
St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Third St. to Fourth St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth St. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
South First
Street/South
From 660 ft. east of Pond
Rd. to its terminus at 865 ft.
east of Pond Rd. (LKL)
[Added 10-20-1998]
No parking —
South
Montgomery
Avenue/East
From 210 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
South
Montgomery
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 210 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1777
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
South Park
Avenue/East
From Gibson St. to Montauk
Hwy. (West Main St.) (BSR)
[Added 10-3-1978;
amended 2-5-2008]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
North of Gibson St. and
south of Main St. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
South Park
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. (West
Main St.) to Gibson St.
(BSR) [Added 10-3-1978;
amended 2-5-2008]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
North of Gibson St. and
south of Main St. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
South Penataquit
Avenue/East
From 770 ft. north of First
Ct. to 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
[Added 2-5-2008]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 30 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (BSR) [Added
2-5-2008]
No parking
South Second
Street/North
From 250 ft. to 360 ft. west
of Corbin Ave. (EDG)
[Added 1-24-2017]
No parking —
From 870 ft. east of Pond
Rd. to 660 ft. east of Pond
Rd. (LKL) [Added
10-20-1998]
No parking —
South Snedecor
Avenue/East
From Great South Bay to
100 ft. north of Great South
Bay (BPT) [Added
8-11-1998]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Middle Rd. to Middle Rd.
(BPT) [Added 7-11-1978]
No parking —
South Snedecor
Avenue/West
From Middle Rd. south for
100 ft. (BPT) [Added
7-11-1978]
No parking —
From 100 ft. north of Great
South Bay (BPT) [Added
9-20-1983]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1778
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
South Street/
North
From Higbie La. to 150 ft.
west of Higbie La. (WIS)
[Added 2-26-2008]
No parking
South Street/
South
From 110 ft. east of West St.
to 100 ft. west of Higbie La.
(WIS) [Added 2-26-2008]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 100 ft. west of Higbie
La. to Higbie La. (WIS)
[Added 2-26-2008]
No parking
South Union
Avenue/South
From 85 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. east for 200 ft. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All, except
Sun.
From 285 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. east for 40 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
From 325 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. east for 75 ft. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
All, except
Sun.
Spence Avenue/
East
From 1155 +/_ ft. north of
Deerfield Ct. to terminus
(HTV) [Added 7-18-1995]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Mon. through
Fri., 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon, Sat.
through Sun.;
during times
designated by
the Director
of Traffic
Safety
Spence Street/
North
From Fifth Ave. to
Heckscher Ave. (NBS)
No parking —
Spence Street/
South
From Heckscher Ave. to
Fifth Ave. (NBS)
No parking —
Springmeadow
Drive/East
From Greenbelt Pkwy. West
to Patchogue-Holbrook Rd.
(north intersection) (HBK)
[Added 3-20-1979]
No parking —
Springmeadow
Drive/West
From Patchogue-Holbrook
Rd. (north intersection) to
Greenbelt Pkwy. West (HBK)
[Added 3-20-1979]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1779
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Spur Drive
North/East
From East Farmingdale St.
north for 210 +/- ft. (EIS)
[Added 5-27-2009]
No
stopping
—
From 150 +/- ft. south of
East Farmingdale St. north
to East Farmingdale St.
(EIS) [Added 5-27-2009]
No
stopping
—
Spur Dr. North/
North
From Eastview Dr. to
Carleton Ave. (CIS) [Added
5-11-2010]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. east of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Islip Ave. west for 200
ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From 210 ft. east of
Broadway Ave. to Broadway
Ave. (BWD) [Added
8-20-1985]
No parking —
From Broadway Ave. to 300
ft. west of Broadway Ave.
(BWD) [Added 8-20-1985]
No parking —
From Brentwood Rd. west
for 200 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From 500 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
[Amended 8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. west for
350 ft. (BWD) [Amended
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
Spur Drive
North/South
From 350 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
[Amended 8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. to a point
460 ft. east of Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Added 8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
No parking —
From 300 ft. west of
Broadway Ave. to Broadway
Ave. (BWD) [Added
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1780
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Broadway Ave. to 300
ft. east of Broadway Ave.
(BWD) (Brentwood) [Added
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Islip Ave. east for 200
ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From Carleton Ave. to
Eastview Dr./parkway ramp
(CIS) [Added 5-11-2010]
No
stopping
—
Spur Drive
North/West
From 210 ft. north of East
Farmingdale St. south to
East Farmingdale St. (EIS)
[Added 6-21-2011]
No
standing
—
Opposite East Farmingdale
St. in front of pedestrian
footbridge (EIS) [Added
6-21-2011]
No
stopping
—
From prolonged south curb
of East Farmingdale St.
south for 150 ft. (EIS)
[Added 6-21-2011]
No
standing
—
Spur Drive
South/East
From Redmen St. to 150 ft.
north of Redmen St. (EIS)
[Amended 1-6-1981;
2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
From 150 ft. north of
Redmen St. to Manhattan
Blvd. [Added 2-28-1989]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Spur Drive
South/North
From 200 ft. east of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
From 600 ft. to 1,000 ft.
west of Islip Ave. (ISL)
[Added 7-15-2008]
No parking
*Spur Drive
South/North
From 200 ft. east of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (NBS)
No parking —
From Brentwood Rd. west
for 200 ft. (NBS)
No parking —
From 480 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (NBS)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1781
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Fifth Ave. west for
400 ft. (NBS) [Amended
8-20-1985]
No
stopping
—
From 100 ft. east of
Manatuck Blvd. to
Manatuck Blvd. (NBS)
No parking —
From 40 ft. west of Lincoln
Blvd. to Potters Blvd. (NBS)
[Added 10-25-2011]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Spur Drive
South/South
From Potters Blvd. to 65 ft.
west of Lincoln Blvd. (NBS)
[Added 10-25-2011]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 100 ft. west of
Manatuck Blvd. to
Manatuck Blvd. (NBS)
No parking —
From 350 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (NBS)
No
stopping
—
From Fifth Ave. east for 200
ft. (NBS)
No parking —
From 200 ft. west of
Brentwood Rd. to
Brentwood Rd. (NBS)
No parking —
From Brentwood Rd. east
for 200 ft. (NBS)
No parking —
From 200 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
From Islip Ave. east for 200
ft. (ISL)
No parking —
From 460 ft. to 550 ft. east
of Freeman Ave. (ISL)
[Added 7-15-2008]
No parking
Spur Drive
South/West
From Manhattan Blvd.
south to 150 ft. north of
Redmen Ave. (EIS)
[Amended 2-28-1989;
4-21-1998]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From 150 ft. north of
Redmen Ave. to Redmen
Ave. (EIS) [Added
2-28-1989]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1782
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Spur Lane/East From 240 ft. south of Spur
Dr. North for 130 ft. (BSR)
[Added 7-17-2018]
No
stopping
—
Standish Road/
North
From 80 ft. west of Devon
Rd. to Devon Rd. (BWD)
[Added 12-15-2015]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Pelham Dr. to
Arlington Rd. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Station Street/
East
From Railroad Ave. to
Railroad Ave. Ext. (HBK)
[Added 11-18-1980]
No parking —
Station Street/
West
From Railroad Ave. Ext. to
Railroad Ave. (HBK) [Added
11-18-1980]
No parking —
Stein Drive/East From Candlewood Rd. to
Oakwood Ave. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Oakwood Ave. to
Jensen Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Jensen Rd. to Marvin
Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Marvin Rd. to Fourth
Ave. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Stein Drive/West From Third Ave. to Fourth
Ave. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fourth Ave. to Anna
Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Anna Rd. to Bancroft
Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Bancroft Rd. to
Marvin Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1783
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Marvin Rd. to Dalton
Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Dalton Rd. to
Inchcape Rd. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Inchcape Rd. to
Jensen Rd. (BWD) [Added
4-4-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Jensen Rd. to Kirk Rd.
(BWD) [Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Kirk Rd. to Fairtown
Rd. (BWD) [Added
10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Fairtown Rd. to
Oakwood Ave. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Oakwood Ave. to
Candlewood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 10-3-1978]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Steward Street/
North
From 180 ft. west of
Carleton Ave. to Third Ave.
(EIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Steward Street/
South
From Third Ave. to 180 ft.
west of Carleton Ave. (EIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Storey
Boulevard/North
From Bay Shore Rd. to
Howells Rd. (BSR) [Added
12-15-2009]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Stuyvesant
Street/South
From Winfield Ave. to
Brentwood Pkwy. (BWD)
[Added 9-18-1990]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
Suffolk Avenue/
North
From 225 ft. east of Bella
Casa La. to Bella Casa La.
(CIS) [Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From 400 ft. west of Bergen
St. to 500 ft. west of Bergen
St. (BWD) [Added
12-17-2019]
No parking —
From 250 ft. east of Gibbs
Rd. to Gibbs Rd. (CIS)
[Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1784
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 250 ft. east of Powell
Ave. to Powell Ave. (CIS)
[Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Powell Ave. to 260 ft.
east of Dovecote La. (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1988;
amended 10-5-1993]
No parking —
From 260 ft. east of
Dovecote La. to Dovecote
La. (CIS) [Added
10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From 85 ft. east of Nagle
La. to Nagle La. (CIS)
[Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From 280 ft. east of
Broadway to Broadway
(CIS) [Amended
10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From Broadway to William
St. (CIS) [Added
10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From William St. to
Hawthorne Ave. (CIS)
[Added 10-5-1993]
No
stopping
—
From 120 ft. east of
Pineville Rd. to Pineville Rd.
(CIS) [Added 10-1-1991]
No
stopping
—
From 275 ft. west of Church
St. west for 30 ft. (CIS)
No parking —
From Church St. to Wheeler
Rd. (CIS)
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
From Church St. to Wheeler
Rd. (CIS)
Angle
parking
—
From Wheeler Rd. west for
710 ft. (CIS) [Amended
6-5-1979; 7-10-1990]
No
stopping
—
From 140 ft. to 200 ft. west
of Wheeler Rd. (CIS)
[Added 8-30-1983]
Bus stop —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1785
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 ft. east of Allyn
Dr. to Allyn Dr. (CIS)
[Added 1-5-1982]
No parking —
From 200 ft. east of Dow St.
to Dow St. (CIS)
No parking —
From Dow St. to 40 ft. west
of Dow St. (CIS) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking —
From 40 ft. west of Dow St.
to 80 ft. west of Dow St.
(CIS) [Added 1-5-1988]
No parking All days,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 360 ft. to 460 ft. west
of Applegate Dr. (CIS)
[Added 7-17-2018]
No parking —
From 150 ft. east of Joshua's
Path to Joshua's Path (CIS)
[Added 6-5-1979]
No
stopping
—
From 50 ft. west of Joshua's
Path west for 100 ft. (BWD)
[Added 8-25-1987]
Bus stop —
From 305 ft. west of
Joshua's Path west for 45 ft.
(BWD) [Added 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
From 350 ft. west of
Joshua's Path to 530 ft. west
of Joshua's Path (BWD)
[Added 7-6-1982;
amended 12-11-2012]
No parking —
From 530 ft. west of
Joshua's Path to 642 ft. west
of Joshua's Path (BWD)
[Added 12-11-2012;
amended 12-2-2014]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 1,050 ft. west of
Joshua's Path to Bergen St.
(BWD) [Added
12-16-2014]
No parking —
From Bergen St. west for 50
ft. (BWD) [Added
12-16-2014]
No parking —
From 300 ft. east of Fulton
St. to Fulton St. (BWD)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1786
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Fulton St. west for
100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From 30 ft. east of
Brentwood Pkwy. to Alder
Ave. (BWD) [Amended
12-11-2012]
No
stopping
—
From Alder Ave. to
Washington Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Washington Ave. west
for 50 ft. (BWD) [Amended
6-5-1979]
No parking —
From 50 ft. west of
Washington Ave. to 30 ft.
east of Reese Ave. (BWD)
Limited
parking
1 hour
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 120 ft. east of
Jefferson Ave. to Jefferson
Ave. (BWD) [Added
6-5-1979]
No
stopping
—
From Jefferson Ave. to
Monroe Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From Monroe Ave. to
Madison Ave. (BWD)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 6-7-2016]
No
stopping
—
From Madison Ave. to Wicks
Rd. (BWD) [Added
6-5-1979; 11-1-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Park Ave. west for 105
ft. (BWD) [Added
12-8-1998]
No
standing
Bus stop
—
From Fifth Ave. west for
200 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
Suffolk Avenue/
South
From 200 ft. west of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking —
From 450 ft. east of Wicks
Rd. to 585 ft. east of Wicks
Rd. (BWD) [Added
12-8-1998]
No
standing
Bus stop
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1787
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Fifth Ave. to
Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 11-1-1988]
No
stopping
—
From Brentwood Rd. east
for 2,000 ft. (BWD)
[Amended 7-6-1982;
8-19-1986; 11-1-1988]
No
stopping
—
From 740 ft. east of
Willoughby St. to Fulton St.
(BWD) [Added 5-1-1979]
No parking —
From Fulton St. east for 325
ft. (BWD) [Added
5-1-1979; amended
5-1-1984; 8-25-1987;
12-11-2012; 8-27-2013]
No parking —
From 325 ft. to 375 ft. east
of Fulton St. (BWD) [Added
8-27-2013]
Limited
parking
30 minutes
—
From 375 ft. to 565 ft. west
of Fulton St. (BWD) [Added
8-27-2013]
No parking —
From Bergen St. east for
170 ft. (BWD) [Added
5-1-1984]
No parking —
From 1,210 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to 760 ft. east of
Applegate Dr. (CIS) [Added
11-16-2010]
No parking —
From 240 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (BWD)
[Added 6-5-1979]
No
stopping
—
From Islip Ave. east for 80
ft. (CIS) [Added 6-5-1979;
amended 11-16-2010]
No
stopping
—
From 1,957 feet east of Islip
Ave. for 300 feet (CIS)
[Added 5-11-2010]
No parking —
From 130 ft. west of North
Peters Blvd. to North Peters
Blvd. (CIS) [Added
6-5-1979]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1788
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From North Peters Blvd.
east for 75 ft. (CIS) [Added
6-5-1979]
No parking —
From 1,000+/- ft. east of
Peters Blvd. for 130+/- ft. to
1,130 ft. east of Peters Blvd.
(CIS) [Added 10-17-2006]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
From 640 ft. east of North
Peters Blvd. to 1,600 ft.
west of Carleton Ave. (CIS)
[Added 10-6-1998]
No
stopping
—
From 1,000 ft. west of
Carleton Ave. to 320 ft. west
of Carleton Ave. (CIS)
[Added 6-5-1979;
amended 7-10-1990]
No
stopping
—
From 320 ft. west of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (CIS) [Amended
6-5-1979; 7-10-1990]
No
stopping
—
From Carleton Ave. to
Lowell Ave. (CIS) [Added
8-17-1982; amended
1-31-2006]
No
stopping
—
From Lowell Ave. to 4,300
ft. east of Lowell Ave. (CIS)
[Amended 1-31-2006;
8-15-2006]
No
stopping
—
Suffolk Lane/
East
From South Harrison Ave.
northerly for 900 ft. (EIS)
[Added 6-20-1995]
No parking —
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Amended
6-20-1995]
No
stopping
—
Suffolk Lane/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 200 ft. (EIS)
No
stopping
—
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. southerly to
Haide Pl. (EIS) [Added
6-20-1995]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1789
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Sunrise Highway
North Service
Road
No stopping From Nicolls
Rd. to Veterans Memorial
Hwy. (HBK, HTV) [Added
7-14-1993]
—
Sunset Road/
West
From Montauk Hwy. north
for 340 ft. (BSR)
No parking —
Swayze Street/
North
From Railroad Ave. west for
240 ft. (SVL)
No parking —
Swayze Street/
South
From 100 ft. west of
Railroad Ave. to Railroad
Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
Sweeneydale
Avenue/South
From Fifth Ave. to 100 ft.
west of Fifth Ave. (BWD)
[Added 3-24-1998]
No parking —
Sycamore
Avenue/East
From 180 ft. north of
Silverleaf La. north for 200
ft. (CIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From 100 ft. south of the
Sycamore Ave. School
building line to 100 ft. north
of the school's building line
(BHM)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From 40 ft. north of
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. to 795
ft. north of Oakdale-
Bohemia Rd. (BHM) [Added
2-5-1991]
No
stopping
—
From 1,220 ft. north of
Westwind Dr. to Pond Rd.
(BHM) [Added 9-20-2016]
No parking —
From Seventh St. to
Veteran's Memorial Hwy.
(BHM) [Added 8-17-1982]
No parking —
Sycamore
Avenue/West
From 380 ft. north of
Silverleaf La. south for 200
ft. (CIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From 205 ft. south of Erie
St. for 50 ft. (RNK) [Added
2-12-2013]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1790
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 ft. north of
Johnson Ave. to Johnson
Ave. (RNK) [Added
11-17-1987]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
5:00 a.m.
From 585 ft. to 680 ft. south
of Veteran's Memorial Hwy.
(BHM) [Added 8-17-1982]
No parking —
From 100 ft. north of
Seventh St. to Seventh St.
(BHM) [Added 4-5-1983]
No parking —
From 200 ft. south of
Lenson St. to Oakdale-
Bohemia Rd. (BHM) [Added
10-1-1985]
No parking —
From Oakdale-Bohemia Rd.
south for 150 ft. (BHM)
[Added 10-1-1985]
No parking —
Sylvan Avenue/
East
From 1,300 +/- ft. north of
Church St. north for 1,000
+/- ft. (BPT) [Added
5-12-2009]
No
stopping
—
Sylvan Avenue/
West
From 1,850 +/- ft. north of
Church St. south for 500 +/-
ft. (BPT) [Added
5-12-2009]
No
stopping
—
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Taft Avenue/East
and West
Extension southerly to the
terminus (ISL) [Added
8-12-2003]
No parking —
Tamarack Street/
North
From 110 ft. east of Wilson
Blvd. to Wilson Blvd. (ISL)
[Added 10-5-1999]
No
stopping
—
Tariff Street/
South
From 320 ft. west of Cherry
Ave. to Cherry Ave. (WSV)
[Added 2-23-1993]
No parking —
From Greeley Ave. to
Lakeland Ave. (SVL)
No parking —
Terry Boulevard/
North
From Grundy Ave. east and
west for 100 ft. (HBK)
No
standing
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1791
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Technology
Drive/East
From 1211 +/- ft. south of
South Technology Dr. south
for 491 +/- ft. (CIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
No
stopping
Technology
Drive/West
From 1211 +/- ft. south of
South Technology Dr. south
for 491 +/- ft. (CIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
No
stopping
Terry Boulevard/
South
From 80 ft. east of Hiram
Ave. to Hiram Ave. (HBK)
[Added 2-2-1989]
No parking —
From Grundy Ave. east and
west for 100 ft. (HBK)
No
standing
—
Terry Road/East From Express Dr. S. to
Express Dr. N. (RNK)
No parking —
Terry Road/West From Express Dr. N. to
Express Dr. S. (RNK)
No parking —
Terry Street/
North
From Browns River (dead
end) to River Rd. (SVL)
[Amended 6-20-1978;
4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From River Rd. to Foster
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
Terry Street/
South
From Foster Ave. to River
Rd. (SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From River Rd. to Browns
River (dead end) (SVL)
[Amended 6-20-1978;
4-1-1986]
No parking —
Terry's Road/
East
From Mobile St, to Milton
St. (SVL)
No parking —
Terry's Road/
West
From Milton St. to Mobile
St. (SVL)
No parking —
Tex Court/North From Commack Rd. west for
120 ft. (ISL) [Added
4-4-1989]
No parking —
Tex Court/South From 410 ft. east of Grant
Ave. to Commack Rd. (ISL)
[Added 4-4-1989]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1792
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Third Avenue/
East
From East Main St. north
for 50 ft. (BSR) [Added
10-17-1978]
No parking —
From 30 ft. north of East
Main St. to 45 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Amended 10-17-1978;
4-9-2008]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 45 ft. south of
Mechanicsville Rd. to
Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 10-17-1978]
No parking —
From Mechanicsville Road
to Ritchie Ct. (BSR) [Added
9-25-2012]
Limited
parking 1
hour
—
From Ritchie Ct. to Union
Blvd. (BSR) [Amended
9-25-2012]
Limited
parking
1 hour
All
From 160 ft. north of
Ritchie Ct. to Union Blvd.
(BSR)
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to 65 ft.
north of Union Blvd. (BSR)
[Added 11-17-1987;
amended 12-15-1987]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From Hubbard St. to Perkal
St. (BSR) [Amended
10-9-2001]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Perkal St. north for 30
ft. (BSR) [Added
8-30-1988]
No parking —
From 355 ft. to 700 ft. north
of Sunrise Hwy. (NBS)
[Added 2-23-1988;
amended 6-23-2015]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 700 ft. to 800 ft. north
of Sunrise Hwy. (NBS)
[Added 2-23-1988;
amended 6-23-2015]
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. to 440
ft. north of Montauk Hwy.
(EIS) [Added 9-8-1998]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1793
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
North of Main St. and south
of Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Third Avenue/
North
From Sixth St. to Brentwood
Rd. (BWD) [Added
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Brentwood Rd. to
Fourth St. (BWD) [Added
5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Fourth St. west for
100 ft. (BWD)
No parking —
From First St. to Fifth Ave.
(BWD) [Amended
7-11-1978]
From 300 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. to Carleton
Ave. (CIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
Third Avenue/
South
From Carleton Ave. east for
50 ft. (CIS) [Added
4-3-2012]
No parking —
From 50 ft. to 250 ft. east of
Carleton Ave. (CIS) [Added
4-3-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From Carleton Ave. east for
300 ft. (CIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From 200 ft. west of First
St. to First St. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From First St. to Second St.
(BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 125 ft. east of Fourth
St. to Brentwood Rd. (BWD)
[Added 5-5-1981]
No
stopping
—
Third Avenue/
West
From 425 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Added
9-8-1998]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1794
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 770 ft. north of
Sunrise Hwy. to 350 ft.
north of Sunrise Hwy. (NBS)
[Added 2-23-1988;
amended 7-11-1989]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From Sunrise Hwy. south to
Koral St. (BSR) [Added
8-30-1988; amended
2-28-1989]
No parking —
From Koral St. to Roosevelt
St. (BSR)
No
standing
—
From Roosevelt St. (north
spur) south to Roosevelt St.
(BSR) [Amended
9-12-2006; 8-14-2007]
No parking —
From 220 ft. north of Union
Blvd. to Union Blvd. (BSR)
No parking —
From Union Blvd. to
Montauk Hwy. (BSR)
No parking —
North of Main St. and south
of Mechanicsville Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered
parking
—
Third Street/East From Ninth Ave. to Eighth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. north for
200 ft. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Eighth Ave. to
Seventh Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Seventh Ave. to Sixth
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Fourth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1795
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Third Street/
North
From Cherry Ave. north for
75 ft. (WSV)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
Third Street/
West
From Fourth Ave. to South
Fifth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From South Fifth Ave. to
Sixth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Sixth Ave. to Seventh
Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Seventh Ave. to
Eighth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From 200 ft. north of Eighth
Ave. to Eighth Ave. (BWD)
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Thirteenth
Avenue/East
From Veterans Memorial
Hwy. to Peconic St. (LKL)
[Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Thirteenth
Avenue/West
From Peconic St. to
Veterans Memorial Hwy.
(LKL) [Added 9-20-1988]
No parking —
Thompson Drive/
East
From Bay Shore Rd. north
for 50 ft. (NBS) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking —
Thompson Drive/
West
From 250 ft. south of Huron
Dr. to Bay Shore Rd. (NBS)
[Added 1-5-1988]
No parking —
Thunder Road/
East
From 70 ft. south of Jet La.
north for 600 ft. (HBK)
[Added 9-18-1988]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Timberline
Drive/East
From Second Ave. to Fir Pl.
(BWD)
No
stopping
—
Timberline
Drive/West
From Fir Pl. to Second Ave.
(BWD)
No
stopping
—
Timber Point
Road/North
From Woodhollow Rd. west
for 250 ft. (GRV) [Added
3-4-1986]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1796
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Heckscher State
Pkwy. exit (west leg) west
for 100 ft. (EIS) [Added
3-7-2006]
No parking —
From 400 ft. west of
Country Village La. west for
300 ft. (EIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Timber Point
Road/South
From 150 ft. east of School
House Rd. east for 250 ft.
No stopping (EIS)
—
From 400 ft. east of School
House Rd. east for 200 ft.
(EIS)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Maynard La. east for
270 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
From 100+/- ft. east of
Maynard La. east for 307+/-
ft. to Heckscher State Pkwy.
exit (west leg) (EIS) [Added
9-29-2009]
No parking —
From 250 ft. west of
Woodhollow Rd. to
Woodhollow Rd. (GRV)
[Added 3-4-1986]
No parking —
Toomey Road/
East
From Elward Ave. to Clay
Ave. (WIS) [Added
4-26-2011]
No
stopping
8:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./school
days
From Kingsland Ave. to
Webster Ave. (WIS) [Added
9-5-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Toomey Road/
West
From Webster Ave. to
Kingsland Ave. (WIS)
[Added 9-5-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 610 ft. to 690 ft. south
of VanBuren Ave. (WIS)
[Added 7-15-2008]
No
stopping
From 690 ft. south of
VanBuren Ave. to 250 +/- ft.
north of Hunter Ave. (WIS)
[Added 7-15-2008]
No
stopping
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1797
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Tower Mews/
East
From 140 ft. north of
Princess Gate to Hollywood
Dr. (OKD) [Added
2-6-1979]
No parking —
Tower Mews/
West
From Hollywood Dr. south
for 150 ft. (OKD) [Added
2-6-1979]
No parking —
Town Line Road/
South
From Lincoln Blvd. to Park
Ave. (HPG)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
From 100 ft. west of Village
La. to Village La. (HPG)
No parking —
From Village La. east for
100 ft. (HPG)
No parking —
From 440 ft. west of
Blydenburg Rd. to
Blydenburg Rd. [Added
11-13-2001]
No parking —
From Blydenburg Rd. to
Evergreen Ave. [Added
11-13-2001]
No parking —
From Evergreen Ave. to
Canterbury Dr. [Added
11-13-2001]
No parking —
From Canterbury Dr. to 160
ft. east of Canterbury Dr.
[Added 11-13-2001]
No parking —
From 620 ft. east of
Canterbury Dr. to Terry Rd.
[Added 11-13-2001]
No parking —
From Terry Rd. to 700 ft.
east of Terry Rd. [Added
11-13-2001]
No parking —
Trade Zone
Court/North
From terminus westerly to
Trade Zone Dr. (HBK)
[Added 2-5-1985]
No parking —
Trade Zone
Court/South
From Trade Zone Dr.
easterly to terminus (HBK)
[Added 2-5-1985]
No parking —
Trade Zone
Drive/East
From Veterans Hwy.
northerly to terminus (HBK)
[Added 2-5-1985]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1798
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Trade Zone
Drive/West
From terminus to Veterans
Hwy. (HBK) [Added
2-5-1985]
No parking —
Tree Avenue/
West
From Sassafras Ave. to
Apricot St. (CIS) [Added
5-24-2011]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Tudor Lane/
North
From East Third Ave. west
for 320 ft. to west terminus
(NBS) [Added 6-19-2012]
No parking —
Tudor Lane/
South
From west terminus east for
320 ft. to East Third Ave.
(NBS) [Added 6-19-2012]
No parking —
Tulip Avenue/
East
From Academy La. to a
point 200 ft north of
Academy La. (OKD) [Added
6-18-1985]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Twenty-Third
Avenue/South
From 545 feet east of East
Forks Rd. for 50 ft. (BSR)
[Added 7-17-2018]
No
stopping
—
Tyler Avenue/
East
From Montauk Hwy. to
Union St. (WSV) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking
Sun.
7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Tyler Avenue/
North
From Cherry St. to the
south property line of house
No. 90 (WSV) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Tyler Avenue/
South
From Cherry St. to the
south property line of house
No. 81 (WSV) [Added
1-5-1988]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Tyler Avenue/
West
From 50 ft. north of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WSV)
No parking —
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Udall Road/East From 450 ft. north of
Oakwood Ave. to Higbie Dr.
(WIS) [Added 4-4-1978]
No parking —
From 130 ft. north of
Muncey Rd. to 230 ft. north
of Muncey Rd. (WIS)
[Added 10-19-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1799
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Rockaway St. north
for 75 ft. (WIS) [Added
1-5-1982]
No parking —
From 230 ft. south of
Bellmore St. to Bellmore St.
(WIS) [Added 9-7-1982]
No
stopping
—
Udall Road/West From Webster Ave. to Van
Buren Ave. (WIS)
No parking —
Union Avenue/
East
From 500 ft. south of Union
Pl. to Union Pl. (ISL)
[Added 7-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
From Veterans Rd. north for
35 ft. (ISL) [Added
8-21-1984; amended
9-9-2008]
No parking —
Union Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 150 ft. (ISL) [Added
9-9-2008]
No parking —
From Union Pl. south for
500 ft. (ISL) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
Union
Boulevard/North
From Montauk Hwy. to
Connetquot Ave. (GRV)
No parking —
From Connetquot Ave. to
Knapps Lake (EIS)
No parking —
From Knapps Lake to Islip
Ave. (ISL)
No parking —
From Islip Ave. to 170 ft.
east of Nassau Ave. (ISL)
[Added 2-3-1981;
amended 3-20-2001]
No parking —
From 170 ft. east of Nassau
Ave. to Nassau Ave. (ISL)
[Added 3-20-2001]
No
stopping
—
From Nassau Ave. west for
50 ft. (ISL) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of Watson
Pl. to Watson Pl. (ISL)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
From Watson Pl. west for 50
ft. (ISL) [Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1800
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 ft. east of Grant
Ave. to Grant Ave. (ISL)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
From Grant Ave. to Saxon
Ave. (ISL) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Saxon Ave. to
Brentwood Rd. (BSR)
[Amended 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Brentwood Rd. to
Oakland Ave. (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Oakland Ave. to
Penataquit Ave. (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Penataquit Ave. to
Chapman Pl. (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Chapman Pl. to
Montgomery Ave. (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From North Montgomery
Ave. west for 750 feet (BSR)
[Amended 10-24-2017]
Limited
parking 2
hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 750 feet west to 925
feet west of North
Montgomery Ave. (BSR)
[Added 10-24-2017]
Limited
parking 30
minutes
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Sun. and
holidays
From 925 feet west of North
Montgomery Ave. to
Lakeview Ave. (BSR)
[Added 10-24-2017]
Limited
parking 2
hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Sun. and
holidays
From Lakeview Ave. to First
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From First Ave. to Second
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Second Ave. to Third
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1801
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Third Ave. west for
505 ft. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981; 11-17-1981]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 505 ft. west of Third
Ave. to Fourth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 11-17-1981]
No
stopping
—
From Fourth Ave. to Park
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —-
From Park Ave. west for 210
ft. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981; 5-18-2004]
No parking —
From 210 ft. west of Park
Ave. to 170 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. (BSR) [Added
5-18-2004]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 170 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BSR)
[Added 5-18-2004]
No parking —
From Fifth Ave. to Clinton
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From 125 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. to Clinton Ave. (BSR)
No
stopping
—
From Clinton Ave. to
Community Rd. (BSR)
No parking —
From Community Rd. to the
Brightwaters Village line
(BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Brightwaters Village
line to Robert Moses
Causeway (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Robert Moses
Causeway to Pease La.
(WIS) [Added 1-15-1980;
amended 8-22-2017]
No parking —
From Pease La. to Beach St.
(WIS) [Added 8-22-2017]
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1802
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 225 ft. west of
Chestnut St. to Higbie La.
(WIS)
No parking —
From Higbie La. to the town
line (WIS)
No parking —
Union
Boulevard/South
From the town line to
Higbie La. (WIS)
No parking —
From Higbie La. to Birch St.
(WIS)
No parking —
From Birch St. east for 165
ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From Beach St. to Keith La.
(WIS) [Added 1-15-1980;
amended 8-22-2017]
No
stopping
—
From Keith La. to Milligan
La. (WIS) [Added
1-15-1980; amended
8-22-2017]
No
stopping
—
From Milligan La. to Pease
La. (WIS) [Added
1-15-1980; amended
8-22-2017]
No
stopping
—
From Pease La. to
Tanglewood Rd. (WIS)
[Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Tanglewood Rd. to Pat
Dr. (WIS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Pat Dr. to Robert
Moses Causeway (WIS)
[Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Robert Moses
Causeway to Gladstone Ave.
(WBS) [Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Gladstone Ave. to Oak
Neck Rd. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Oak Neck Rd. to
Myrtle Ave. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1803
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Myrtle Ave. to McCall
Ave. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From McCall Ave. to Hyman
Ave. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Hyman Ave. to
Thompson Dr. (WBS)
[Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Thompson Dr. to
Manor La. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Manor La. to Gardiner
Dr. (WBS) [Added
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Gardiner Dr. to
Aberdeen La. (WBS)
[Added 1-15-1980]
No parking —
From Aberdeen La. to
Brightwaters Village line
(WBS) [Amended
1-15-1980]
No parking —
From the Brightwaters
Village line to Sunset Rd.
(BSR) [Added 3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Sunset Rd. to
Hemlock La. (BSR) [Added
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Hemlock La. to
Johnson La. (BSR) [Added
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Johnson La. to Lanier
La. (BSR) [Added
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Lanier La. to
Community Rd. (BSR)
[Added 3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Community Rd. to
Clinton Ave. (BSR)
[Amended 3-3-1981]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1804
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Clinton Ave. east for
80 ft. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From 80 ft. east of Clinton
Ave. to Fifth Ave. (BSR)
[Amended 11-17-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From Fifth Ave. east for 50
ft. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981; 3-20-2001;
5-18-2004]
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of Fifth
Ave. to 50 ft. west of Smith
Ave. (BSR) [Added
3-20-2001; amended
5-18-2004; 8-22-2017]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 50 ft. west of Smith
Ave. to Smith Ave. (BSR)
[Added 5-18-2004]
No parking —
From Smith Ave. east for 50
ft. (BSR) [Added
5-18-2004]
No parking —
From 50 ft. east of Smith
Ave. to 125 ft. west of Park
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-20-2001]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
From 125 ft. west of Park
Ave. to Park Ave. (BSR)
[Added 3-20-2001;
amended 5-18-2004]
No parking —
From Park Ave. to 125 ft.
west of Fourth Ave. (BSR)
Limited
parking
2 hours
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except Sun.
and holidays
From 125 ft. west of Fourth
Ave. to Fourth Ave. (BSR)
[Amended 3-3-1981]
No parking —
From Fourth Ave. to Third
Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Third Ave. to Bay
Shore Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1805
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Bay Shore Ave. to
Second Ave. (BSR)
No parking —
From Second Ave. to First
Ave. (BSR) [Amended
3-3-1981]
No parking —
From First Ave. to Lakeview
Ave. (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Lakeview Ave. to
Aletta Pl. (west intersection)
(BSR) [Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Aletta Pl. (west
intersection) to Aletta Pl.
(east intersection) (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Aletta Pl. (east
intersection) to
Montgomery Ave. (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Montgomery Ave. to
Chapman Pl. (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Chapman Pl. to
Penataquit Ave. (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —-
From Penataquit Ave. to
Oakland Ave. (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Oakland Ave. to
Brentwood Rd. (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Brentwood Rd. to
Brookdale Dr. (west
intersection) (BSR) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Brookdale Dr. (west
intersection) to Brookdale
Dr. (east intersection) (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Brookdale Dr. (east
intersection) to Saxon Ave.
(BSR) [Added 2-3-1981]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1806
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Saxon Ave. to North
Ocean Ave. (ISL) [Amended
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From North Ocean Ave. to
Pardee Ave. (ISL) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Pardee Ave. to Grant
Ave. (ISL) [Added
2-3-1981]
No parking —
From Grant Ave. east for
100 ft. (ISL) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From 50 ft. west of Watson
Pl. to Watson Pl. (ISL)
[Added 4-6-1982]
No parking —
From Wastson Pl. east for
50 ft. (ISL) [Added
4-6-1982]
No parking —
From 170 ft. west of Nassau
Ave. to Nassau Ave. (ISL)
[Added 4-6-1982;
amended 3-20-2000]
No
stopping
—
From Nassau Ave. to 170 ft.
west of Islip Ave. (ISL)
[Added 2-3-1981;
amended 3-20-2001]
No parking —
From 170 ft. west of Islip
Ave. to Islip Ave. (ISL) From
Islip Ave. to Knapps Lake
(ISL)
No parking —
From Knapps Lake to
Connetquot Ave. (EIS)
No parking —
From Connetquot Ave. to
Montauk Hwy. (GRV)
No parking —
Unnamed
frontage road/
South
From the west curb west for
55 ft. (WIS)
No
standing
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1807
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Van Bomel
Boulevard/East
From 105 ft. south of
Chateau Dr. to Chateau Dr.
(OKD) [Added 2-25-1992]
No parking —
Van Bomel
Boulevard/West
From 105 ft. south of
Chateau Dr. to Chateau Dr.
(OKD) [Added 2-25-1992]
No parking —
Van Buren
Avenue/North
From Toomey Rd. west for
110 ft. (WIS) [Added
2-16-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Van Buren
Avenue/South
From 110 ft. west of Toomey
Rd. to Toomey Rd. (WIS)
[Added 2-16-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Van Schack
Place/East
From Johnson Ave. to
Pleasant St. (RNK) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Van Schack
Place/West
From Pleasant St. to
Johnson Ave. (RNK) [Added
7-6-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Vanderbilt
Boulevard/East
From 730 ft. south of Cross
Rd. to Cross Rd. (OKD)
[Added 8-15-2006;
amended 11-14-2006]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
From Biltmore Ave. to
Montauk Hwy. (OKD)
No
stopping
—
Vanderbilt
Boulevard/West
From Montauk Hwy. to
Biltmore Ave. (OKD)
No
stopping
—
From 30 ft. south of Shore
Dr. to 700 ft. north of Shore
Dr. (OKD) [Added
8-15-2006; amended
11-14-2006]
No parking 4:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., 4/1
to 10/31
Versa Place/
North
From Broadway Ave. west
for 120 ft. (SVL) [Added
1-31-2012]
No parking —
From 70 ft. east of Budenos
Dr. to Budenos Dr. (SVL)
[Added 8-17-2010]
No parking —
Versa Place/
South
From 150 ft. east of
Wyandanch Rd. east for 200
ft. (SVL) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1808
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Victory Drive/
North
From Lake St. to Rosevale
Ave. (RNK) [Amended
4-30-1996]
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From 80 ft. west of North
Third St. to North Fourth St.
(RNK) [Added 5-5-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Victory Drive/
South
From West Fourth St. to
West Third St. (RNK)
[Added 5-5-1981]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Rosevale Ave. to Lake
St. (RNK) [Amended
11-20-1990]
No
stopping
8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.,
nightly
Village Lane/
West
From Town Line Rd. south
for 180 ft. (HPG)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
Voorhis Drive/
North
From 105 ft. east of Mur Pl.
to 140 ft. west of Mur Pl.
(BWD)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Wall Street/
North
From 50 ft. east of Locust
Ave. to Locust Ave. (BHM)
[Added 8-15-2000]
No parking —
Wall Street/
South
From Wall St. east for 50 ft.
(BHM) [Added 8-15-2000]
No parking —
Walnut Avenue/
East
From 50 ft. south of Church
St. to Church St. (BHM)
No parking —
Washington
Avenue/East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
170 ft. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From 180 ft. south of Motor
Pkwy. to Motor Pkwy. (BWD)
No
standing
—
Washington
Avenue
(Remington
Boulevard)/West
From Sixth St. for 350 +/-
ft. south to Veterans Hwy.
(LKL) [Added 2-5-2008]
No parking
Washington
Avenue/West
From Hewes St. to Perry St.
(BWD)
No parking —
From 80 ft. north of Clarke
St. to Clarke St. (BWD)
[Added 9-17-1991]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1809
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From McWhorter St. to
Suffolk Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Pine Aire Dr. south for
165 ft. (EDG) [Added
7-11-2000]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
From the south property
line of the West Sayville
Post Office north for 30 ft.
(WSV)
No parking —
Washington
Street/North
From 430 ft. west of
Division Ave. to its west
terminus at Carleton Ave.
(EIS) [Added 8-30-1988]
No
stopping
—
Washington
Street/South
From its west terminus at
Carleton Ave. east for 200
ft. (EIS) [Added
8-30-1988]
No
stopping
—
Waterford Road/
North
From 200 ft. east of
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. to
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. (OKD)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
Waterford Road/
South
From Oakdale-Bohemia Rd.
east for 200 feet (to
Chatham Dr.) (OKD)
[Added 12-10-2013]
No parking —
Watson Place/
North
From Carleton Ave. west for
30 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Watson Place/
South
From 30 ft. west of Carleton
Ave. to Carleton Ave. (EIS)
No parking —
Wavecrest
Avenue/South
From Higbie La. east for 50
ft. (WIS) [Added
7-17-1979]
No parking —
Waverly Avenue/
East
From Blue Point Rd.
northerly for 100 ft. (HTV)
[Added 10-8-1996]
No
stopping
—
Waverly Avenue/
West
From 100 ft. north of Storm
Dr. (north leg) to 100 ft.
south of Storm Dr. (south
leg) (HTV)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1810
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 140 ft. north of
Alexander DiGuardia Blvd.
to Alexander DiGuardia
Blvd. (HTV) [Added
3-19-2019]
No parking —
From Alexander DiGuardia
Blvd. south for 100 ft. (HTV)
[Added 3-19-2019]
No parking —
From Blackpine Ct. south
for 500 ft. (HTV) [Added
5-20-1997; amended
11-13-2001; 6-18-2013]
No
stopping
5:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From 120 ft. north of Blue
Point Rd. West to 400 ft.
south of Blue Point Rd. West
(HTV) [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 1-25-2005]
No
stopping
—
Webster Avenue/
North
From Cadman Rd. to
Toomey Rd. (WIS) [Added
9-5-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Webster Avenue/
South
From Toomey Rd. to
Cadman Rd. (WIS) [Added
9-5-1978]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wedgewood
Drive/East
From 100 ft. south of Town
Line Rd. to Town Line Rd.
(HPG) [Added 5-5-1981]
No parking —
Wedgewood
Drive/West
From Town Line Rd. south
for 100 ft. (HPG) [Added
5-5-1981]
No parking —
West Avenue/
East
West Ave. Dock, from the
south end of the dock to 250
ft. south of Shore Rd. (WSV)
No parking —
From 50 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WSV)
No parking —
West Avenue/
West [Amended
5-14-2019]
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 100 ft. (WSV)
No parking —
West Drive/East From Oak St. to Garfield St.
(BSR) [Added 2-9-2016]
Limited
time
parking
4-hour
parking
between April
1 and October
31
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1811
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
West Drive/West From Garfield St. to Oak St.
(BSR) [Added 2-9-2016]
Limited
time
parking
4-hour
parking
between April
1 and October
31
West End
Avenue/North
From Highland Avenue west
for 105 feet (BWD) [Added
3-10-2020]
No parking —
West Lane/East From 995 ft. south of O-Co-
Nee Walk north for 150 ft.
(BSR) [Amended
11-18-1980]
No
stopping
—
West Lane/West From 845 ft. south of O-Co-
Nee Walk south for 150 ft.
(BSR) [Amended
11-18-1980]
No
stopping
—
West Lane/West From Montauk Hwy. south
for 400 ft. (WSV) [Added
9-19-1995]
No parking —
West Street/East For 75 ft. north of South St.
(WIS) [Added 7-7-1987]
No parking —
West Adams
Street/North
From Carleton Ave. to 235
ft. west of Carleton Ave.
(EIS) [Added 5-7-1991]
No parking —
West Bay Drive/
East
From 400 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to 100 ft.
south of Montauk Hwy.
(WIS) [Added 1-6-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (WIS) [Added
1-6-1981]
No parking —
West Bay Drive/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 100 ft. (WIS) [Added
1-6-1981]
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. south for 300
ft. (WIS) [Added 1-6-1981]
Limited
parking
2 hours
—
West First
Street/North
From 420 ft. east of Udall
Rd. to Udall Rd. (WIS)
[Added 3-23-2004]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1812
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
West First
Street/South
From Udall Rd. east for 30
ft. (WIS) [Added
3-23-2004]
No parking —
From 30 ft. east of Udall Rd.
to 270 ft. west of its
terminus at the Sunrise
Hwy. North Service Rd.
(WIS) [Added 3-23-2004]
Limited
parking
2 hours
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Fri.
West Islip Road/
East
The cul-de-sac, and north
for 200 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From 30 ft. south of
Frontage Rd. to 180 ft.
south of Frontage Rd. (WIS)
[Added 11-14-2000]
No parking —
West Islip Road/
West
The cul-de-sac, and north
for 200 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 500 ft. (WIS)
No parking —
West Shore
Road/West
From south property line of
house No. 308 to terminus
(OKD) [Added 9-20-1983]
No parking —
West Third
Street/North
From 200 ft. west of Sunrise
Hwy. N. Service Rd. to
Spruce Ave. (WIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
West Third
Street/South
From Spruce Ave. east for
150 ft. (WIS)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
West White
Street/South
From Quail Dr. to Chapel
Hill Dr. (BWD) [Amended
11-16-1982]
No
stopping
8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Westbridge
Drive/North
From Broadway Ave. to 400
ft. west of Broadway Ave.
(HBK) [Added 9-12-2000]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Wheeler Road/
East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
250 ft. (CIS)
No
standing
—
From Suffolk Ave. to
McGrath St. (CIS)
Metered
parking
—
From Halley La. to Adams
Rd. (CIS)
No parking —
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1813
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Adams Rd. to Dolores
Pl. (CIS)
No parking —
From Montauk Hwy. west
for 370 ft. (GRV) [Added
6-11-2002]
No
stopping
—
From 400 ft. south of Motor
Pkwy. to Marlo La. (HPG)
[Added 9-7-1982;
amended 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
From Bretton Rd. to
Joshua's Path (NY 111)
(HPG) [Added 9-18-1979]
No
standing
—
Wheeler Road/
West
From prolonged south side
of Dolores Pl. to McGowan
La. (CIS)
No parking —
From McGowan La. to
Halley La. (CIS)
No parking —
From Linda La. to Suffolk
Ave. (CIS)
No parking —
From 250 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS)
No
standing
—
From Montauk Hwy. west
for 370 ft. (GRV) [Added
6-11-2002]
No
stopping
—
From 400 ft. south of Motor
Pkwy. to Marlo La. (HPG)
[Added 8-25-1987]
No
stopping
—
Whipple Street/
North
From east property line to
west property line of park
(BWD) [Added
11-20-1984]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wicks Road/East From Suffolk Ave. to Willow
Ct. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Willow Ct. to Pine Ct.
(BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Pine Ct. to Cedar St.
(BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Cedar St. to Wood St.
(BWD)
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1814
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Wood St. to Spruce
Ct. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Spruce Ct. to Grove
St. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Grove St. to Maple St.
(BWD) [Added 4-18-1989]
No
stopping
—
Express Dr. S. to Motor
Pkwy. (BWD)
No parking —
Wicks Road/West From Motor Pkwy. to
Express Dr. S. (BWD)
No parking —
From 590 ft. north of Polly
Dr. to 330 ft. north of Polly
Dr. (BWD) [Added
4-18-1989]
No parking —
From 145 ft. south of Leahy
Ave. to Crooked Hill Rd.
(BWD) [Added
11-14-2006]
No
stopping
—
From Merill St. to Bradley
St. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Bradley St. to Yarnell
St. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
From Yarnell St. to Suffolk
Ave. (BWD)
No
stopping
—
William Avenue/
East (EIS)
From 200 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. north for 100
ft.
No parking —
From 100 ft. south of
Montauk Hwy. to Montauk
Hwy. (EIS) [Added
2-4-1992]
No parking —
William Avenue/
West
From Montauk Hwy. to 100
ft. south of Montauk Hwy.
(EIS) [Added 2-4-1992]
Limited
parking
1 hour
—
William Street/
East
From Suffolk Ave. north for
300 ft. (CIS) [Amended
7-11-1978; 6-17-1980]
Limited
parking
15 minutes
—
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1815
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
William Street/
North
From Paulanna Ave. to
Gerritsen Ave. (BPT)
[Added 1-15-1980;
amended 9-1-1993]
No parking/
No boat
trailer
parking
—
William Street/
South
From Gerritsen Ave. to
Paulanna Ave. (BPT)
[Added 1-15-1980;
amended 9-1-1993]
No parking/
No boat
trailer
parking
—
William Street/
West
From 300 ft. north of
Suffolk Ave. to Suffolk Ave.
(CIS) [Amended
7-11-1978]
No parking —
Willow Street/
North
From Browns River to River
Rd. (SVL) [Added
7-11-1978; amended
4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From River Rd. to Foster
Ave. (SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; amended
4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
Willow Street/
South
From Foster Ave. to River
Rd. (SVL) [Amended
6-20-1978; 4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
From River Rd. to Browns
River (SVL) [Added
7-11-1978; amended
4-1-1986]
No parking 4/1 to 11/1
Wilshire
Boulevard/North
and West
From Rodeo Drive to the
north terminus at a point
2,975 ft. north of Rodeo
Drive (EDG) [Added
9-25-2018]
No parking —
Wilshire
Boulevard/West
and South
From the north terminus at
a point 2,975 ft. north of
Rodeo Drive to Rodeo Drive
(EDG) [Added 9-25-2018]
No parking —
Wilshire Lane/
South
From 500 ft. east of
Oakdale-Bohemia Rd. east
for 1,400 ft. (OKD)
No parking —
Wilson Street/
North
From Lakeland Ave. to
Smithtown Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
From Smithtown Ave. to
Walnut Ave. (BHM)
No parking —
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1816
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Windsor Place/
East
From south terminus north
for 110 ft. (CIS) [Added
4-8-2014]
No parking —
From 110 ft. to 380 ft. north
of south terminus (CIS)
[Added 4-8-2014]
No parking —
Windsor Place/
West
From 3,225 ft. south of
Connetquot Ave. to south
terminus north (CIS)
[Added 4-8-2014]
No parking —
Winfield Avenue/
East
From Oakland St. to
Stuyvesant St. (BWD)
[Added 7-17-2018]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6.00 a.m.
Winganhauppauge
Road/East
From Moffitt Blvd. north for
225 ft. (ISL) [Added
8-22-2017]
No parking —
From James St. to Sunrise
Hwy. (ISL) [Added
9-18-1990]
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.,
nightly
Winganhauppauge
Road/West
From 300 ft. north of Moffitt
Blvd. to Moffitt Blvd. (ISL)
[Added 3-19-2019]
No parking —
Winmar Lane/
North
From Johnson Ave. west for
100 ft. (SVL) [Added
10-8-2013]
No parking —
Winmar Lane/
South
From 190 ft. west of
Johnson Ave. to Johnson
Ave. (SVL) [Added
10-8-2013]
No parking —
Winnie Lane/
East
From 130 ft. north of
Winston Dr. to Wittberg St.
(BWD) [Added 12-7-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wisconsin
Avenue/North
From Illinois Ave. west for
1,130 ft. (BWD) [Added
6-6-1978]
No parking —
From 700 ft. west of Illinois
Ave. to 1,100 ft. west of
Illinois Ave. (BWD) [Added
4-26-2011]
No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
Wittberg Street/
South
From Winnie La. east for
160 ft. (BWD) [Added
12-7-1982]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § J-1
66:1817
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Woodhollow
Road/East
From Timber Point Rd. for
200 ft. (GRV) [Added
3-4-1986]
No parking —
Woodhollow
Road/West
From 200 ft. north of
Timber Point Rd. to Timber
Point Rd. (GRV) [Added
3-4-1986]
No parking —
Woodland Drive/
West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 30 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Woodland Drive/
East
From Gwendolyn Pl. north
for 200 ft. (EIS) [Added
2-14-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./school
days
From 450 ft. south of
Gwendolyn Pl. to
Gwendolyn Pl. (EIS) [Added
2-14-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./school
days
Woodland Drive/
West
From 205 ft. south of
Shinnecock La. south for
205 ft. (EIS) [Added
12-11-2012]
No
stopping
—
From 410 ft. south of
Shinnecock La. south for
115 ft. (EIS) [Added
12-11-2012]
Limited
parking 15
minutes
—
From 525 ft. south of
Shinnecock La. south for
110 ft. (EIS) [Added
12-11-2012]
No
stopping
—
From 635 feet south of
Shinnecock La. south for
150 ft. (EIS) [Added
12-11-2012]
Limited
parking 15
minutes
—
Woodlawn
Avenue/South
From 130 +/- ft. west of Idle
Hour Blvd. east for 130 +/-
ft. (OKD) [Added
4-23-2013]
No parking —
Woodlea Avenue/
East
From 280 ft. south of
Greenwood Rd. to 400 ft.
south of Greenwood Rd.
(school gate) (NBS) [Added
12-3-1996]
No
stopping
—
§ J-1 ISLIP CODE § J-1
66:1818
Name of
Street/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Woodlea Avenue/
West
From 280 ft. south of
Greenwood Rd. to 400 ft.
south of Greenwood Rd.
(school gate) (NBS) [Added
12-3-1996]
No
stopping
—
Woodside Street/
North
From 200 ft. east of Essex
St. to Essex St. (HPG)
[Added 5-4-1999]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Woodside Street/
South
From Essex St. east for 200
ft. (HPG) [Added
5-4-1999]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Wurz Street/
North and West
From 210 ft. south of Zane
Ct. to 180 ft. east of Grand
Blvd. (BWD)
No parking —
Wurz Street/
South and East
From Urn Ct. to Zane Ct.
(BWD) [Added 12-6-1977]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wyandanch
Avenue/West
From Montauk Hwy. south
for 330 ft. (EIS)
No parking —
Schedule K
PARKING FOR SHOPPING CENTERS, APARTMENT
COMPLEXES, HOSPITALS, FIRE DISTRICTS AND
INDUSTRIAL PARKS
§ K-1. Parking for shopping centers, apartment complexes,
hospitals, fire districts and industrial parks. [Amended 7-11-1978;
10-6-1998]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC4-1, no vehicle shall be parked in
a parking area described below:
A. In any manner other than as designated on the surface thereof by
appropriate markings.
B. In any designated fire zone (FZ).
C. In any designated handicapped parking zone (HP).
D. Except in marked stalls only.
§ J-1 WATER QUALITY § K-1
66:1819
Parking Area Regulations
Academy of St. Joseph
Maria Regina
Resident
Health Care Facility (BWD)
[Added 6-13-2006]
FZ, HP, no
parking in front
of building
Autumn Ridge
Condominiums
Greenbelt Parkway West at
Colin Drive (HBK) [Added
12-18-1990]
HP
Bay Shore Retail
Stores
1747-57 Sunrise Highway
(BSR) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Bay Shore Retail
Stores
1175-1265 Sunrise Highway
between Clinton Avenue
and Manatuck Boulevard
(Tax Map Nos. 339-02-071,
072, 073 and 340-01-029)
(BSR) [Added 3-3-1987;
amended 3-20-1990]
FZ, 15-minute
parking, front
row only
Bay Shore Retail
Stores
894 Sunrise Highway
between Manor Lane and
Ackerson Boulevard (Tax
Map Nos. 364-2-2.1, 2.3)
(BSR) [Added 1-26-2010]
HP, FZ
Bay Shore Senior
Citizens Center
Lakeview Avenue and
Millpond Lane (BSR)
[Added 11-17-1981]
HP
Belmore Country Club
Gardens
280 Belmore Avenue (EIS)
[Added 2-6-1979;
amended 4-15-1980]
FZ, HP
Birchwood on the
Green Apartments
Wilshire Lane (OKD)
[Added 3-20-1990;
amended 12-12-1995]
FZ, HP
Bohack Village
Shopping Center
Sunrise Highway (south
side) between Ocean
Avenue and Sycamore
Avenue (OKD) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Brentwood Farmers
Market
Brentwood Road at
Candlewood Road
(northwest corner) (BWD)
[Added 5-1-1984]
FZ
Brentwood Fire
Department Parking
Lot
Fourth Street and Second
Avenue (BWD) [Added
7-7-1981]
No parking
except Fire
Department
personnel
§ K-1 ISLIP CODE § K-1
66:1820
Parking Area Regulations
Brentwood Retail
Stores
Jefferson Avenue at Suffolk
Avenue (northeast corner)
(BWD) [Added 5-21-1991]
FZ
201 Second Avenue at
Timberline Drive (northeast
corner) (BWD) [Added
11-16-2004]
FZ, HP
Brentwood Shopping
Center
Brentwood Road and
Second Avenue (northeast
corner) (BWD) [Amended
9-18-1979; 8-20-1985]
FZ
Broadway Knolls Broadway Avenue at
Veterans Memorial Highway
(southwest corner) (HBK)
[Added 6-23-2015]
FZ, HP
Brook Gardens
Apartments
June Court (NBS) [Added
11-17-1987]
HP
Brookwood Terrace
Apartments
23 Walter Street (BWD)
[Added 7-13-2004]
FZ, HP
Caguas Enterprises,
Inc.
8894 Wicks Road
(southwest corner of Merrill
Street and Wicks Road)
(BWD) [Added 4-5-1983]
30-minute
parking
Captree Shopping
Village
480 to 584 Union Boulevard
(WIS)
FZ
Cheap John's Broadway Avenue at
Veterans Highway
(northeast corner) (HBK)
[Added 8-25-1987]
FZ
Connetquot Plaza
(Bohemia Shopping
Center)
Sunrise Highway (north
side) between Ocean
Avenue and Locust Avenue
(BHM) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Coventry Village
Apartments
5-60 Coventry Lane (CIS) FZ, HP
Crossroad
Corporation Center
Veterans Memorial Highway
at Sparton Lane (HPG)
[Added 9-12-2000]
FZ, HP
Disabled American
Veterans Building
Union Avenue at Service
Road (ISL) [Added
8-30-1988]
HP
§ K-1 WATER QUALITY § K-1
66:1821
Parking Area Regulations
East Islip Retail
Stores
Carleton Avenue at
Montauk Highway
(northwest corner) (EIS)
[Added 7-10-2001]
FZ, HP
East Islip Shopping
Center
Sunrise Highway at Irish
Lane (southwest corner)
(EIS) [Added 11-16-1982]
FZ
Fairfield Estate Lakeland Avenue at George
Street (SVL) [Added
12-18- 1990]
HP
Fairfield Greens
Apartments
825 Broadway Avenue
(HBK) [Added 1-6-1981;
amended 4-16-2002]
FZ, HP
Fairfield Properties 204-226 Lakeland Avenue
(SVL) [Added 4-20-1994]
FZ
Fairfield Saxon Arms Saxon Avenue north of
Montauk Highway (ISL)
[Added 9-18-1990]
HP
Forest Green
Apartments
2449 Union Boulevard (ISL)
[Amended 9-15-1981]
FZ, HP
Gardiner Manor
Shopping Center
Sunrise Highway and
Manor Lane (WBS)
[Amended 11- 18-1980;
8-20-1985]
FZ
Good Samaritan
Hospital
Beach Street and Montauk
Highway (WIS) [Amended
4-6-1982; 3-21-1989]
HP, FZ, reserved
parking, hospital
permit required
Good Samaritan
Hospital Dialysis
Center
929 Sunrise Highway
between Pine Drive and
Manor Lane (WBS) [Added
12-18-2001]
HP
Grand Union
Shopping Center
Montauk Highway at
Lincoln Avenue (northeast
corner) (SUL) [Added
1-7-1986]
FZ
Great Bay Shore
Shopping Center
Montauk Highway and
Saxon Avenue (BSR)
FZ
Hawthorne Court
Apartments
111-217 Hawthorne Avenue
(CIS) [Amended
9-16-1980; 7-13-2004]
FZ, HP
Heckscher Estates Beecher Avenue Extension
at its cul-de-sac (EIS)
[Added 5-1-1990]
FZ
§ K-1 ISLIP CODE § K-1
66:1822
Parking Area Regulations
Heckscher Estates Beecher Avenue Extension
between Wantagh Avenue
and the Beecher Avenue
Extension terminus (EIS)
[Added 5-1-1990]
Parking in
marked stalls
only
Heckscher Plaza
Shopping Center, Inc.
302-28 Montauk Highway
(EIS)
FZ
Hedges Apartments 401 - 409 Montauk Highway
between Brentwood Road
and Saxon Avenue (BSR)
[Added 8-30-1988]
HP
Holiday Inn Express 2050 Express Drive South
(HPG) [Added 10-9-2001]
FZ, parking in
marked stalls
only
Home Depot 1881 Sunrise Highway
(NBS) [Added 7-16-2002]
FZ, HP
Island Wide
Ambulette
100 North Clinton Avenue
(BSR) [Added
12-13-2005]
HP
Islip Fire Department 28 Monell Avenue (ISL)
[Added 4-15-1980;
amended 4-6-1982]
FZ, no parking
except Fire
Department
personnel
J.R. Terry Properties 126 East Main Street
(southwest corner of
Matinecock Avenue) (EIS)
[Added 10-6-1981;
amended 8-20-1985]
FZ
King Kullen Shopping
Center
Montauk Highway and
Saxon Avenue (southwest
corner) (BSR) [Amended
6-3-1980; 8-20-1985]
FZ
Korvettes Shopping
Center (Southgate
Shopping Center)
Sunrise Highway and Kane
Street (WIS)
FZ
Lakeland Garden
Apartments
Lakeland Avenue and
Johnson Avenue (SVL)
[Added 9-20-1988]
HP
Laurel Apartments 92 South Clinton Avenue
(BSR) [Added 9-16-1980]
HP
Lexington Village
Apartments
1-A to 1-F Hemlock Drive
(northwest corner of
Brightshore Avenue) (PNR)
FZ
§ K-1 WATER QUALITY § K-1
66:1823
Parking Area Regulations
Lexington Village
Apartments
3-A to 15-C Hemlock Drive
(northwest corner of
Manatuck Boulevard) (PNR)
FZ
Linden Arms 80 South Clinton Aveuue
(BSR) [Added 8-18-1981]
HP
Marriott Residence
Inn
850 Motor Parkway (HPG)
[Added 2-27-2007]
FZ, HP
Modells Shoppers
World
Saxon Avenue and Sunrise
Highway (southeast corner)
(ISL) [Amended 1-6-1981;
8-20-1985]
FZ
New England Village
Apartments
Lincoln Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 8-29-1989]
FZ
Newbrook Apartments Spur Drive South west of
Brentwood Road (NBS)
[Added 9-15-1981]
FZ, HP
Nob Hill
Condominium
Richmond Boulevard (RNK)
[Added 4-15-1980;
amended 12-17-1985]
FZ, HP
Oakdale-Sayville
Shopping Plaza
855-925 Montauk Highway
(OKD) [Amended
2-3-1981; 11-17-1981;
8-20-1985]
FZ
Oakdale Shopping
Center
927-947 Montauk Highway
(OKD) [Added 4-15-1980;
amended 11-17-1981;
8-20-1985]
FZ
Ockers Garden
Apartment Complex
(OKD) [Added
9-18-1979]
HP
Our Lady of
Consolation Nursing
Home 111 Beach
Drive (WIS) [Added
2-16-1999]
FZ, HP
Pathmark Shopping
Center
Islip Avenue at the Long
Island Rail Road (ISL)
[Amended 8-20-1985]
FZ
Pinebrook Village
Apartments
Union Boulevard (N/S)
between Grant Avenue and
Saxon Avenue (ISL) [Added
9-20-1982]
HP
§ K-1 ISLIP CODE § K-1
66:1824
Parking Area Regulations
Plymouth Village
Condominiums
Adams Road and
Hawthorne Avenue
(northwest corner) (CIS)
[Added 4-15-1980]
FZ
Redwood Garden
Apartments
99 South Clinton Avenue
(BSR) [Added 9-16-1980]
HP
Royal Apartments Penataquit Avenue at Union
Boulevard (southeast
corner) (BSR) [Added
8-20-1985]
HP
Saxon Commons Saxon Avenue and Montauk
Highway (northeast corner)
(ISL) [Added 8-19-1986]
FZ
Sayville Shopping
Center
North Main Street between
Railroad Avenue and Smith
Street (SVL) [Added
8-28-1979; amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Sequam Colony
Shopping Center
(Gristede's)
420-460 Montauk Highway
(WIS)
FZ
Sid Farber Shopping
Center
237-295 Second Avenue
between Broadway and
Timberline Drive (BWD)
[Added 7-11-2006]
FZ, HP
South Bay Manor 33 Candee Avenue (SVL)
[Added 5-18-1994]
FZ
South Shore Mall 1701 Sunrise Highway
(BSR) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Southern Meadows
Apartments
Gillette Avenue (east side)
between Montauk Highway
and Purick Street (BPT)
[Added 4-5-1988;
amended 2-29-2000]
FZ, HP
Southside Hospital Montauk Highway (BSR) FZ, HP
Stonehurst Terrace
Apartments
Stonehurst Drive/northside
(HBK) [Added 8-30-1988]
FZ
Stratford Greens
Apartments
1-22 South Dorado Circle
(HPG) [Amended
4-7-1981]
HP
§ K-1 WATER QUALITY § K-1
66:1825
Parking Area Regulations
Suffolk County Bar
Association
560 Wheeler Road (HPG)
[Added 11-12-2002]
FZ, park in
marked stalls
only
Sun Vet Mall 5801 Sunrise Highway
(HBK) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Sunrise Day
Treatment Center
(Hospital),
3240 Sunrise Highway (EIS)
[Added 9-18-1979]
HP
Sunrise Garden
Apartments
Lakeland Avenue at Sunrise
Highway (northeast corner)
(BHM) [Added 4-5-1983]
FZ, HP
Sunsmith Plaza 4794
Sunrise Highway
(BHM) [Added
1-2-1991]
FZ
Symbol Technologies
[Added 12-8-1998]
116 Wilbur Place (BHM) FZ, HP
110 Orville Place (BHM) FZ, HP
180 Orville Place (BHM) FZ, HP
1101 Lakeland Avenue
(BHM)
The Atrium Plaza 900
Wheeler Road (HPG)
[Added 6-7-1988]
FZ
The Dale Apartments Northeast corner of
Connetquot Avenue at
Jefferson Street (EIS)
[Added 6-5-1990]
FZ
The Dale Apartments Southeast corner of
Connetquot Avenue at
Jefferson Street (EIS)
[Added 6-5-1990]
No parking
The Fairfield Greens I/F/O 330 Briar Lane Walk
(HBK) [Added
11-21-1989]
HP
The Laurels
Apartments
11 South Saxon Avenue
(BSR) [Added 6-6-1989]
No parking
except vehicles
with
handicapped
permits
The Maple
Apartments
11 Saxon Avenue (ISL)
[Added 10-18-1988]
HP
§ K-1 ISLIP CODE § K-1
66:1826
Parking Area Regulations
The Pines Apartments 21 Brentwood Road (BSR)
[Added 2-3-1981]
HP
The Woodlands 130 Cardinal Lane (ISL)
[Added 9-19-1989]
HP
Town Center at
Central Islip between
North
Research Drive and South
Research Drive (CIS)
[Added 8-12-2008]
FZ
Vanderbilt Plaza
Center
Motor Parkway and
Wheeler Road (southwest
corner) (CIS) [Added
4-15-1980; amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
3500 Veterans
Memorial Highway
At Ocean Avenue;
southwest corner (BHM)
[Added 11-14-2000]
FZ
Waldbaums Shopping
Center
1235 Veterans Highway
(HPG) [Added 5-5-1981;
amended 8-20-1985]
FZ
Waldbaums Shopping
Center
Northwest corner of
Spartan Lane and Veterans
Memorial Highway (HPG)
[Added 6-2-1981;
amended 8-20-1985]
FZ
Waldbaums, TOYS-RUS
Shopping Center
1851 Sunrise Highway
(BSR) [Amended
8-20-1985]
FZ
Waverly Park
Condominium
1-300 Storm Drive (HTV) FZ
West Islip Fire
Department Parking
Lot
Union Boulevard east of
Higbie Lane (WIS) [Added
11-17-1981]
No parking
except Fire
Department
personnel
Western Apartments Union Boulevard (BSR)
[Added 1-5-1988]
HP
Wheeler Road
Shopping Plaza
Suffolk Avenue and Wheeler
Road (CIS) [Amended
9-18-1979; 8-20-1985]
FZ
Wind Watch Golf and
County Club
1715 Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (HPG) [Added
8-17-1999]
FZ
Windbrook Homes
Condominium (CIS)
[Added 8-25-1992]
HP
§ K-1 WATER QUALITY § K-1
66:1827
Schedule L
TOWN PARKING LOTS
§ L-1. Town parking lots. [Amended 6-6-1978; 7-11-1978; 5-1-1979;
7-17-1979; 8-28-1979; 9-18-1979; 4-15-1980; 11-18-1980; 5-5-1981;
9-15-1981; 10-6-1981; 7-6-1982; 12-7-1982; 1-18-1983; 8-30-1983;
11-15-1983; 7-3-1984; 1-15-1985]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC4-2, the areas described below are
established as town parking lots and the parking, stopping and standing
of vehicles in such lots shall be subject to the additional regulations and
restrictions indicated.
Parking Field Regulations
Animal Shelter, South Denver
Avenue (Bay Shore Parking lot No.
22) (BSR)
No parking: south side of parking
field from South Denver Avenue
west for 160 feet
Bay Shore Marina and Benjamin
Beach, South Clinton Avenue (Bay
Shore Parking Lot Nos. 19 and 20)
(BSR) [Amended 3-4-2014]
Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 1, Third
Avenue at Union Boulevard,
northwest corner (BSR) [Amended
3-4-2014]
Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 6, north
of Main Street between Smith
Avenue and Fifth Avenue [Added
3-4-2014]
Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 7, north
of Main Street between Park Avenue
and Smith Avenue (BSR) [Amended
3-4-2014; 8-22-2017]
Metered parking;
Handicapped parking;
4-hour; 72 hours between May 15
and Sept. 30; 12-hour Bay Shore
employee permits (BSE)
Parking Area Regulations
Windsor Village
Apartments
MacArthur Boulevard at
Veterans Memorial Highway
(southwest corner) (HPG)
[Added 11-15-1994]
HP
2002 on Wheels, Inc. Wicks Road at Yarnell
Street (southwest corner)
(BWD) [Added 4-6-1982]
1-hour parking
§ K-1 ISLIP CODE § L-1
66:1828
Parking Field Regulations
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 8, north
of Main Street between Park Avenue
and Fourth Avenue (BSR)
[Amended 4-21-1992; 3-7-2006;
4-10-2007; 3-4-2014; 8-22-2017]
Handicapped parking;
Metered parking;
4-hour, 12-hour Bay Shore employee
permits (BSE)
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 9, north
of Main Street between Third
Avenue and Fourth Avenue (BSR)
[Added 4-28-2009; amended
3-4-2014; 8-22-2017]
Handicapped parking;
Metered parking;
4-hour, 12-hour Bay Shore employee
permits (BSE)
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 11,
Gibson Street between South
Avenue (BSR) [Amended
3-4-2014]
No parking: 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
Clinton Avenue and Bay Mon.-
Fri.,except Memorial Day, July 4th
and Labor Day; Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 12, Bay
Shore Avenue at Bay Shore Road
(BSR) [Added 6-2-1987; amended
4-18-1989; 8-22-2017]
No parking: 12:00 midnight to 4:00
a.m.
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 13,
Gibson Street between South Ocean
Avenue and South Park Avenue
(BSR) [Amended 4-10-2007;
3-4-2014; 8-22-2017]
No parking: 5:00 a.m,. to 6:00 a.m.;
Metered parking
4-hour, Fri. 7:00 p.m. to Mon. 9:00
a.m. between May 15 and Sept. 30
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 14,
Gibson Street between South Park
Avenue and Maple Avenue (BSR)
[Amended 3-7-2006; 4-10-2007;
6-8-2010; 3-4-2014; 10-13-2015;
8-22-2017]
HP;
Metered parking;
4-hour, 12-hour Bay Shore employee
permits (BSE)
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 15,
Gibson Street between Maple
Avenue and Shore Lane (BSR)
[Amended 9-7-2011; 3-4-2014;
8-22-2017]
HP;
Metered parking;
4-hour, 12-hour Bay Shore employee
permits (BSE)
No parking: 9 spaces adjoining east
property line of Bay Shore Fire
House
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 16,
Gibson Street between Shore Lane
and Homan Avenue (BSR)
[Amended 3-4-2014]
Limited time parking: 2 hours,
between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
Metered parking
§ L-1 WATER QUALITY § L-1
66:1829
Parking Field Regulations
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 17
(Maple Avenue Dock) (BSR)
[Amended 8-17-1999; 3-4-2014;
5-26-2015]
Metered parking
16-hour parking
24-hour parking
72-hour parking
HP parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 18, First
Avenue at Union Boulevard,
southeast corner (BSR)
Metered parking
Oceana Avenue Dock [Added
3-4-2014]
Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 24,
Mechanicsville Road s/s between
Third Avenue and Bay Shore Avenue
[Added 3-4-2014]
Metered parking
Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 25,
Mechanicsville Road at Second
Avenue, southwest corner (BSR)
[Added 10-18-1988; amended
3-4-2014]
HP; Metered parking
Bay Shore Railroad Station North
Parking Lot (Bay Shore Parking Lot
No. 3) (BSR) [Amended 3-4-2014;
2-9-2016]
Metered parking
24 hour, 72 hour, permit, daily and
flex parking as per predetermined
meter programming
Bay Shore Railroad Station
Northwest Parking Lot, North Park
Avenue at Oak Street (Bay Shore
Parking Lot No. 2) (BSR) [Amended
6-14-2005; 3-4-2014; 2-9-2016]
Metered parking 24 hour, 72 hour,
permit, daily and flex parking as per
predetermined meter programming
Bay Shore Railroad Station South
Parking Lot (Bay Shore Parking Lot
No. 4) (BSR) [Amended
2-23-1993; 9-12-2000; 4-9-2008;
1-25-2011; 3-4-2014; 2-9-2016]
Metered parking; Taxi stand: North
side of lot from North Park Avenue
east for 310 feet (26 stalls)
Handicapped parking;
24 hour, 72 hour, permit, daily and
flex parking as per predetermined
meter programming
§ L-1 ISLIP CODE § L-1
66:1830
Parking Field Regulations
Baymens Soccer Fields, Cherry
Avenue at Tariff Street (south/west
corner) (WSV) [Added 2-23-1993]
No parking
Bayport Beach, Paulanna Avenue
(Bayport Parking Lot No.1) (BPT)
[Amended 10-21-2008]
No parking: 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Bayport Marina (island area
adjacent to James Street) (BPT)
[Added 8-27-1991]
No trailer parking
Bayport Marina (West) Bay Avenue
at Browns River Road (Bayport
Parking Lot No. 3) (BPT) [Added
7-11-1989]
Handicapped parking: west side of
parking lot, the 14th, 84th, 85th,
120th and 121st stall from the north
end
Bayport Parking Lot No. 2, Howells
Court at Middle Road (BPT) [Added
1-11-1995]
No parking: 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Brentwood Country Club,
Brentwood Parkway (Brentwood
Parking Lot No. 7) (BWD)
—
Brentwood Railroad Station
(Brentwood Parking Lot No. 5)
(BWD) [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 10-14-2014]
Parking in marked stalls only;
Handicapped parking only (with
permit); 15-minute parking; Oneway;
Stop; Speed limit 15 mph
Brentwood Railroad Station North
Parking Lot (Brentwood Parking Lot
No. 4) (BWD)
Resident parking sticker required
Brentwood Recreation Center, Third
Avenue, (Brentwood Parking Lot No.
2) (BWD) [Amended 9-7-2011;
3-3-2015]
Handicapped parking; fire zone;
"Town of Islip Employees Only" as
posted
Brentwood Senior Citizen Center
south side Second Avenue at Second
Street (BWD) [Added 9-13-2005]
No parking: West side of lot
Brightside Avenue at Carleton
Avenue (Central Islip Parking Lot
No. 6) (CIS) [Added 6-21-2011;
amended 10-25-2011]
Park in marked stalls only;
Handicapped parking
Broadway Avenue Park (Sayville
Parking Lot No. 2) (SVL)
—
Brookwood Hall, Irish Lane, (East
Islip Parking Lot No. 1) (EIS)
—
§ L-1 WATER QUALITY § L-1
66:1831
Parking Field Regulations
Byron Lake Park, Bayview Drive
(Oakdale Parking Lot No. 1) (OKD)
[Amended 11-15-2005]
Park in marked stalls only;
Handicapped parking only (with
permit)
Carleton Avenue at Karp Drive (Islip
Terrace Parking No. 1) (IST) [Added
5-15-2018]
—
Central Islip Parking Field No. 5
adjacent to No. 70 Carleton Avenue
(CIS) [Added 4-21-1992;
amended 10-25-2011]
Park in marked stalls only
Central Islip Parking Lot No. 4,
Carleton Avenue at St. John's Street,
northwest corner (CIS) [Added
10-4-1994]
—
Central Islip Railroad Station
Commuter Lot #2 (CIS) [Added
2-5-2008]
No parking: 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Central Islip Railroad Station North
Parking Lot (Central Islip Parking
Lot No. 1) (CIS)
—
Central Islip Railroad Station South
Parking Lot (Central Islip Parking
Lot Lot No. 1) (CIS)
Resident parking sticker required
Central Islip Railroad Station South
Parking Lot (Central Islip Parking
Lot No. 2) (CIS) [Added
7-11-1989]
No stopping: Northbound/
southbound center aisle
Limited time parking: 15 minutes,
north side of lot from station
building to 792 feet west of station
building
Handicapped parking: Northside of
lot from station building to 700 feet
east of station building (19 stalls)
Central Islip Recreation Village,
Clayton Street (Central Islip Parking
Lot No. 3) (CIS)
—
Champlin Creek Dock, West
terminus of Dock Road (East Islip
Parking Lot No. 5) (EIS) [Added
7-11-1989]
Handicapped parking: West side of
parking lot, first parking stall south
of north end
§ L-1 ISLIP CODE § L-1
66:1832
Parking Field Regulations
No parking: Boat owners only with
mooring permit, west side of
parking lot, from 80 ft. south of
north end to south end parking
facility
Cars with boat trailers only: East
side of parking lot, from 150 ft. to
400 ft. north of south end
Chicago Avenue Park Chicago
Avenue between Jordan Street and
Utica Street (NBS) [Added
10-21-2008]
Handicapped parking
Deer Park Train Station (Brentwood
Parking Lot No. 8), Executive Drive
at Long Island Avenue, Southwest
Corner (EDG) [Added 9-7-2011]
Handicapped parking
District Court, Third Avenue (Bay
Shore Parking Lot No. 10) (BSR)
—
East Islip Beach and Marina,
Bayview Avenue (East Islip Parking
Lot Nos. 3 and 4) (EIS)
—
Great River Parking Lot No. 3 (east
side of Great River Road opposite
Church Street) (GRV)
No parking: 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Great River Railroad Station North
Parking Lot (Great River Parking Lot
No. 1) (GRV)
Resident parking sticker required
Greenbelt Recreation Center,
Greenbelt Parkway (Holtsville
Parking Lot No. 1) (HTV)
—
Hidden Pond Park, Terry Road
(Hauppauge Parking Lot No. 1)
(HPG)
—
Holbrook Country Club, Patchogue-
Holbrook Road (Holbrook Parking
Lot No. 3) (HBK) [Added
1-19-1993]
—
Islip Beach, Bay Avenue (Islip
Parking Lot No. 8) (ISL)
Resident parking sticker required
Islip Beach (Parking Lot No. 8), west
end of parking lot near playground
(ISL) [Added 7-16-1996]
No parking
§ L-1 WATER QUALITY § L-1
66:1833
Parking Field Regulations
Islip MacArthur Airport Terminal
Building Parking Lot (Holbrook
Parking Lot No. 1) (HBK) [Added
3-4-1986]
Pay parking, all stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport Terminal
Building Parking Lot (Holbrook
Parking Lot No. 1A) (HBK) [Added
5-7-1985]
No parking: Entrance roadways to
parking lot
Islip MacArthur Airport Terminal
Building Parking Lot (Holbrook
Parking Lot No. 4) (HBK) [Added
3-4-1986]
VIP parking, by assignment only, all
stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport A.F.S.S.
Parking Lot) (Holbrook Parking Lot
No. 2) (HBK) [Added 3-4-1986]
Tenant parking
Islip MacArthur Town Resident
Parking (Holbrook Parking Lot No.
3) (HBK) [Added 3-4-1986]
Town resident parking, all stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport Terminal
Building Parking Lot (Holbrook
Parking Lot No. 5) (HBK) [Added
3-4-1986]
Avis/Hertz rental cars, all stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport Terminal
Building Parking Lot (Holbrook
Parking Lot No. 6) (HBK) [Added
3-4-1986]
Airport Terminal Building employee
parking, all stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport Parking Lot
(south of Hudson Aviation)
(Holbrook Parking Lot No. 7) (HBK)
[Added 3-4-1986]
Tenant parking, all stalls
Islip MacArthur Airport F.A.A. Tower
Parking Lot (Holbrook Parking Lot
No. 8) (HBK) [Added 3-4-1986]
Tenant parking, all stalls
Islip Parking Lot No. 1, north side of
Main Street and west of Grant
Avenue (ISL) [Amended
8-15-2006]
No parking; Main Street entrance
driveway; east side from Main
Street north for 165 feet; west side,
from 255 feet north of Main Street
to Main Street
Limited time parking: 30 minutes on
south side from east side of Main
Street entrance driveway east for 7
stalls
Handicapped parking: 3 stalls
§ L-1 ISLIP CODE § L-1
66:1834
Parking Field Regulations
Islip Parking Lot No. 2, north of
Main Street between Grant Avenue
and Locust Avenue (ISL) [Amended
3-27-2007]
Handicapped parking: 3 stalls
Islip Parking Lot No. 3, north of
Main Street and east of Locust
Avenue (ISL)
—
Islip Parking Lot No. 5, Smith
Avenue between Main Street and
Raymond Street (ISL) [Amended
8-22-2017]
Handicapped parking
Islip Parking Lot No. 6, Manitton
Court at Nassau Avenue, northeast
corner (ISL)
—
Islip Parking Lot No. 7, Union
Avenue between Main Street and
Raymond Street (ISL) [Added
8-22-2017]
—
Islip Railroad Station North Parking
Lot (Islip Parking Lot No. 12) (ISL)
[Amended 10-17-1989;
12-18-2018]
Handicapped parking: South side of
lot: first two stalls west of east train
shelter; speed limit 15 MPH
Islip Railroad Station South Parking
Lot (Islip Parking Lot No. 9) (ISL)
[Amended 12-18-2018]
Handicapped stalls: all designated
blue colored stalls with appropriate
signing; speed limit 15 MPH
Maple Street (west terminus of
Maple Street) (Islip Parking Lot No.
10) (ISL) [Amended 5-1-1990]
Handicapped parking: West side,
30th stall south of north end
No parking -- boat owners only with
mooring permit: West side, from 30
feet to 300 feet south of north end;
East side, from 125 feet south of
north end to north end; South side,
from west terminus east for 120 feet
Cars with boat trailers only: South
side, from 120 feet east of west
terminus to east side; East side,
from south side north for 230 feet
Oakdale Railroad Station South
Parking Lot (Oakdale Parking Lot
No. 3) (OKD)
—
Ocean Avenue Dock and Marina
(Bay Shore Parking Lot No. 21)
(BSR)
—
§ L-1 WATER QUALITY § L-1
66:1835
Parking Field Regulations
Park and Ride, Exit 54 (Brentwood
Parking Lot No. 6) (BWD)
No stopping, bus stop: West side of
bus stop island
Park and Ride, Exit 58 (Shafter
Street Central Islip Parking Lot No.
4) (CIS)
—
Port O'Call Recreation Center,
Browns River Road (Sayville Parking
Lot No. 7) (SVL)
Resident parking sticker required
Ronkonkoma Beach (RNK) [Added
10-13-2010]
Park in marked stalls only;
Handicapped parking by permit
only; Stop (all way)
Ronkonkoma Beach Parking Lot
(RNK) [Added 2-5-2008]
Handicapped parking
Ronkonkoma Railroad Station (RNK)
[Added 7-11-1989; amended
10-14-2009]
Park in marked stalls only; No
parking (as posted); Handicapped
parking by permit only
Sagtikos Recreation Center, Muncey
Road (West Bay Shore Parking Lot
No. 1) (WBS)
—
Sayville Beach, Browns River Road
(Sayville Parking Lot No. 3) (SVL)
[Amended 2-5-2008; 10-21-2008;
10-13-2010]
No parking: 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Sayville Parking Lot No. 4, south of
Middle Road between Gillette
Avenue and Collins Avenue (SVL)
[Amended 1-5-1988; 9-11-2012]
Park in marked stalls only,
Handicapped parking
Sayville Parking Lot No. 5, south of
Main Street between Candee
Avenue and Gillette Avenue (SVL)
[Amended 1-5-1988; 9-11-2012]
Park in marked stalls only,
Handicapped parking
Sayville Parking Lot No. 6, south of
Main Street between Candee
Avenue and Greene Avenue (SVL)
[Amended 1-5-1988; 9-11-2012]
Park in marked stalls only,
Handicapped parking
Sayville Parking Lot No. 8, River
Road, 130 feet north of Browns
River Road No. 1 (SVL) [Amended
6-8-2010; 10-13-2010;
11-22-2016]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Sayville Parking Lot No. 15, Center
Street parking, Center Street (SVL)
[Added 1-5-1988]
Limited time parking: 30 minutes,
between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ L-1 ISLIP CODE § L-1
66:1836
Parking Field Regulations
Sayville Parking Lot No. 15, west of
Railroad Avenue between Center
Street and Swayze Street (SVL)
[Added 4-18-1989]
HP
Sayville Railroad Station North
Parking Lot (Sayville Parking Lot
No. 1) (SVL) [Amended
5-11-2010]
Handicapped parking only (with
permit); park in marked stalls only
Sayville Railroad Station Southeast
Parking Lot, south of Depot Street
between Greene Avenue and
Railroad Avenue (Sayville Parking
Lot No. 10) (SVL)
Resident parking sticker required
Sayville Railroad Station South
Parking Lot (Sayville Parking Lot
No. 9) (SVL)
Taxi stand: North side of lot, from
the west side of station building line
west for 50 feet (5 spaces) and from
the east side of the building line east
for 110 feet (12 spaces)
Senior Citizen Food Commissary,
Carleton Avenue at Union Boulevard
(EIS) [Added 12-15-1987]
Handicapped parking: East side of
parking field from the north end
south for 1 stall
Limited 1/2-hour parking: East side
of parking field from the south end
north for 80 feet
Town Hall Parking Lot, east side of
Nassau Avenue (Islip Parking Lot
No. 4) (ISL)
—
Town Hall West Parking Lot, 401
Main Street (Islip Parking Lot No.
11) (ISL)
—
Town Plaza, west of Nassau Avenue
between Chestnut Street and
Montauk Highway (ISL) [Added
2-28-1989]
Limited time parking: 1 hour, south
side of lot from Nassau Avenue west
for 40 feet (4 stalls)
West Islip Ballfields (WIS) [Added
8-16-2005; amended 9-11-2012]
Handicapped parking; No parking:
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; Limited time
parking: 4 hours
West Islip Beach and Marina, Beach
Drive (West Islip Parking Lot Nos. 1
and 2) (WIS)
—
Schedule M
TRUCK EXCLUSIONS
§ L-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1837
§ M-1. Truck exclusions. [Amended 1-17-1989]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC5-1, all trucks, commercial
vehicles, tractors or tractor-trailer combinations in excess of 5,000 pounds
gross maximum weight are excluded from the streets or parts thereof
described below:
Name of Street Limits
Abbey Lane (NBS) [Added
8-28-1990]
From Millay Lane to Spur Drive South
Abrew Street (BSR) [Added
10-17-1989]
From Brook Avenue to East Forks Road
Ackerson Boulevard (NBS)
[Added 6-5-1979]
From the Village of Brightwaters line to
Montauk Drive
Aldrich Court (BSR) [Added
5-27-2014]
From Shore Lane to Maple Street
American Boulevard (BWD)
[Added 6-7-1988]
From Commack Road to Second Avenue
Antartic Street (NBS) [Added
5-6-1980]
From Atlantic Avenue to Brook Avenue
Applegate Drive (CIS) From Motor Parkway to Suffolk Avenue
Apricot Street (CIS) [Added
5-2-2000]
From Islip Avenue to Tree Avenue
Artic Street (NBS) [Added
5-6-1980]
From Atlantic Avenue to Brook Avenue
Arkansas Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Asharoken Boulevard (NBS)
[Added 6-5-1979]
From Howells Road (CR 57) to Chenango
Drive
Atlantic Avenue (NBS)
[Added 5-6-1980]
From Sunrise Highway to Pacific Street
Atlantic Place (HPG) [Added
2-6-1979]
From Lincoln Boulevard to Schneider Lane
Auburn Avenue (BSR)
[Added 11-16-1993]
From Lawrence Avenue to Bayview Avenue
Bay Shore Avenue (WBW)
[Added 4-4-1978]
From Bayshore Road to Howells Road
Bedford Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Belmore Avenue (EIS)
[Added 3-1-1983]
From Sunrise Highway South Service Road
to Jericho Street
Belmore Avenue (NGR)
[Added 6-5-1984]
From Lowell Avenue to Manhattan
Boulevard
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1838
Name of Street Limits
Belmore Avenue (NGR)
[Added 9-18-1984]
From Manahattan Boulevard to Sunrise
Highway North Service Road
Benjamin Street (BSR) From Center Street to Fourth Avenue
Berard Boulevard (OKD)
[Added 8-27-2013]
From Locust Avenue to Montauk Highway
Bergen Street (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Prospect Avenue
Bethesda Lane (SVL) [Added
9-20-1994]
From Broadway Avenue to Potomac Lane
Biltmore Avenue (OKD)
[Added 3-1-1983; amended
3-23-1993]
From Idle Hour Boulevard to Brook Way
Blue Point Road (HBK) From Greenbelt Parkway to Waverly
Avenue
Bohemia Parkway (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Fulton Avenue
Boston Avenue (ISL) [Added
12-3-1996]
From Spur Drive South to Atlanta Street
Boulevard Avenue (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1988]
From Hemlock Street to East Beech Street
Bradley Street (BWD) From Wicks Road to Eisenhower Avenue
Bretton Road (HPG) [Added
2-3-1981]
From Wheeler Road to Ridge Court
Bridge Road (HPG) From Wheeler Road to Motor Parkway
Broadway (CIS) [Added
10-9-2001]
From Suffolk Avenue (CR100) to the school
roadway (Charles Mulligan Elementary
School, Ralph G. Reed Elementary School)
Broadway Avenue (HBK)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Main Street to Veterans Highway
Brook Avenue (NBS) [Added
8-15-2006]
From Fifth Avenue to Mildred Place
Brook Street (ISL, NBS)
[Added 12-3-1996]
From Commack Road to St. Louis Avenue
Brook Street (OKD, SVL,
WSV) [Added 11-16-1982]
From Montauk Highway to Greeley Avenue
Brookdale Avenue (BSR)
[Added 4-4-1978]
From Bay Shore Road to Udall Road
Burnett Avenue (BSR)
[Added 11-16-1993]
From Lawrence Avenue to Bayview Avenue
Caleb's Path (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Motor Parkway
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1839
Name of Street Limits
California Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Callahan Street (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
From Bay Shore Road to West Oakdale
Street
Candlewood Road (BWD)
[Added 2-15-2005]
From Brentwood Road to Commack Road
Carlton Avenue (BWD)
[Added 5-22-2007]
From Candlewood Road to Pine Aire Drive
Cassel Avenue (WBS) [Added
1-25-2000]
From Diamond Street to Orinoco Drive
Center Avenue (BSR) [Added
5-16-2000]
From Garfield Avenue to Howells Road
Central Avenue (BHM)
[Added 5-1-1979]
From Church Street north for 2,100 feet
Chateau Drive (OKD) [Added
6-11-2002]
From Idle Hour Boulevard to Connetquot
Drive
Chenango Drive (NBS)
[Added 6-5-1979]
From Manor Lane to Manatuck Boulevard
Chestnut Street (ISL) [Added
9-24-2019]
From Locust Avenue to Nassau Avenue
Chicago Avenue (NBS)
[Added 12-3-1996]
From Spur Drive South to Cleveland Street
Church Street (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Sycamore
Avenue
Church Street (BPT) From Nichol's Road to the Brookhaven
town line
Church Street (BWD) From Commercial Avenue to Motor
Parkway
Church Street (CIS) From Suffolk Avenue to Dietz Street
Church Street (HBK) From Broadway Avenue to Lincoln Avenue
Church Street (BWD) From Emjay Boulevard to MacArthur
Avenue
Cinnamon Street (CIS)
[Added 5-2-2000]
From Islip Avenue to Tree Avenue
Clark Street (BWD) [Added
5-15-2018]
From Eisenhower Avenue to Marshall
Avenue
Clayton Street (CIS) From Carleton Avenue to Lowell Avenue
Cleveland Street (BSR)
[Added 12-8-1998]
Between Saxon Avenue and St. Louis
Avenue
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1840
Name of Street Limits
Coates Avenue (BHM)
[Added 11-20-1979]
From Church Street to Ellsworth Street
Coates Avenue (HBK) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Railroad Avenue to Veterans
Highway
Colorado Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Columbia Street (ISL)
[Added 9-24-2019]
From Watson Place to Nassau Avenue
Columbus Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Commack Road (ISL/BWD)
[Added 8-15-2000]
From Sunrise Highway to Spur Drive North
Commack Road (ISL) [Added
6-22-1999]
From Moffitt Boulevard to Sunrise
Highway (New York State Route 27)
Commercial Avenue (EIS)
[Added 3-1-1983]
From Sunrise Highway North Service Road
to East Roslyn Street
Commercial Boulevard
(BWD), (CIS)
From Joshua's Path to Orient Avenue
Community Road (BSR) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway (West Main Street)
Connecticut Avenue (BWD)
[Added 7-11-2006]
From Brentwood Road to Fifth Avenue
Connetquot Drive (OKD)
[Added 3-1-1983]
From Chateau Drive to Biltmore Avenue
Corbin Avenue (EDG) [Added
6-5-1979]
From Grand Boulevard to Howells Road
Dakota Avenue (NBS)
[Added 10-17-1989;
amended 10-13-2010;
1-25-2011]
From Penataquit Avenue to Ohio Avenue
Dalton Road (BWD) [Added
11-14-2006]
From Fifth Avenue to Stein Drive
DeKalb Avenue (BWD) From Orient Avenue to Highland Road
Dietz Street (CIS) From Wheeler Road to Church Street
Dovecote Lane (CIS) From Half Mile Road to Suffolk Avenue
Dowsing Avenue (NBS)
[Added 11-13-2001]
From Fifth Avenue (CR13) to North Park
Avenue
Dubois Road (WIS) [Added
5-15-2018]
From Higbie Lane to east terminus
East Cherry Street (CIS)
[Added 5-15-2018]
From Lowell Avenue to Nicoll Avenue
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1841
Name of Street Limits
East Forks Road (NBS)
[Added 10-17-1989;
amended 1-31-2006]
From Spur Drive South to south terminus
at a point 750 feet south of Abrew Street
East Nassau Street (EIS)
[Added 8-5-2014; amended
9-25-2018]
From Bellmore Avenue to Connetquot
Avenue
East Roslyn Street (EIS)
[Added 3-1-1983]
From Connetquot Avenue to Commercial
Avenue
East Third Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990;
amended 1-2-1991]
From Sunrise Highway to Spur Drive South
Easton Street (LKL) From Ocean Avenue to Fifth Avenue
Eaton Lane (WIS) From Montauk Highway to the Great South
Bay
Eighth Street (BHM) [Added
4-7-1987]
From Sycamore Avenue to Norman Drive
Eisenhower Avenue (BWD)
[Added 9-18-1979]
From Suffolk Avenue to St. Andrews Drive
Elm Drive (PNR) [Added
12-6-1977]
From North Gardiner Drive to Heckscher
Avenue
Evelyn Road (WIS) [Added
5-21-1991]
From Montauk Highway to Edgewood Road
Everdell Avenue (WIS)
[Added 2-16-1986]
From Montauk Highway north for 500 feet
Evergreen Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to Eastern Avenue
Fairview Place (HPG) [Added
10-18-1983]
From Hauppauge Road to Woodcrest Drive
Feuereisen Avenue (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Madison Street
Feuereisen Avenue (LKL) From Sixth Street to Easton Street
Fifth Avenue (LKL) From West Peconic Street to Easton Street
Florida Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Franklin Avenue (BWD) From Orient Avenue to Highland Road
Fuller Avenue (ISL) [Added
3-7-2006]
From Sunrise Highway south to Garretson
Avenue
Fulton Street (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Motor Parkway
Furrows Road (HBK) [Added
1-15-1980]
From Grundy Avenue to (Old) Patchogue-
Holbrook Road
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1842
Name of Street Limits
Gardiner Drive (NBS) [Added
6-5-1979]
From Howells Road (CR 57) to Chenango
Drive
Gates Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Gaymore Road (HPG) [Added
8-28-1990]
From Townline Road to Marlon Lane
Gillette Avenue (BPT) [Added
12-6-1994]
From Montauk Highway to Purick Street
Gillette Avenue (SVL) From 320 feet south of Montauk Highway
to Edwards Street
Gladstone Avenue (WIS)
[Added 12-16-1986;
amended 3-3-1987]
From Montauk Highway to Union
Boulevard
Glenmore Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to Eastern Avenue
Gloria Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 2-3-1981]
From Express Drive South to Motor
Parkway
Grant Avenue (ISL) [Added
6-22-1999]
From Moffitt Boulevard to Commack Road
Greenbelt Parkway (HBK) From Blue Point Road to Patchogue-
Holbrook Road
Greenbelt Parkway (HBK)
[Added 6-7-1988]
From Nicolls Road (CR 97) to Patchogue-
Holbrook Road (CR 19)
Gridley Street (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
From Bay Shore Road to West Oakdale
Street
Grissom Way (HPG) [Added
2-6-1979]
From Wheeler Road to Atlantic Place
Grundy Avenue (HBK)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Railroad Avenue to Veterans
Highway
Gull Haven Drive (CIS)
[Added 9-24-2013]
From Carleton Avenue to Eastview Drive
Gunther Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-30-1995]
From Brentwood Road to Monroe Avenue
Half Mile Road (CIS) From Gibbs Road to Hawthorne Avenue
Hall Street (WIS) [Added
12-16-1986]
From Montauk Highway north to Everdell
Avenue
Halley Lane (CIS) [Added
1-4-1994]
From Wheeler Road to Hawthorne Avenue
Handsome Avenue (SVL)
[Added 3-10-2009]
From Montauk Highway to south terminus
Harding Street (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Smithtown
Avenue
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1843
Name of Street Limits
Hawthorne Avenue (CIS) From Motor Parkway to Suffolk Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue (HPG)
[Added 2-3-1981]
From Bridge Road to Motor Parkway
Heckscher Avenue (BWD) From Pineaire Drive to Spur Drive North
Hellwig Court (WIS) From Pease Lane to Montauk Highway
Hemlock Lane (BSR) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Hemlock Street (ISL) [Added
2-25-1997]
From Islip Avenue to Robbins Avenue
Heyward Street (BWD)
[Added 2-25-2003]
From Washington Avenue to Wicks Road
(CR7)
Higbie Lane (WIS) [Added
1-12-1994]
From Udall Road to Sunrise Highway
Highland Road (BWD)
[Added 3-20-2001]
From Express Drive south to Caleb Path
Hillard Avenue (CIS) [Added
3-21-1978]
From Wheeler Road to Rose Street
Hilltop Drive (BWD) [Added
6-7-1988]
From Commack Road to Second Avenue
Hoffman Lane (HPG) [Added
12-18-1984]
From Motor Parkway to Veterans Memorial
Highway
Holbrook Street (NBS) From Fifth Avenue to Third Avenue
Howells Road (WBW) [Added
4-4-1978; amended
5-5-1981]
From Bay Shore Road to Corbin Avenue
Hubbs Avenue (HPG) [Added
2-6-1979]
From Wheeler Road to Atlantic Place
Hunter Avenue (WIS) From the Babylon town line to Udall Road
Hyde Park Avenue (BWD) From Candlewood Road to Pineaire Drive
Hyman Avenue (WBS)
[Added 4-20-1994]
From Orinoco Drive to Sunrise Highway
South Service Road
Idaho Avenue (BSR) [Added
10-17-1989]
From Penataquit Avenue to Brentwood
Road
Illinois Avenue (NBS) [Added
8-28-1990]
From Barry Place to Spur Drive South
Islip Boulevard (ISL, EIS)
[Added 10-8-2013]
From Ferndale Boulevard to Irish Lane
Jackson Street (EIS) [Added
8-17-1999]
From Garfield Avenue to Irish Lane
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1844
Name of Street Limits
Jade Street (OKD) [Added
12-6-1994]
From Featherbed Lane to Hollywood Drive
Jefferson Avenue (BWD) From LeGrand Street to Motor Parkway
Jenkins Street (ISL) [Added
2-25-1997]
From Islip Avenue to Robbins Avenue
Jericho Street (EIS) [Added
3-1-1983]
From Connetquot Avenue to Pacific Street
John Street (HPG) [Added
8-28-1990]
From MacArthur Boulevard to Gaymore
Road
Johnson Avenue (RNK)
[Added 7-7-1987]
From Ocean Avenue to the Village of
Islandia
Johnson Avenue (SVL)
[Added 11-15-1988]
From Lakeland Avenue to Sunrise Highway
Julia Goldbach Avenue (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Madison Street
Julia Goldbach Avenue (LKL) From Sixth Street to Easton Street
Kahle Street (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Smithtown
Avenue
Kane Street (WIS) [Added
12-17-2002]
From Ruth Street to Sunrise Highway
North Service Road
Kansas Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Karshick Street (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Sycamore
Avenue
Katherine Place (OKD)
[Added 8-27-2013]
From Locust Avenue to Race Place
Keith Lane (WIS) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Kentucky Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Kenwood Drive (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Eighth Street
Knickerbocker Avenue (HBK)
[Added 11-15-2005]
From Railroad Avenue to Union Avenue
Lanier Lane (BSR) From Union Boulevard to West Main Street
Lawrence Avenue (BSR)
[Added 11-16-1993]
From South Clinton Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
Leaf Avenue (CIS) [Added
6-21-2011]
From Apricot Street to Palm Street
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1845
Name of Street Limits
Leahy Avenue (BWD) [Added
12-6-1977]
From Crooked Hill Road to Wicks Road
LeGrand Street (BWD) From Washington Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
Lexington Avenue (BWD) From Orient Avenue to Joshua's Path
Lincoln Avenue (BWD) From LeGrand Street to Motor Parkway
Lincoln Avenue (HBK)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Railroad Avenue to Veterans
Highway
Lincoln Avenue (SVL) [Added
3-24-1992]
From Sunrise Highway to Montauk
Highway
Lincoln Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 9-18-1979]
From Motor Parkway to Veterans Highway
Locust Avenue (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Veterans
Highway
Locust Avenue (ISL) [Added
9-24-2019]
From Columbia Street to 300 feet north of
Montauk Highway (NY27A)
Loop Drive (SVL) [Added
9-20-1994]
From Broadway Avenue to Chase Drive
Louis Kossuth Avenue (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Madison Street
Louis Kossuth Avenue (LKL) From Sixth Street to Easton Street
Louisiana Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Penataquit
Avenue
MacArthur Avenue (BWD)
[Amended 9-18-1979]
From (Crooked Hill Road) Merrill Street to
McNair Street
MacArthur Boulevard (HPG) From Express Drive South to Motor
Parkway
MacArthur Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 7-2-1985]
From Veterans Memorial Highway to
Express Drive North
Madison Avenue (BWD) From LeGrand Street to Motor Parkway
Malts Avenue (WIS) [Added
4-20-1994]
From Orinoco Drive to Sunrise Highway
South Service Road
Manatuck Boulevard (NBS)
[Added 2-7-1995]
From Southern State Parkway to Sunrise
Highway North Service Road
Manatuck Boulevard (PNR)
[Added 2-7-1995]
From Pine Aire Drive to Southern State
Parkway
Manhattan Boulevard (NGR)
[Added 9-11-2012]
From Carleton Avenue to Spur Drive North
Manor Lane (WBS) [Added
4-20-1994]
From Orinoco Drive to Sunrise Highway
South Service Road
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1846
Name of Street Limits
Marshall Avenue (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Yarnell Street
Martinstein Avenue (WBW)
[Added 4-4-1978; amended
11-13-2001]
From Bay Shore Road to Deer Park Street
McArthur Street (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Walnut Avenue
McCall Avenue (WIS) [Added
12-16-1986; amended
3-3-1987]
From Montauk Highway to Madeline Place
McGrath Street (CIS) From Wheeler Road to Church Street
McKinley Street (ISL)
[Added 9-24-2019]
From Grant Avenue to Locust Avenue
McNair Street (BWD) [Added
9-18-1979]
From Crooked Hill Road to MacArthur
Avenue
Merriam Road (WBW)
[Added 4-4-1978]
From North Thompson Drive to Howells
Road
Merrill Street (BWD) From Wicks Road to Eisenhower Avenue
Milligan Lane (WIS) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Minnesota Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Mississippi Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Missouri Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Monsen Street (CIS) From Wheeler Road to Church Street
Montana Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990;
amended 8-30-1995]
From Illinois Avenue to Monroe Avenue
Montauk Drive (NBS) [Added
6-5-1979]
From Howells Road (CR 57) to Manatuck
Boulevard
Muncey Road (WIS) [Added
1-11-1995]
From Howells Road to Udall Road
Muriel Street (HBK) [Added
9-12-2006]
From Coates Avenue to Grundy Avenue
Nassau Avenue (ISL) [Added
9-24-2019]
From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway (RT27A)
Nemeth Street (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Walnut Avenue
Nevada Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1847
Name of Street Limits
Nicoll Avenue (CIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
From Poplar Street to East Cherry Street
Nimitz Avenue (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Yarnell Street
North Gardiner Drive (WBW)
[Added 5-1-1984]
From Pineaire Drive to Elm Drive
North Ocean Avenue (ISL)
[Added 9-25-2018]
From Montauk Highway to Union
Boulevard
North Park Avenue (NBS)
[Added 12-19-2000]
From Sunrise Highway to Dowsing Avenue
North Thompson Drive (EDG,
WBW) [Added 4-4-1978]
From Pineaire Drive to Merriam Road
Northfield Road (HPG) From Veterans Highway (Town Line Road)
to Ridgefield Road
Nostrand Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to Eastern Avenue
Oak Street (CIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
From Nicoll Avenue to Connetquot Avenue
Oakdale Avenue (CIS)
[Added 3-21-1978]
From Wheeler Road to Rose Street
Oakdale-Bohemia Road
(BHM) [Added 9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Sycamore
Avenue
Oakland Avenue (CIS) From Motor Parkway to Suffolk Avenue
Oakneck Road (WIS) [Added
12-16-1986; amended
3-3-1987]
From Montauk Highway to Union
Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue (WIS)
[Added 4-20-1994]
From Orinoco Drive to Higbie Lane
Ocean Avenue (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Veterans
Highway
Ocean Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to Eastern Avenue
Ocean Avenue (OKD) [Added
1-7-1992]
From 100 feet south of Sunrise Highway to
Locust Avenue
Ocean Avenue (WBW)
[Added 4-4-1978]
From Bay Shore Road to Garden City
Street
Ocean Avenue (WIS) [Added
6-7-1988]
From Bay Shore Road to Ridgewood Street
Ohio Avenue (NBS) [Added
10-13-2010; 1-25-2011]
From Montana Avenue to Spur Drive South
Oregon Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1848
Name of Street Limits
Pacific Street (EIS) [Added
3-1-1983]
From Sunrise Highway South Service Road
to Jericho Street
Pacific Street (NBS) [Added
5-6-1980]
From Atlantic Avenue to Brook Avenue
Paprocki Avenue (WIS)
[Added 4-20-1994]
From Higbie Lane to West Islip Boulevard
Parkwood Road (WIS)
[Added 11-20-1990]
From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Pat Drive (WIS) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Pease Lane (WIS) [Added
2-19-2002]
Union Boulevard to Montauk Highway
Peck Avenue (BWD) From Pineaire Drive to Candlewood Road
Peckham Avenue (ISL)
[Added 3-7-2006]
From Sunrise Highway south to Maddox
Avenue
Peconic Street (LKL) [Added
3-5-1985; amended
6-4-1985]
From Ocean Avenue to Elm Avenue
Penataquit Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990;
amended 3-25-2003]
From Louisiana Avenue to Sunrise
Highway Service Road
Penataquit Avenue (BSR)
[Added 8-27-1991;
amended 11-19-1991]
From Sunrise Highway to Montauk
Highway
Peters Boulevard (NBS)
[Added 4-5-2005]
From the Village of Brightwaters line to
Chenango Drive
Pilgrim Road (BWD)
[Amended 9-18-1979]
From Crooked Hill Road to Dillmont Street
Pine Drive (NBS) [Added
6-5-1979]
From the Village of Brightwaters line to
Chenango Drive
Pine Grove Boulevard (PNR)
[Added 11-15-2005]
From Elm Drive to Forrest Place
(Candlewood Road)
Pineville Road (CIS) [Added
3-21-1978]
From Suffolk Avenue to William Avenue
Pinewood Avenue (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1988]
From Maple Place to Connetquot Avenue
Piper Lane (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Debbie Lee Lane
Plymouth Road (HPG) From Kings Road to Northfield Road
Pond Road (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Sycamore
Avenue
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1849
Name of Street Limits
Pond Road (LKL) [Added
3-5-1985]
From Peconic Street to Johnson Avenue
Princess Avenue (BWD) From Candlewood Road to Pineaire Drive
Prospect Avenue (CIS)
[Added 9-20-1988]
From Hemlock Street to East Beech Street
Prospect Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Prospect Place (HPG) [Added
10-18-1983]
From Hauppauge Road to Woodcrest Drive
Purick Street (BPT) [Added
12-6-1994]
From Nicolls Road (CR 97) to Sylvan
Avenue
Raft Avenue (SVL) [Added
9-20-1994]
From Sunrise Highway to Potomac Lane
Ralph Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Redmond Avenue (BSR)
[Added 4-18-2000]
From Sunrise Highway to Redington Street
Ridgefield Road (HPG) From Kings Highway to Northfield Road
Ridgewood Avenue (BWD) From Orient Avenue to Highland Road
Ridgewood Street (WIS)
[Added 6-7-1988]
From Ocean Avenue to Udall Road
Riley Street (WBW) [Added
4-22-1986]
From Bay Shore Road to West Oakdale
Street
Robbins Avenue (ISL) [Added
2-25-1997]
From Moffitt Boulevard to Jenkins Street
Roosevelt Avenue (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Eighth Street
Roosevelt Avenue (ISL)
[Added 3-7-2006]
From Moffitt Boulevard to Sunrise
Highway
Roosevelt Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 5-7-1991]
From Express Drive North to Betty Place
Roosevelt Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 2-3-1981; amended
3-19-1991]
From Motor Parkway to Express Drive
South
Ruth Street (WIS) [Added
12-17-2002]
From Kane Street to Higbie Lane
St. Andrews Drive (BWD) From Crooked Hill Road to Marshall
Avenue
St. Louis Avenue (NBS)
[Added 12-3-1996]
From Sunrise Highway North Service Road
to Spur Drive South
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1850
Name of Street Limits
St. Peters Drive (BWD) From Crooked Hill Road to Marshall
Avenue
Sage Street (CIS) [Added
5-2-2000]
From Islip Avenue to Tree Avenue
Savoy Avenue (BWD) From Candlewood Road to Pineaire Drive
Saxon Avenue (NBS) [Added
12-3-1996]
From Sunrise Highway North Service Road
to Spur Drive South
Schneider Lane (HPG)
[Added 2-6-1979]
From Wheeler Road to Atlantic Place
Schoolhouse Lane (HPG)
[Added 10-18-1983]
From Hauppauge Road to Veterans
Highway
Seafield Lane (BSR)
[Amended 11-15-1988]
From Bonniwell Place to West Main Street
Second Avenue (EIS) [Added
10-7-2003]
From Montauk Highway to Court Street
Sequams Lane (WIS) From Montauk Highway to Sequams Lane
North
Seventh Street (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Sycamore Avenue to Beaver Drive
Shore Lane (BSR) [Added
5-27-2014]
From Gibson Street to Aldrich Court
Smith Avenue (BSR) [Added
11-12-2002]
From Mechanicsville Road to Union
Boulevard
Smith Street (NBS) [Added
5-11-2010]
From Fifth Avenue to east terminus
Smith Street (SVL) [Added
10-4-1994]
From Montauk Highway to Hiddink Street
Smithtown Avenue (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987;
amended 11-1-1988]
From Terry's Road North to Lakeland
Avenue
Southern Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 8-22-2017]
From Town Line Road (CR 76) to
Hauppauge Road
Sparton Lane (HPG) [Added
8-28-1990]
From 310 feet south of Pinedale Road to
Pinedale Road
Spruce Street (CIS) [Added
9-20-1988]
From Boulevard Avenue to Marie Lane
Spruce Street (ISL) [Added
2-25-1997]
From Islip Avenue to Robbins Street
Stein Drive (BWD) [Added
9-12-2006]
From Candlewood Road to Third Avenue
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1851
Name of Street Limits
Storey Avenue (CIS) [Added
3-21-1978]
From Wheeler Road to Rose Street
Sullivan Street (WBW)
[Added 4-22-1986]
From Bay Shore Road to West Oakdale
Street
Sunburst Boulevard (CIS)
[Added 3-1-1994]
From Belt Drive East to Carleton Avenue
Sunrise Road (BHM) [Added
4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Kenwood Drive
Sunset Road (BSR) From Union Boulevard to West Main Street
Sycamore Avenue (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to Veterans
Highway
Sylvan Avenue (BPT) [Added
5-3-1988]
From Church Street to Montauk Highway
Sylvan Court (WIS) [Added
8-27-1991]
From Montauk Highway to Church Lane
Tanglewood Road (WIS) From Union Boulevard to Montauk
Highway
Tariff Road (WSV) [Added
11-1-1988]
From Cherry Avenue to Lakeland Avenue
Terry Road (HPG) [Added
7-14-1998]
From Nichol's Road to Townline Road
Terry Road (RNK) [Added
7-7-1987]
From Motor Parkway to Johnson Avenue
Terry Road (SVL, WSV)
[Added 11-1-1988]
From Cherry Avenue to Smithtown Avenue
Texas Avenue (NBS) [Added
8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Third Avenue (EIS) [Added
3-7-2006]
From Union Boulevard to Main Street
Third Street (LKL) [Added
10-2-1990]
From Sycamore Avenue to Ocean Avenue
Thirteenth Avenue (RNK)
[Added 6-4-1985]
From Peconic Street to Southport Street
Thirteenth Street (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Lafayette Street
Thomas Street (BWD) From Washington Avenue to Motor
Parkway
Tillie Street (East William
Street) (BSR) [Added
4-21-2015]
From Brentwood Road to Brook Avenue
Tower Mews (OKD) From Hollywood Drive to Featherbed Lane
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § M-1
66:1852
Name of Street Limits
Tree Avenue (CIS) [Added
5-2-2000]
From Brightside Avenue to Apricot Street
Udall Road (WBW) [Added
4-4-1978]
From Bay Shore Road to Howells Road
Udall Road (WIS) [Added
7-13-1994]
From Bay Shore Road to Sunrise Highway
Valley Stream Street (NGR) From Spur Drive North to Belmore Avenue
Vanderbilt Avenue (BWD) From Joshua's Path to the Brentwood
Country Club
Village Lane (HPG) [Added
8-28-1990]
From Townline Road to Marlon Lane
Walnut Avenue (BHM)
[Added 9-15-1987]
From Sunrise Highway to McArthur Street
Washington Avenue (BHM)
[Added 4-7-1987]
From Veterans Highway to Eighth Street
Watson Place (ISL) [Added
9-24-2019]
Frrom Union Boulevard to McKinley Street
Wavecrest Avenue (WIS) From Higbie Lane to Beach Avenue
Weeks Avenue (CIS) [Added
3-21-1978]
From Suffolk Avenue to William Avenue
West End Avenue (BWD) From Orient Avenue to Highland Road
West Peconic Street (LKL) From Ocean Avenue to Seventeenth
Avenue
West Pine Street (ISL)
[Added 8-12-2008]
From Islip Avenue to Whitman Avenue
Whitman Avenue (ISL)
[Added 8-16-2005]
From Sunrise Highway to Bates Street
Willett Avenue (SVL) [Added
7-12-2005]
From Easy Street to Tariff Street
William Avenue (ISL) [Added
2-25-1997]
From Jenkins Street to Moffitt Boulevard
Willoughby Street (BWD) From Suffolk Avenue to Prospect Avenue
Willow Street (CIS) [Added
12-6-1977]
From Lowell Avenue to Nicoll Avenue
Wilson Boulevard (CIS)
[Added 6-21-2011]
From Brightside Avenue to Spur Drive
North
Wilson Street (BHM) [Added
9-15-1987]
From Lakeland Avenue to Smithtown
Avenue
Winganhauppauge Road (ISL)
[Added 10-18-1988]
From Moffit Boulevard to Wallace Street
§ M-1 WATER QUALITY § M-1
66:1853
Name of Street Limits
Woodlawn Drive (OKD)
[Added 3-1-1983]
From Idle Hour Boulevard to Connetquot
Drive
Wyoming Avenue (NBS)
[Added 8-28-1990]
From Brentwood Road to Illinois Avenue
Yalta Drive (CIS) [Added
8-15-2000]
From Motor Parkway to Applegate Drive
Yarnell Street (BWD) From Wicks Road to Eisenhower Avenue
Traffic Code Disposition List
Chapter TCDL
TRAFFIC CODE DISPOSITION LIST
§ TCDL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-25-2005 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; speed limits on certain
streets; parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. C, G, H and J
2-15-2005 Stop and yield intersections; truck
exclusions
Sch. G and M
3-1-2005 Traffic control signals Sch. A
4-5-2005 U-turns; stop and yield intersections;
truck exclusions
Sch. D, G and M
5-3-2005 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and and
standing restrictions
Sch. A, G and J
6-14-2005 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
7-12-2005 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, J and M
8-16-2005 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots; truck exclusions
Sch. G, J, L and M
9-13-2005 Prohibited turns; parking area exits and
entrances; stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and standing
restrictions; Town parking lots
Sch. C, F, G, J and L
§ M-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1854
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-18-2005 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
11-15-2005 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J, L and M
12-13-2005 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
parking for shopping centers, apartment
complexes, hospitals, fire districts and
industrial parks
Sch. G, J and K
1-31-2006 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J and M
3-7-2006 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots; truck exclusions
Sch. G, J, L and M
3-28-2006 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. A, G and J
4-25-2006 Prohibited turns; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C and J
6-13-2006 Stop and yield intersections; parking for
shopping centers, apartment complexes,
hospitals, fire districts and industrial
parks
Sch. G and K
7-11-2006 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
parking for shopping centers, apartment
complexes, hospitals, fire districts and
industrial parks; truck exclusions
Sch. G, J, K and M
8-15-2006 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J, L and M
9-12-2006 parking, stopping and standing
restrictions; truck exclusions
Sch. J and M
10-17-2006 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
11-14-2006 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1855
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-6-2007 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
2-27-2007 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
parking for shopping centers, apartment
complexes, hospitals, fire districts and
industrial parks
Sch. G, J and K
3-27-2007 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Sch. G, J, and L
4-10-2007 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Sch. G, J, and L
4-24-2007 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-22-2007 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J and M
7-10-2007 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; speed limits on certain
streets; parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. C, G, H and J
8-14-2007 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; school speed limits;
parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. C, G, I, and J
11-27-2007 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G, and J
2-5-2008 Prohibited turns; one-way streets; stop
and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions; town
parking lots
Sch. C, E, G, J, and
L
2-26-2008 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G, and J
4-9-2008 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G, and J
4-9-2008 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; town parking lots
Sch. G, I, J and L
§ TCDL-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1856
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-29-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
6-10-2008 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. G, I and J
6-24-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping, and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
7-15-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping, and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
7-15-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping, and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
8-12-2008 Prohibited turns; one-way streets; stop
and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
parking for shopping centers, apartment
complexes, hospitals, fire districts and
industrial parks
Sch. C, E, G, J and K
8-12-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, J and M
9-9-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
10-21-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Sch. G, J and L
10-21-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Sch. G, J and L
11-18-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
11-18-2008 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
12-2-2008 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
2-24-2009 One-way streets; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. E, G and J
3-10-2009
(L.L. No.
3-2009)
Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; truck exclusions
Sch. A, G, J and M
4-14-2009 Parking Violations Bureau amendment Ch. 7
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1857
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-14-2009 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
4-28-2009 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots
Sch. C, G, J and L
5-12-2009 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
5-27-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
5-27-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
6-23-2009 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
6-23-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
7-14-2009 Prohibited turns; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C and J
8-11-2009 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
9-15-2009 One-way streets; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. E, G and J
9-29-2009 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. G, I and J
10-14-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Sch. G, J and L
11-17-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
11-17-2009 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
12-1-2009 Parking Violations Unit Ch. 8
12-15-2009 Penalties amendment Chs. 1 and 4
1-26-2010 Stop and yield intersections; parking
stopping and standing restrictions;
parking for shopping centers, apartment
complexes, hospitals, fire districts and
industrial parks
Sch. G, J and K
2-9-2010 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
§ TCDL-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1858
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-9-2010 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
3-16-2010 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
5-11-2010 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. C, G, J, L and
M
5-25-2010 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. A, G and J
6-8-2010 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; Town parking lots
Sch. A, G and L
8-17-2010 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
8-17-2010 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. G, I and J
10-13-2010 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J, L and M
11-16-2010 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. G, I and J
12-14-2010 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
1-25-2011 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. C, G, J, L and
M
3-8-2011 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
4-26-2011 Stop and yield intersections; speed
limits on certain streets; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G, H and J
4-26-2011 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
5-24-2011 General provisions amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Chs. 1; 3
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1859
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-24-2011 Traffic control signals; prohibited turns;
stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. A, C, G and J
6-21-2011 Parking regulations amendment; offstreet
parking areas amendment
Chs. 3; 4
6-21-2011 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
6-21-2011 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, I, J, L and M
6-21-2011 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
9-7-2011 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Schs. G, J and L
10-25-2011 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots
Schs. C, G, J and L
12-13-2011 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
1-31-2012 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
2-14-2012 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Schs. A, G and J
4-3-2012 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Schs. A, G and J
4-24-2012 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
5-22-2012 Parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. J
6-19-2012 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
9-11-2012 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; school speed limits;
parking, stopping and standing
restrictions; Town parking lots; truck
exclusions
Schs. C, G, I, J, L
and M
9-25-2012 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
§ TCDL-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1860
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-11-2012 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
1-15-2013 Removal and storage of vehicles Ch. 6
1-15-2013
(L.L. No.
1-2013)
Parking Violations Bureau amendment Ch. 7
1-15-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Schs. G and J
2-12-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
3-5-2013 General provisions amendment; parking
regulations amendment; commercial
vehicles; weight limits amendment
Chs. 1; 3; 5
4-23-2013 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
6-18-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
8-27-2013 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. G, I and J
8-27-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, J and M
9-24-2013 Stop and yield intersections; speed
limits on certain streets; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, H, J and M
10-8-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, J and M
12-10-2013 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
1-14-2014 Stop and yield intersections; speed
limits on certain streets; school speed
limits
Sch. G, H and I
2-11-2014 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1861
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-4-2014
(L.L. No.
1-2014)
General provisions amendment; traffic
regulations amendment; parking
regulations amendment; off-street
parking areas amendment; commercial
vehicles; weight limits amendment;
removal and storage of vehicles
amendment; Parking Violations Bureau
amendment; Parking Violations Unit
repealer; metered parking; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots
Chs. 1 through 8;
Sch. J and L
4-8-2014 Traffic control signals; prohibited turns;
stop and yield intersections
Sch. A, C and G
4-8-2014 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
5-27-2014 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
truck exclusions
Sch. G, J and M
6-24-2014 Traffic control signals; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. A, G and J
8-5-2014 Stop and yield intersections; truck
exclusions
Sch. G and M
9-23-2014 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
10-14-2014 School speed limits; parking, stopping
and standing restrictions; Town parking
lots
Sch. I, J and L
11-18-2014 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
12-2-2014 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
12-16-2014 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
3-3-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; speed limits on certain
streets; parking, stopping and standing
restrictions
Sch. C, G, H and J
§ TCDL-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1862
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-3-2015 School speed limits; parking, stopping
and standing restrictions; Town parking
lots
Sch. I, J and L
4-21-2015 Stop and yield intersections; truck
exclusions
Sch. G and M
5-5-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-26-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; school speed limits;
parking, stopping and standing
restrictions; Town parking lots
Sch. C, G, I, J and L
6-23-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing regulations; parking for
shopping centers, apartment complexes,
fire districts and industrial parks
Sch. C, G, J and K
7-14-2015 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing regulations
Sch. G and J
9-22-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
10-13-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots
Sch. C, G, J and L
11-17-2015 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions
Sch. C, G and J
12-15-2015 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing regulations
Sch. G and J
2-9-2016 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions; town
parking lots
Sch. G, J and L
3-8-2016 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
6-7-2016 Prohibited turns; stop and yield
intersections; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; parking for
shopping centers, apartment complexes,
fire districts and industrial parks
Sch. C, G, J and K
9-20-2016 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1863
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-22-2016 Stop and yield intersections; school
speed limits; parking, stopping and
standing restrictions; Town parking lots
Sch. G, I, J, and L
1-24-2017 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
3-21-2017 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
5-23-2017 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
8-22-2017 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions;
Town parking lots; truck exclusions
Sch. G, J, L and M
10-24-2017 Stop and yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing restrictions
Sch. G and J
5-15-2018 Prohibited Turns Amendment; Stop and
Yield Intersections Amendment;
Parking, Stopping and Standing
Restrictions Amendment; Town Parking
Lots Amendment; Truck Exclusions
Amendment
Sch. C, G, J, L and
M
7-17-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking, Stopping and
Standing Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G and J
8-21-2018 Prohibited Turns Amendment; Stop and
Yield Intersections Amendment;
Parking, Stopping and Standing
Restrictions Amendment
Sch. C, G and J
9-25-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking, Stopping and
Standing Restrictions Amendment;
Truck Exclusions Amendment
Sch. G, J and M
11-20-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking, Stopping and
Standing Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G and J
12-18-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections; Parking,
Stopping and Standing Restrictions;
Town Parking Lots
Sch. G, J and L
3-19-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Speed Limits on Certain
Streets Amendment; Parking, Stopping
and Standing Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G, H and J
§ TCDL-1 ISLIP CODE § TCDL-1
66:1864
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-16-2019 Commercial Vehicles; Weight Limits
Amendment
Ch. 5
4-16-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking, Stopping and
Standing Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G and J
5-14-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking, Stopping and
Standing Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G and J
7-16-2019 Prohibited Turns Amendment; U-Turns
Amendment; One-Way Streets
Amendment; Stop and Yield
Intersections Amendment; Speed Limits
on Certain Streets Amendment; Parking,
Stopping and Standing Restrictions
Amendment
Sch. C, D, E, G, H
and J
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
9-24-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Speed Limits on
Certain Streets Amendment;
School Speed Limits
Amendment; Truck
Exclusions Amendment
Sch. G, H, I and
M
107
10-22-2019 Prohibited Turns
Amendment; Stop and Yield
Intersections Amendment;
Parking, Stopping, and
Standing Restrictions
Amendment
Sch. C, G and J 107
12-17-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; School Speed
Limits Amendment; Parking,
Stopping and Standing
Restrictions Amendment
Sch. G, I and J 107
3-10-2020 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking,
Stopping and Standing
Restrictions Amendment
G; J 108
5-12-2020 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment; Parking,
Stopping and Standing
Restrictions Amendment
G; J 108
§ TCDL-1 WATER QUALITY § TCDL-1
66:1865

Chapter A78
ZONING PRIOR TO DECEMBER 12, 1967
[HISTORY: Original ordinance adopted by the Town Board of the Town of
Islip 4-11-28; Amended Zoning Ordinance adopted 2-23-32. All
amendments included.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
For the current Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 68, Zoning.
EDITOR'S PREFACE
A Revised and Codified Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Islip was
adopted by the Town Board on December 12, 1967. While this ordinance
was a complete revision and recodification of the existing ordinances. It
nevertheless contains various references to the "requirements of the
Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment." For this reason
the Town Officials determined that the earlier zoning ordinances, together
with their various amendments, should be included in the Code Appendix.
This has been accomplished by including as Part 1 the Zoning Ordinance
adopted April 11, 1928, together with its amendments, and by including as
Part 2 the Amended Zoning Ordinance adopted February 23, 1932, together
with its amendments.
Each of the amendments has been enclosed in brackets, and the date of its
adoption has been indicated in parenthesis just before the close of the
brackets. Insofar as possible the bracketed amendments have been placed
directly beneath the Article, section or paragraph which they amend, with a
chronological sequence used when a single provision has been amended
more than once. However, due to the sheer mass of the amendments and to
the fact that several of the amendatory ordinances have amended numerous
provisions of an existing ordinance, complete consistency has not been
possible at all times. Nevertheless, every effort has been made to so place
and to so identify each of the amendments as to make it clearly
understandable.
The purpose of this chapter is to enable a person having a knowledge of the
zoning regulations of the Town of Islip to determine, through a careful 
scrutiny of the ordinance provisions and the amendments thereto, precisely
what zoning regulations existed at any given time between April 11, 1928
and December 12, 1967.
Part 1
Zoning Ordinance of April 11, 1928
Section 1. General. Zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are
approved and established. The Zoning Map which accompanies this
ordinance is hereby declared to be a part thereof. No building or land shall
be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered except in
conformity with the regulations herein prescribed.
Section 2. Residence A District uses. In a Residence A District, no building
or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally
altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for other than one
(1) or more of the following uses:
1. Dwelling.
2. Church, school, college, library, public museum, community
building.
3. Park, playground, public recreation building, golf course, polo
field.
4. Railway right-of-way, not including railway yards, passenger
station.
5. Farming, nursery, truck gardening.
6. Private club, excepting a club the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
Section 3. Residence B District uses. In a Residence B District, no building
or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally
altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for other than one
(1) or more of the following uses:
1. A use permitted in a Residence A District.
2. Hotel.
3. Philanthropic institution other than a penal or correction institution.
Hospital or sanitarium other than for the insane or feebleminded and other
than for liquor or drug addicts.
4. Telephone exchange where no public business office and no repair
or storage facilities are maintained; fire station.
5. Water supply reservoir, well, tower or filter bed.
6. School or college stadium.
Section 4. Residence C District uses. In a Residence C District, no building
or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally
altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for other than one
(1) or more of the following uses:
1. A use permitted in a Residence A District or a Residence B District.
2. Apartment house.
Section 5. Accessory uses in residence districts. A use accessory to a use
authorized in a residence district shall be permitted in such district. A
commercial billboard or advertising sign shall in no case be permitted as an
accessory use, except that the placing of signs in connection with the sale,
renting, construction or improvement of the property shall be permitted as an
accessory use. A store, trade or business shall not be permitted as an
accessory use, except that the office of a physician, dentist, surgeon or other
professional person may be located in the dwelling or apartment used by
such physician, dentist, surgeon or other professional person as his private
residence; and except that any person carrying on a customary home
occupation may do so in a dwelling or apartment used by him as his private
residence. In a dwelling or apartment occupied as a private residence, one
(1) or more rooms may be rented or table board furnished. A restaurant,
public dining room or other service customary to a hotel or an apartment
house and incidental to its residential use may be located therein as an
accessory use. As an accessory use to a dwelling, a private garage may 
provide storage for not more than three (3) motor vehicles. As an accessory
use to a hotel, club, apartment house or institutional building, a private
garage may provide storage for not more than one (1) motor vehicle for each
two thousand (2,000) square feet of the area of the lot. Except with the
approval of the Board of Appeals, a private garage may not be located
within ten (10) feet of any street line. In a private garage, space for not more
than two (2) motor vehicles may be rented to other than occupants of the
premises, and no business, occupation or service connected in any way with
motor vehicles shall be permitted.
[Section 5 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended in part to read as
follows: As an accessory use to a dwelling, a private garage may provide
storage for not more than three (3) motor vehicles, except that where the lot
has an area of one (1) acre or more with a frontage of not less than one
hundred (100) feet, a private garage may not provide storage for more than
five (5) motor vehicles. (5-28-30)]
Section 6. Business district uses.
A. In a business district, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used, for other than one (1) or more of the following uses:
1. A use permitted in a residence district.
2. Bank, office, studio.
3. Store for retail trade; shop for custom work; shop for making
of articles to be sold at retail on the premises; restaurant, theater, moving
picture house, assembly hall, mortuary.
4. Ice delivery station; bathhouse; boathouse; lodging house.
5. Motor vehicle sales room; electric substation.
6. Garage for motor vehicles, or gasoline or other motor fuel
station as provided in Subdivision B.
7. Penal or correctional institution; hospital or sanitarium for
the insane or feebleminded or for liquor or drug addicts.
8. Printing plant.
9. Aviation field, amusement park, fairgrounds, circus grounds,
crematory, cemetery.
10. Dock or wharf; shipyard, boat repair shop; boat storage; net
storage.
B. Garages and filling stations. Plans for the erection or structural
alteration of any garage for more than five (5) motor vehicles or of any
gasoline or other motor fuel filling station shall be approved by the Board of
Appeals, and said Board may require such changes therein in relation to
yards, location of pumps and buildings and construction of buildings as it
may deem best suited to insure safety, to minimize traffic difficulties and to
safeguard adjacent properties.
C. Accessory uses. In a business district, a use accessory to an
authorized use shall be permitted. A use specified in Subdivision B or in
Subdivision C of Section 7 shall not be permitted as an accessory use.
Automobile wrecking shall not be permitted as an accessory use.
Section 7. Industrial district uses. A. General. In an industrial district, no
building or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for
other than one (1) or more of the following uses:
1. A use permitted in a residence district or business district.
2. Commercial billboard.
3. Wholesale business; storage in bulk of or warehouse for such
material as building material, contractor's equipment, clothing, cotton, drugs,
dry goods, feed, food, furniture, hardware, ice, machinery, metals, oil and
petroleum in quantities less than tank car lots, paint and paint materials,
pipe, rubber, shop supplies, tobacco or wool.
4. Cold storage plant; ice manufacture; creamery; ice-cream
manufacture; bottling works; milk bottling or central distributing station;
baking plant.
5. Dyeing or dry-cleaning plant; laundry.
6. Stable or wagon shed; veterinary hospital; blacksmith or
horseshoeing shop.
7. Streetcar barn; streetcar repair shop; freight terminal; grain
elevator; railroad yards.
8. Coal, coke or wood yard; lumberyard.
9. Storage of live poultry, or poultry killing or dressing for sale
at retail on the premises.
10. Greenhouse; dairy.
11. Motor vehicle repair shop.
12. Foundry.
13. Scrap iron or junk storage; automobile wrecking yard; scrap
paper or rag storage, sorting or baling.
14. Stonecutting; monument works.
15. Brick, tile or terra-cotta manufacture; sand or gravel pit.
16. Central station, light or power plant.
17. Sewage disposal or treatment plant; garbage disposal plant.
18. Manufacture or industrial operation of any kind not
heretofore listed and exclusive of special permit uses listed in Subdivision B
of this section and exclusive of prohibited uses listed in Subdivision C of
this section; provided that no industrial process shall be included which
emits dust, odor, gas, fumes, noise or vibration comparable in character or in
aggregate amount to that of any use listed as a special permit use or as a
prohibited use.
B. Special permit uses. In an industrial district, no building or
premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally
altered which is arranged intended or designed to be used, for any of the
following uses, except on special permit as provided in Paragraph 1 of
Subdivision B of Section 15:
1. Bag cleaning; carpet cleaning.
2. Brewing or distilling of beverages.
3. Dextrin, glucose or starch manufacture.
4. Grain drying or poultry feed manufacture from refuse mash
or refuse grain: flour or feed mill.
5. Poultry slaughterhouse.
6. Gas manufacture from coal, coke, petroleum, or the storage
thereof; carbon or lampblack manufacture; petroleum storage in quantities
greater than tank car lots.
7. Power forge; structural iron- or pipeworks; rock crusher;
railroad roundhouse or shop.
8. Refuse dump.
9. Any industrial process emitting dust, odor, gas, fumes, noise
or vibration comparable in character or in aggregate amount to that of any
use specified in Paragraphs 1 to 8 inclusive of this subdivision.
C. Prohibited uses. In an industrial district, no building or premises
shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally altered which
is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for any of the following uses:
1. Acetylene gas manufacture; oxygen manufacture.
2. Celluloid manufacture.
3. Paper manufacture; plaster manufacture.
4. Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.
5. Asphalt manufacture or refining; coal distillation, including
manufacture or treatment; tar distillation.
6. Boilermaking; locomotive manufacture; railway car
manufacture; steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
7. Linoleum or oilcloth manufacture.
8. Pickle, sauerkraut or vinegar manufacture; soap manufacture.
9. Rawhides or skins, curing or tanning; wool scouring.
10. Small-arms ammunition or fireworks manufacture.
11. Ammonia, bleaching powder or other chemical plants
emitting corrosive or toxic fumes carrying beyond the limits of the premises.
12. Petroleum or kerosene refining or distillation, or derivation
of by-products.
13. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
14. Chlorine or hydrochloric, nitric, picric or sulfuric acid
manufacture; smelting of copper, tin, zinc, lead or iron ores.
15. Manufacture of explosives; storage of explosives in bulk.
16. Abattoir, meat packing; distillation of bones; fat rending
and manufacture of tallow, greases or oils; fertilizer manufacture; hair
manufacture; offal or dead animal reduction; stockyards.
17. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture where the process
includes the refining or recovering of products from fish, animal refuse or
offal.
18. Any industrial process emitting dust, odor, gas, fumes,
noise or vibration comparable in character or in aggregate amount to that of
any use specified in Paragraphs 1 to 17 inclusive of this subdivision.
Section 8. Nonconforming uses. Any use of property existing at the time of
the passage of this ordinance that does not conform to the regulations
prescribed in the preceding sections of this ordinance shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be continued, subject to such
regulations as to the maintenance of premises and conditions of operation as
may in the judgment of the Board of Appeals be reasonably required for the
protection of adjacent property. A nonconforming use shall not be extended,
but the extension of a use to any portion of a building, which portion was
arranged or designed for such nonconforming use at the time of the passage
of this ordinance, shall not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use.
A building arranged, designed or devoted to a nonconforming use at the time
of the passage of this ordinance may not be reconstructed or structurally
altered to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost twenty-five percent (25%) of
the fair value of the building, unless the use of said building is changed to a
conforming use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may
not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. For the purpose of
this ordinance, a use shall be deemed to be changed if changed from a use
listed in one (1) of the numbered paragraphs of Sections 2, 3, 4, 6 or 7 hereof
to a use not listed in such paragraph. A cemetery, icehouse, greenhouse,
sand pit, gravel pit, stone quarry, stone-cutting, sewage disposal or treatment
plant, dairy, dock, wharf, boathouse, bathhouse, public utility plant, hospital,
sanitarium, correctional institution or municipal or state building or
institution existing in any use district at the time of the passage of this
ordinance, or any industrial district use so existing in a business district,
shall be deemed a conforming use upon the plot devoted to such use at the
time of the passage of this ordinance.
Section 9. Height regulations. A. General.
1. In a Residence A District or a Residence B District, no building shall be
erected to a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet: provided that any
portion of a building may be erected to a height in excess of thirty-five (35)
feet, provided such portion of such building is set back from all street and
required yard lines two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of such additional
height.
2. In a Residence C District, no building shall be erected to a height in
excess of thirty-five (35) feet; provided that any portion of a building may be
erected to a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, provided such portion of
such building is set back from all street and required yard lines one (1) foot
for each one (1) foot of such additional height.
3. In a business district or an industrial district, no building shall be erected
to a height in excess of sixty (60) feet; provided that any portion of a
building may be erected to a height in excess of sixty (60) feet, provided
such portion of such building is set back from all lot lines one (1) foot for
each foot of such additional height.
B. Exceptions.
1. The provisions of this section shall not apply to restrict the height of a
church spire, tower or belfry, or of a flagpole, wireless tower, monument,
chimney, water tank or elevator bulkhead, or of a stage tower or scenery loft.
2. Nothing in these regulations shall apply to prevent the erection above the
height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament and without windows,
extending above such height limit not more than five (5) feet.
Section 10. Housing density. A. Area of lot. For buildings hereafter erected
or altered to accommodate or make provision for additional families, the
required lot area shall be as follows:
1. In a Residence A District, four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet
for a single-family dwelling and nine thousand (9,000) square feet for a twofamily dwelling.
2. In a Residence B District, three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet
for a single-family dwelling and five thousand (5,000) square feet for a twofamily dwelling.
3. In a Residence C District or an industrial district, one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet for each family housed in a dwelling or an
apartment house.
4. In a business district, eight hundred (800) square feet for each family
housed in a dwelling or apartment house. Provided that in any district a
single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot separately owned at the
time of the passage of this ordinance.
B. Hotels and boardinghouses. In a Residence A or a Residence B District,
for any hotel or boardinghouse hereafter erected or altered to accommodate
or make provision for additional sleeping rooms, the area of the lot shall be
not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet nor provide less than five
hundred (500) square feet for each sleeping room for which such hotel or
boardinghouse is arranged or designed.
C. Width of the lot. In a Residence A District, for buildings hereafter
erected, the required width of a lot shall be fifty (50) feet for a single-family
dwelling and eighty (80) feet for a two-family dwelling or a private club. In
a Residence B District or a Residence C District, for buildings hereafter
erected, the required width of the lot shall be forty (40) feet for a singlefamily dwelling and fifty (50) feet for a two-family dwelling or apartment
house; provided that in any district a single-family dwelling may be erected
on any lot separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
D. Percentage of lot occupancy. No dwelling, apartment house, hotel, private
club, hospital, sanitarium, institutional building or telephone exchange
hereafter erected shall occupy a greater percentage of the area of its lot than
thirty percent (30%) if in a Residence A District, or forty percent (40%) if in
a Residence B District or a Residence C District. No apartment house
hereafter erected in a business district or an industrial district shall occupy
above the ground story more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
No building hereafter erected in any district shall occupy above the ground
story more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of an interior lot nor more
than ninety percent (90%) of the area of a corner lot.
Section 11. Side and rear yards in residence districts.
A. Side yards. In a residence district, for every building hereafter erected,
there shall be a side yard along each lot line other than a street or rear line,
as follows:
1. In a Residence A District the width of each side yard for any building
other than a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or private club
shall be not less than eight (8) feet. For a two-family dwelling or private club
the width of each side yard shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet. For a
single-family dwelling the sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards shall
be not less than sixteen (16) feet, with a minimum width for either of such
side yards of four (4) feet.
2. In a Residence B District the width of each side yard for any building
other than a dwelling, private club, hotel, hospital, sanitarium, institutional
building or telephone exchange shall be not less than eight (8) feet. The
width of each side yard for a private club, hospital, sanitarium, institutional
building or telephone exchange shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet. The
sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for a single-family dwelling shall
be not less than twelve (12) feet. with a minimum width for either of such
side yards of four (4) feet. The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards
for a two-family dwelling shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet, with a
minimum width for either of such side yards of four (4) feet.
3. In a Residence C District the width of each side yard for any building
other than a detached dwelling shall be not less than eight (8) feet. For a
detached dwelling the sum of widths of the two (2) side yards shall be not
less than ten (10) feet, with a minimum width for either of such side yards of
four (4) feet.
B. Rear yards. In a residence district every building hereafter erected shall
have a rear yard. The depth of a rear yard shall be not less than twenty-five
(25) feet nor less than the height of the building.
C. Exceptions. The space in a side or rear yard shall be open and
unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt
courses, cornices and other ornamental features to the extent of not more
than four (4) inches, except that if the building is not over two and one-half
(2 1/2) stories in height, the cornice or eaves may project not more than
eighteen (18) inches into such yard. A building and any accessory building
erected on the same lot shall, for the purpose of side and rear yard
requirements, be considered as a single building, provided that twenty-five
percent (25%) of the area of the rear yard may be occupied by a private
garage or accessory building not over twelve (12) feet in height.
[Paragraph C, Exceptions, of Section 11 of the Zoning Ordinance, is hereby
modified to read as follows:
C. Exceptions. The space in a side or rear yard shall be open and
unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt
courses, cornices and other ornamental features to the extent of not more
than four (4) inches, except that if the building is not over two and one-half 
(2 1/2) stories in height, the cornice or eaves may project not more than
eighteen (18) inches into such yard. A building and any accessory building
erected on the same lot shall, for the purpose of side and rear yard
requirements, be considered as a single building, provided that twenty-five
percent (25%) of the area of the rear yard may be occupied by a private
garage or accessory building conforming with the architecture of dwelling
and the height, to be approved by the Town Clerk. (10-16-28)]
[The following is hereby added to Paragraph C, Exceptions, Section 11 of
the Bay Shore-Islip Zoning Ordinances: Nothing in this ordinance shall
prevent the building or construction of a joint garage composed of one (1) or
more compartments by two (2) adjoining property owners across their
common lot line. (10-23-29)]
Section 12. Front yards. Every building hereafter erected shall have a front
yard as indicated on the Zoning Map; and along all frontages in residence
districts along which no front yard line is shown on such map, front yards
shall be provided as follows:
1. The depth of the front yard measured back from the front line of the lot
shall be: twenty-five (25) feet if in a Residence A District, and fifteen (15)
feet if in a Residence B District or a Residence C District; provided that if
twenty-five percent (25%) of a block frontage is improved with buildings,
the front yard shall extend to the alignment of such existing buildings unless
such alignment is more than forty (40) feet back from such front line of the
lot if in a Residence A District or more than twenty-five (25) feet back from
such front line if in a Residence B or a Residence C District. A through lot
shall have a front yard on both frontages.
2. A corner lot shall have a front yard along its side street frontage as well as
along the front line of the lot as above provided. The depth of such front
yard back from the side line of the lot shall be two percent (2%) of the width
of the lot, but need not be more than twenty (20) feet if in a Residence A
District or more than ten (10) feet if in a Residence B District or a Residence
C District.
3. In a Residence A District, a one-story unenclosed extension or porch may
extend not to exceed ten (10) feet into the front yard. Cornices or eaves on
the main building may project not more than two (2) feet into the front yard.
4. On any corner lot on which a front yard is required by this ordinance, no
wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or
other growth shall be maintained in such location within such required front
yard space as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view.
Section 13. District boundaries. When definite distances in feet are not
shown on the Zoning Map, the district boundaries on the Zoning Map are
intended to be along existing street, alley or property lines, or extensions of
or from the same. When the location of a district boundary line is not
otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the map
measured from a given line. Where the street layout actually on the ground
varies from the street layout as shown on the Zoning Map, the Board of
Appeals may apply the designations shown on the mapped streets in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan for the particular area
in question.
Section 14. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Town
Clerk. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered within
the area covered by the Zoning Map until a permit authorizing the same shall
have been issued by the Town Clerk.
[Section 14 of the Islip-Bay Shore Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as
follows:
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, who shall be an
adjunct of the Islip Town Planning Board and shall come under the direct
supervision of the executive head of said Planning Board.
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered within the area
covered by the Zoning Map until a permit authorizing the same shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall require that the application for a building
permit and the accompanying plot plan contain all the information necessary
to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building complies with the
provisions of this ordinance. (12-23-31)]
Section 15. Board of Appeals. A. Organization. There shall be a Board of
Appeals consisting of five (5) members appointed by the Town Board. The 
Board of Appeals shall have the powers granted by and be controlled by the
provisions of Article 17-C, Section 349-u of the General Town Law.
B. Special exceptions. When in its judgment the public convenience and
welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of neighboring
property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of
Appeals may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the
regulations herein established as follows:
1. Permit the location of a special permit use as listed to Subdivision B of
Section 7 in any part of an industrial district.
2. Permit the location in any use district of a state or municipal building,
college building, hotel, boathouse, dock, wharf, bathhouse, public utility
plant, greenhouse, kennel, aviation field, crematory, cemetery, correctional
institution, sanitarium, hospital, sewage disposal or treatment plant, garbage
disposal plant, refuse dump, stonecutting plant, gravel or sand pit.
3. Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use,
or permit the extension of a nonconforming use or building upon the lot
occupied by such use or building at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
4. Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted district
immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than fifty (50) feet beyond the
boundary line of the district in which such building or use is authorized.
5. Grant in undeveloped sections of the town temporary and conditional
permits for not more than two-year periods for any structure or use.
6. Permit in any district such modification of the requirements of these
regulations as said Board may deem necessary to secure an appropriate
development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on two (2) or more sides
there are buildings that do not conform to these regulations.
7. Permit such modification of the yard or lot area or lot width regulations as
may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a parcel of land
where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the passage of this
ordinance and is of such restricted area that it cannot be appropriately
improved without such modification.
8. Permit the location in a residence district of any use authorized in a
business district; provided there shall be on file with the said Board the
consents, duly signed and acknowledged, of the owners of eighty percent
(80%) of the area of all the lands within such district as the said Board shall
have determined to be specially affected by such proposed use or structure.
9. Permit the erection of a building or portion of a building covering not
more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lot to a height not more
than fifty (50) feet in excess of the limits prescribed in Section 9 hereof.
10. Permit the location in a business district of a lumberyard or of a dockbuilding plant.
Section 16. Interpretation: purpose. In interpreting and applying the
provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience or the general welfare. The lot or yard areas required by this
ordinance for a particular building shall not be diminished and shall not be
included as a part of the required lot or yard areas of any other building. If
the lot or yard areas required by this ordinance for a particular building are
diminished, the continued existence of such building shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. The lot or yard areas of buildings existing at the
time of the passage of this ordinance shall not be diminished below the
requirements herein provided for buildings hereafter erected, and such
required areas shall not be included as a part of the required areas of any
building hereafter erected. This ordinance shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or
in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or
ordinance or any rules or regulations previously adopted or issued or which
shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises; provided that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or
requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by such existing
provisions or regulations, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
Section 17. Completion of existing buildings. Nothing herein contained shall
require any change in the plans, construction or designed use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and
which entire building shall be completed within one (1) year from the date of
the passage of this ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall require any 
change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a
building permit has been heretofore issued and which entire building shall be
completed within one (1) year from the date of the passage of this ordinance.
If an amendment to this ordinance is hereafter adopted incorporating
additional areas in the Zoning Map or changing the boundaries of districts,
the provisions of this ordinance with regard to buildings or premises existing
or buildings under construction or building permits issued at the time of the
passage of this ordinance shall apply to buildings or premises existing or
buildings under construction or building permits issued in the area affected
by such amendment at the time of the passage of amendment.
Section 18. Penalty for violation. Any person or corporation who shall
violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved
hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.), and each day such violation shall
be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or
owners of any building or premises or part thereof where anything in
violation of this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection
therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such
violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as herein provided.
Section 19. Definitions. Certain words in this ordinance are defined for the
purpose hereof as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word "lot" includes the
word "plot"; the word "building" includes any structure other than a
boundary fence or wall.
2. The "street line" is the dividing line between the street and the lot.
3. The "established grade" is the elevation of the street grade as fixed by the
town.
4. The "height of a building" is the vertical distance measured at the center
line of its principal front from the established grade or from the average 
ground level of the portion of the lot adjoining and within ten (10) feet of the
building, where it sets back from the street line ten (10) feet or more, to the
level of the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs inclining
not more than one (1) inch to the foot, and the mean height level of the top
of the main plate and the highest ridge in the case of other roofs. Where
there are structures wholly or partly above the roof, the height shall be
measured to the level of the highest point of the building, including such
structures wholly or partly above the roof.
5. A "rear yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot.
6. A "front yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, between the front line of the building and the front line of the lot.
7. A "side yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending through from the street or from the front yard to the rear yard or to
the rear line of the lot. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be
deemed a side line.
8. A "lot" is a parcel of land occupied or designed to be occupied by one (1)
building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it,
including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be used in
connection with such building. A lot may be or may not be the land shown
as a lot on a duly recorded plot.
9. A "family" is any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking upon the premises.
10. A "dwelling" is a building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied
by not more than two (2) families living independently of each other and
doing their cooking upon the premises.
11. An "apartment house" is a building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other
and doing their cooking upon the premises, or by three (3) or more
individuals or groups of individuals living independently by having a
common heating system and a general dining room, or by two (2) or more
families above the first story so living and cooking.
12. A "public notice" of a hearing or proceeding means notice of the time
and place thereof printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Islip for three (3) days, the first publication of which shall be at least ten
(10) days prior to the time of the hearing.
[Paragraph 12 of Section 19 is amended to read as follows:
A "public notice" of a hearing or proceeding means notice of the time and
place thereof printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Islip for two (2) days, the first publication of which shall be at least ten (10)
days prior to the time of the hearing. (10-16-28)]
13. An "accessory use of building" is a subordinate use or building
customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main use of
building.
Section 20. Validity of ordinance. If any section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance
as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to
be invalid and unconstitutional.
Section 21. When effective. This ordinance shall take effect May 1, 1928.
Part 2
Amended Zoning Ordinance of February 23, 1932
ARTICLE I
Definitions
1. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural, and vice versa; the word "lot" includes the word "plot,"
and the word "building" includes any structure other than a boundary fence
or wall; and the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "occupied"
includes the phrase "arranged, designed or intended to be occupied," and the
word "used" includes the phrase "arranged, designed or intended to be used."
[In Paragraph 1 of Article I, omit the word "intended" in the phrase
"arranged, designed or intended." (1-10-39)]
[In Paragraph 1 of Article I, add the following language after "boundary
fence or wall": ",but shall not include a board-walk giving access to a
structure in a Residence BAA District, provided said boardwalk is not more
than four (4) feet in width and not closer to any side line than four (4) feet."
(8-23-60)]
2. The "height of a building" is the vertical distance from the main level of
the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest
and lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires, towers,
elevator penthouses, tanks and similar permitted projections shall not be
included in the height.
3. A "front yard" is the open space between the street line and the nearest
part of any building.
4. A "rear yard" is the open space on the same lot with the main buildings,
between the rear line of said buildings and the rear line of the lot.
5. A "side yard" is the open space on the same lot with the main buildings,
situated between the buildings and the side line of the lot and extending
through from the street or from the front yard to the rear yard of the lot. Any
lot line not a street line or a rear line shall be deemed a side line.
6. A "family" is any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit, doing their cooking upon the premises.
7. A "single-family dwelling" is a building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied exclusively as a home or residence for not more than one (1)
family.
[In Paragraph 7 of Article I, omit the word "intended" in the phrase
"arranged, designed or intended." (1-10-39)]
[Amend Paragraph 7 of Article I to read as follows:
7. A "single-family dwelling" is a building arranged or designed to be
occupied exclusively as a home or residence for not more than one (1) 
family. A trailer, tent, shelter or similar unit shall be considered, for the
purpose of this ordinance, as a single-family dwelling. (8-27-40)]
8. A "two-family dwelling" is a building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied exclusively as a home or residence for not more than two (2)
families.
[In Paragraph 8 of Article I, omit the word "intended" in the phrase
"arranged, designed or intended." (1-10-39)]
9. An "apartment house" is a building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other
and doing their cooking upon the premises, or by three (3) or more
individuals or group of individuals living independently but having a
common heating system and a general dining room, or by two (2) or more
families above the ground story so living and cooking.
[In Paragraph 9 of Article I, omit the word "intended" in the phrase
"arranged, designed or intended." (1-10-39)]
[Amend Paragraph 9 of Article I by adding at the end the following:
"Garden apartments." as the words are used in this ordinance, mean a group
of detached or attached apartment houses not more than two (2) stories in
height. For the purpose of front yard setbacks, side yard and rear yard, such
"garden apartments" may be treated as a single unit, providing site plans
showing location of structures, parking facilities, drainage facilities,
screening and fencing are approved by the Town Board. (1-3-61)]
10. A "private garage" is a building used for the storage of automobiles
owned and used by the occupants of the lot upon which it is erected for a
purpose accessory to the use of the lot and for the storage of not more than
two (2) additional automobiles (not trucks) owned and used by others for a
similar purpose if they are stored in the same room in which the automobiles
of the occupants are stored. No business occupation or service connected in
any way with motor vehicles shall be permitted in a private garage. The
same provisions shall apply to a "private stable," except that one (1) horse
and one (1) wagon shall be considered as equivalent to one (1) automobile.
[The first sentence of Paragraph 10 of Article I is amended by the addition
of the following words after "two (2) additional automobiles (not trucks)":
"one (1) of which may be a commercial vehicle of not more than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds' carrying capacity." (7-23-57)]
11. A "public garage" is a building one (1) or more stories in height used for
the storage and repair of automobiles and trucks.
[Paragraph 11 of Article I is amended to read as follows:
11. A "public garage" is a building one (1) or more stories in height used
either for the storage or repair of automobiles and trucks. (2-26-57)]
12. All "frontages," "depths," "widths" and "areas" shall be net, measured to
or from the sides of streets, alleys or rights-of-way.
13. "Farming" includes the cultivation of land and all uses accessory thereto,
including the sale at retail on the premises of products raised on the
premises.
[Paragraph 13 of Article I is amended to read:
13. "Farming" includes the cultivation of land, together with animal
husbandry and all uses accessory thereto, including the sale at retail on the
premises of products raised on the premises. (7-20-32)]
[Strike out all of Paragraph 13 of Article I entitled "Farming." (9-10-35)]
14. A "public notice" of a hearing or proceeding means notice of the time
and place thereof printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Islip for three (3) days, the first publication of which shall be at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the time of the hearing.
[Amend Paragraph 14 of Article I to read as follows:
14. A "public notice" of a hearing or proceeding means notice of the time
and place thereof printed in two (2) or more newspapers of general
circulation in the Town of Islip for two (2) or more times, the first
publication of which shall be at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time of the
hearing. (7-10-34; renumbered Paragraph 13, 9-10-35)]
[Strike out all of Paragraph 13 of Article I entitled "public notice." (3-22-
38)]
15. An "accessory use" or "accessory building" is a subordinate use or
building customarily incident to and located upon the same lot occupied by
the main building. (Renumbered Paragraph 14, 9-10-35; renumbered
Paragraph 13, 3-22-38)
16. The "building area" is the aggregate of the maximum cross-sectional
area of the buildings on the lot, excluding cornices, eaves or gutter
projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches, steps, open terraces or other
features of an ornamental character. (Renumbered Paragraph 15, 9-10-35;
renumbered Paragraph 14, 3-22-38)
[Add a new Paragraph 16 to Article I to read as follows:
16. "Advertising signs," as the words are used in this ordinance, mean only
those signs, structures, advertising medium or devices which advertise or
call attention to any business, article, product or service sold or dispensed on
the premises where such sign is located. (9-10-35; renumbered Paragraph
15, 3-22-38)]
[Add new Paragraph 17 to Article I to read as follows:
17. "Commercial billboard," as the words are used in this ordinance, means
any outdoor sign, advertising medium, structure or device which advertises,
directs or calls attention to any business, article, substance, service, or any
other thing which is painted, printed, pasted, posted or affixed to any
building, billboard, wall, fence, railing, natural object or structure of any
kind on real property or upon the ground itself. (9-10-35; renumbered
Paragraph 16, 3-22-38) ]
[Revise Paragraph 16 of Article I to read:
16. "Commercial billboard," as the words are used in this ordinance, means
any outdoor sign attached to a pole or post or posts safely embedded in the
ground, which is larger than an advertising sign. (6-3-58)]
[Add a new Paragraph 17 to Article I to read as follows:
17. "Boardinghouse" and "lodging house," as the words are used in this
ordinance, mean a dwelling in which five (5) or more paying guests are
boarded or lodged. (1-10-39)]
[Amend Paragraph 17 of Article I to read as follows:
17. "Boardinghouse," "furnished-room house," "rooming house" or "tourist
house" means a multiple dwelling in which there are less than thirty (30)
sleeping rooms occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with or
without meals, and in which there are provided such services as are
incidental to its use as a temporary residence; also, a dwelling occupied by
one (1) or two (2) families with five (5) or more transient boarders, roomers
or lodgers in one (1) or both households. (8-23-60)]
[Add a new Paragraph 18 to Article I to read as follows:
18. A "dog kennel," as the words are used in this ordinance, means a group
of four (4) or more dogs of license age. (1-10-39)]
[Add a new Paragraph 19 to Article I to read as follows;
19. "Facial sign," as the words are used in this ordinance, means a sign the
back of which is against or toward the wall of a building to which it is
affixed. (6-11-46)]
[Insert the word "entire" between the words "the" and "back" in Paragraph
19 of Article I. (6-3-58)]
[Add a new Paragraph 20 to Article I to read as follows:
20. "Directional sign," as the words are used in this ordinance, means only
those signs, structures, advertising mediums or devices which point towards
or otherwise indicate the location of a designated business. (1-8-52)]
[Add a new Paragraph 21 to Article I to read as follows:
21. A "motel" is a one-story building or series of one-story buildings
arranged or designed to be occupied as sleeping quarters without any
cooking facilities therein, containing adequate sleeping and sanitary 
accommodations, with parking facilities sufficient to accommodate one (1)
automobile for each sleeping unit. (6-15-54)]
[Add a new Paragraph 22 to Article I to read as follows:
22. "Storage," as used herein, means the safekeeping of goods and
merchandise to await the happening of some future event or contingency
which will call for the removal of the goods or merchandise, and does not
apply to goods or merchandise for immediate sale or disposal. (9-11-56;
renumbered Paragraph 24, 6-3-58)]
[Add a new Paragraph 22 to Article I to read as follows:
22. A "vending machine" is an automatic mechanical device which
dispenses articles or materials of value to the public and which is activated
by the insertion of a coin, coins, token or tokens. It shall include a telephone
or telephone booth. (1-29-57)]
[Add the word "not" to the last sentence of Paragraph 22 of Article I so that
it shall read: "It shall not include a telephone or telephone booth." (12-8-59)]
[Add a new Paragraph 23 to Article I to read as follows:
23. A "farmers' market" is any building, structure or area in which more than
five (5) transient or part-time vendors offer for sale to the public, goods,
wares, merchandise or foods; or any building, structure or area in which
goods, wares, merchandise or foods are offered for sale by more than three
(3) vendors to the public for a total number of hours per week which is less
than the total number of hours per week which permanent vendors of
comparable goods, wares, merchandise or foods offer to the public; or any
building, structure or area in which sales to the public by more than three (3)
vendors are contemplated on less than five (5) full business days per week.
(5-7-57)]
[Add a new Paragraph 25 to Article I to read as follows:
25. A "sun deck" is a structure that is elevated more than six (6) inches
above the adjacent grade and is not more than four (4) feet above the
adjacent grade, is more than four (4) feet in width, is without a roof or wall
and is designed as an accessory use to a dwelling. It shall not be considered 
for the purpose of lot occupancy in a BAA Residence District. No part of a
sun deck shall be closer than five (5) feet to any side yard property line or
fifteen (15) feet from any or either front yard property line or rear yard
property line. (10-18-60)]
[Add a new Paragraph 28 to Article I to read as follows:
28. An "apartment" or "suite" is that portion of a dwelling consisting of one
(1) or more living rooms and occupied by the members of a family, which
group of rooms is separated from all other groups within a dwelling. (8-23-
60)]
[Amend Paragraph 28 of Article I to change "apartment" or "suite" to
"apartment, suite or unit." (10-23-62)]
[Add a new Paragraph 29 to Article I to read as follows:
29. A "hotel" is a dwelling in which there are thirty (30) or more sleeping
rooms in one (1) building or structure occupied primarily by transients who
are lodged with or without meals, and there are provided such services as are
incidental to the use thereof as a temporary residence. (8-23-60)]
[Add a new Paragraph 30 to Article I to read as follows:
30. An "off-street parking area" is the area of a lot or building used or
designed to be used for the purpose of accessory parking of vehicles. Such
area shall be on or part of the same lot on which the principal use is located.
(8-23-60)]
[Add a new Paragraph 31 to Article I to read as follows:
31. A "parking space" is the space required for each motor vehicle intended
or required to be parked in an off-street parking area. Each parking space
shall have an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, and in
addition thereto there shall be provided such space as is reasonably
necessary for adequate ingress, egress and turning. The formula for
providing an adequate parking area is an area of three hundred fifty (350)
square feet per required motor vehicle unit. (8-23-60)]
ARTICLE II
Districts
For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Islip, outside of incorporated
villages, is hereby divided into six (6) districts which shall be designated as
follows:
Residence A-A Districts
Residence A Districts
Residence B Districts
Residence C Districts
Business Districts
Industrial Districts
[Article II, Districts, is amended to read as follows:
For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Islip, outside of incorporated
villages, is hereby divided into seven (7) districts which shall be designated
as follows:
Residence A-A District
Residence B-A-A District
Residence A District
Residence B District
Residence C District
Business Districts
Industrial Districts
(12-13-49)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended to read as follows:
For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Islip, outside of the limits of
incorporated villages, is hereby divided into eight (8) districts which shall be
designated as follows:
Residence B-A-A Districts
Residence A-A Districts
Residence A Districts
Residence B Districts
Residence C Districts
Residence D Districts
Business Districts
Industrial Districts
(6-26-52)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended to read:
For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Islip, outside of the limits of
incorporated villages, is hereby divided into eleven (11) districts which shall
be classified in rank from highest to lowest as follows:
a. Residence B-A-A Districts.
b. Residence A-A Districts.
c. Residence A Districts.
d. Residence B Districts.
e. Residence C Districts.
f. Residence D Districts.
g. Business Districts.
h. Business 1 Districts.
i. Business 2 Districts.
j. Business 3 Districts.
k. Industrial Districts.
(9-11-56)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended by changing the word "eleven" to "twelve"
and changing "k. Industrial Districts" to "k. Industrial 1 District. 1. Industrial
2 District." (3-12-57)]
[All existing parcels of land presently zoned "Industrial" shall, upon the
effective date of this amendment, become "Industrial 1 District." (3-12-57,
effective 4-1-57)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended by changing the word "twelve" to "sixteen"
and using the following terminology immediately following a-1 (d) in place
of the language now used:
e. Residence CAA Districts.
f. Residence CA Districts.
g. General Service C Districts.
h. General Service D Districts.
i. General Service E Districts.
j. General Service F Districts.
k. Business Districts.
l. Business 1 Districts.
m. Business 2 Districts.
n. Business 3 Districts.
o. Industrial 1 Districts.
p. Industrial 2 Districts.
(8-23-60)]
[All presently zoned Residence C and Residence D property is changed to
Residence CAA District. (8-23-60)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended by changing the word "sixteen" to
"seventeen" and using the following terminology immediately following 1
(c) in place of the language now used:
d. Residence AB Districts.
e. Residence B Districts.
f. Residence CAA Districts.
g. Residence CA Districts.
h. General Service C Districts.
i. General Service D Districts.
j. General Service E Districts.
k. General Service F Districts.
l. Business Districts.
m. Business 1 Districts.
n. Business 2 Districts.
o. Business 3 Districts.
p. Industrial 1 Districts.
q. Industrial 2 Districts.
(10-18-60)]
[Article II. Districts,1
 is amended to read:
1 Editor's Note: This amendment, which was adopted 9-19-61 and readopted
10-17-61, recited that the amendments to the Revised Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Islip, as it existed on June 18, 1956, were made so as to bring
the ordinance into conformity with the "Revised Zoning Ordinance, Town of
Islip, 1961," dated January 21, 1961.
1. For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Islip, outside of the limits
of incorporated villages, is hereby divided into seventeen (17) districts
which shall be classified in rank from highest to lowest as follows:
a. Residence B-A-A Districts.
b. Residence AA Districts.
c. Residence A Districts.
d. Residence AB Districts.
e. Residence B Districts.
f. Residence CAA Districts.
g. Residence CA Districts.
h. General Service C Districts.
i. General Service D Districts.
j. General Service E Districts.
k. General Service F Districts.
l. Business Districts.
m. Business 1 Districts.
n. Business 2 Districts.
o. Business 3 Districts.
p. Industrial 1 Districts.
q. Industrial 2 Districts.
(9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[Article II. Districts, is amended by changing the word "seventeen" to
"eighteen" and using the following terminology immediately following 1 in
place of the language now used:
a. Residence AAA Districts.
b. Residence BAA Districts.
c. Residence AA Districts.
d. Residence A Districts.
e. Residence AB Districts.
f. Residence B Districts.
g. Residence CAA Districts.
h. Residence CA Districts.
i. General Service C Districts.
j. General Service D Districts.
k. General Service E Districts.
l. General Service F Districts.
m. Business Districts.
n. Business 1 Districts.
o. Business 2 Districts.
p. Business 3 Districts.
q. Industrial 1 Districts.
r. Industrial 2 Districts.
(9-25-62)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended as follows:
a. Residence AAA Districts.
b. Residence B-A-A Districts.
c. Residence AA Districts.
d. Residence A Districts.
e. Residence AB Districts.
f. Residence B Districts.
g. Residence CAA Districts.
h. Residence CA Districts.
i. General Service C Districts.
j. General Service D Districts.
k. General Service E Districts.
l. General Service F Districts.
m. Recreation Service G Districts.
n. Business Districts.
o. Business 1 Districts.
p. Business 2 Districts.
q. Business 3 Districts.
r. Industrial 1 Districts.
s. Industrial 2 Districts.
(9-8-64)]
[Article II, Districts, is amended as follows:
a. Residence AAA Districts.
b. Residence B-A-A Districts.
c. Residence AA Districts.
d. Residence A Districts.
e. Residence AB Districts.
f. Residence B Districts.
g. Residence C Districts.
h. Residence CAA Districts.
i. Residence CA Districts.
j. General Service C Districts.
k. General Service D Districts.
l. General Service E Districts.
m. General Service F Districts.
n. Recreation Service G Districts.
o. Business Districts.
p. Business 1 Districts.
q. Business 2 Districts.
r. Business 3 Districts.
s. Industrial 1 Districts.
t. Industrial 2 Districts.
(9-7-66)]
ARTICLE III
Boundaries of Districts
The boundaries of the districts shall be as shown upon the map attached to
and made a part of this ordinance, entitled "Town of Islip. Suffolk County,
New York, Amended Zoning Map."
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either
along the boundary lines of various properties and lots or the center lines of
streets or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended or lines parallel
thereto. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street line
and a district boundary line, they indicate the distance therefrom equivalent
to the number of feet so indicated. When the location of a district boundary 
line is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the
map measured from a given line; where the street layout actually on the
ground varies from the street layout as shown on the Zoning Map, the
designations shown on the mapped street shall be applied in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance for the particular area in
question. Lands lying underwater shall be considered as being in the same
district as the abutting upland.
ARTICLE IV
Application of Regulations
Zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are approved and
established. The Amended Zoning Map which accompanies this ordinance is
hereby declared to be a part hereof, and all notations, references, etc., shown
thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein.
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered except in conformity with this ordinance. No building or
land shall be used for any trade, industry or purpose that is noxious or
offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise,
etc., or that is detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of
the community.
[Zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are approved and
established.
The Amended Zoning Map which accompanies this ordinance is hereby
declared to be a part thereof, and all notations, references, etc., shown
thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein.
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered except in conformity with this ordinance. Excepting,
however, that on tracts of land devoted to a particular use at the time of the
passage of this ordinance, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or
restrict the continuance of such use nor to prohibit the construction,
extension, alteration or repair of buildings on such tracts of land, provided
such buildings or extensions are accessory to such use and are located more
than three hundred (300) feet from any public street or from any other
property in a different ownership. No building or land shall be used for any
trade, industry or purpose that is noxious or offensive by reason of the 
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise, etc., or that is detrimental
to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community, (7-20-32)]
ARTICLE V
Permitted Uses
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for
other than one (1) or more of the following uses, with the provisions that:
(1) Additional dwellings and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that the housing density, percentage of lot occupancy and
other requirements are not exceeded; and that
(2) The uses permitted in any district shall also be applicable to a district of a
lower classification.
[The first paragraph of Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended to read:
1. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for
other than one (1) or more of the following uses, with the provisions that:
(1) Additional dwellings and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that the housing density, percentage of lot occupancy and
other requirements are not exceeded; and that
(2) The uses permitted in any district shall be applicable to a district of a
lower classification, except as otherwise provided herein. (5-8-56)]
[Subdivision (2) of the first paragraph of Article V, Permitted Uses, is
amended as follows:
After the clause "The uses permitted in any district shall also be applicable
to a district of a lower classification," change the period to a comma and add
the words "except that the uses permitted in a Business District shall not be
permitted in a Business 1 or Business 2 District unless hereafter specifically
included therein." (9-11-56)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended to read as follows up to "Industrial 1
District." Industrial 1 District and Industrial 2 District to be unchanged:
1. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for
other than one (1) or more of the following uses, with the provision that:
(1) Additional dwellings and accessory buildings may be erected on the
same lot, provided that the housing density, percentage of lot occupancy and
other requirements are not exceeded; and that
(2) The uses permitted in any district shall be applicable to a district of a
lower classification, except as otherwise provided herein, except that the
uses permitted in a Business District shall not be permitted in a Business 1
or Business 2 District unless hereafter specifically included therein. (9-19-
61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[After the first paragraph of Article V, Permitted Uses, add a new paragraph
to read as follows:
For the purpose of this ordinance the various use districts shall be classified
in rank from highest to lowest as follows:
1. Residence B-A-A.
2. Residence A-A.
3. Residence A.
4. Residence B.
5. Residence C.
6. Residence D.
7. Business.
8. Industrial.
(3-1-56)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended by the deletion of the following
words:
For the purpose of this ordinance the various use districts shall be classified
in rank from highest to lowest as follows:
1. Residence B-A-A.
2. Residence A-A.
3. Residence A.
4. Residence B.
5. Residence C.
6. Residence D.
7. Business.
8. Industrial.
(3-12-57)]
Residence A-A:
Single-family dwelling.
Church; school; college; library.
Public museum; community building.
Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards.
Private club, fraternity or lodge, except those of which the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
Farming, nurseries, gardens, orchards; except that greenhouses and
dairies shall not be considered as accessory buildings. No farms on which
chickens, ducks, game birds, pigs or other fowl and animals are raised or
kept, except for the sole use of the occupant, shall be allowed; and provided
that there is no display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the
premises.
Park, playground, public recreation building.
Golf course, polo field.
[The sixth paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses, is
amended to read as follows:
Farming (excluding duck farms), nurseries, gardens, orchards, dairies and
noncommercial greenhouses; provided there is no display for commercial
purposes or advertisement on the premises; and further provided that all
greenhouses having heating plants be at least twenty (20) feet from any side
or rear line. (7-20-32)]
[The sixth paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses, is
amended in part to read as follows:
Agriculture, nurseries, gardens, orchards, noncommercial greenhouses,
noncommercial poultry farms, including a small temporary roadside stand
for sale at retail of products raised on the premises; provided there is no
display for commercial purposes, etc. (7-16-40)]
[The second paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses, is
amended by placing the word "public" in front of the word "school" and
eliminating the word "college." (10-24-44)]
[Add a new paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses, to
read as follows:
Laboratories to engage in pure and technological research and development.
(10-22-46)]
[In third paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses,
eliminate the words "Public museum" and substitute the words "Municipal
museum." (11-12-46)]
[In seventh paragraph under Residence A-A in Article V, Permitted Uses,
eliminate the word "public" and substitute the word "municipal." (11-12-46)]
Residence A:
Two-family dwelling.
[Under Residence A in Article V, Permitted Uses, delete the words
"Farming (excluding duck farms), nurseries, gardens, orchards, dairies and
noncommercial greenhouses," and replace with the words "Agriculture,
nurseries, gardens, orchards, non-commercial greenhouses, noncommercial
poultry farms." (9-10-35)]
[Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip, prohibiting the
erection of two-family dwellings in a Residence A District except by special
permit, to be granted by the Board of Appeals, where plot area exceeds nine
thousand (9,000) square feet and the lot width is eighty (80) feet or more. (4-
14-36)]
[Residence A in Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended by placing the word
"public" in front of the word "school" and eliminating the word "college."
(10-24-44)]
[Add a new paragraph under Residence A in Article V, Permitted Uses, to
read as follows:
Laboratories to engage in pure and technological research and development.
(10-22-46)]
[Article V. Permitted Uses, shall be amended to read:
No building or land shall.......... a lower classification.
Residence A-A, B-A-A, A:
Single-family dwelling.
Church, public school, library, municipal museum, community
building, railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including
railway yards. Private club, fraternity or lodge, except those of which the
chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
Agriculture, nurseries, gardens, orchards, noncommercial
greenhouses, noncommercial poultry farms, including a small temporary
roadside stand for the sale at retail of products raised on the premises;
provided there is no display for commercial purposes or advertisement on
the premises; and further provided that all greenhouses having heating plants
be at least twenty (20) feet from any side or rear line.
Park, playground, municipal recreation building, golf course, polo
field, laboratories to engage in pure and technological research and
development.
Residence B ................ etc. (12-13-49)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, after the first paragraph, is amended to read as
follows:
Residence B-A-A:
Single-family dwelling.
Church, public school or library, municipal or community building.
Private club, fraternity or lodge, when approved by the Board of
Appeals, except those of which the chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business.
Park, playground or municipal recreation building, telephone
exchange where no commercial office, repair or storage facilities are
maintained. (6-26-52)]
[Delete from Article V. Permitted Uses, under Residence B-A-A, the words
"when approved by the Board of Appeals," with reference to "Private club,
fraternity or lodge," and substitute therefor the words "when approved by the
Town Board." (5-31-55)]
Residence B:
Hotel, boardinghouse, lodging house.
Philanthropie institutions, other than a penal or correctional
institution.
Hospital or sanitarium.
Telephone exchange where no public business office and no repair
and storage facilities are maintained.
Fire station.
Water supply reservoir, well, tower or filter beds.
School or college stadium.
Farming, nursery, gardens, orchards; except that green-houses and
dairies shall not be considered as accessory buildings.
[In the last paragraph under Residence B, Permitted Uses, Article V,
"Farming, nurseries, gardens, etc.," shall be omitted from the ordinance. (7-
20-32)]
[Amend Article V of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip, under the
caption "Residence B," by adding the words "Pumping equipment and
appurtenances and pump structures." (6-12-34)]
[Residence A-A. Residence A and Residence B:
Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards.
Agriculture, nurseries, gardens, orchards, noncommercial
greenhouses, noncommercial poultry farms, including a small, temporary
roadside stand for sale at retail of products raised on the premises, provided
there is no display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the
premises; and further provided that all greenhouses having heating plants 
have the smokestack at least fifty (50) feet from any side or rear line.
Agricultural pursuits enumerated under Article XVIII, Section 2 of this
ordinance require a permit from the Board of Appeals.
Golf course, polo field.
Laboratories to engage in pure and technological research and
development.
Automobile parking fields when authorized by the Town Board after
public hearing.
Marine wharf for pleasure craft only when authorized by the Town
Board after public hearing, provided there is no repair work or sale of any
products on the premises. (6-26-52)]
[Add the following words in Article V, Permitted Uses, at the end of the
present uses following Residence B-A-A, A-A, A and B: "Public utility
where no commercial office, repair or storage facilities are maintained, when
approved as a special exception by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Article
XVIII, Revised Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip." [5-31-60)]
[Amend Article V, Permitted Uses, by rewording the heading following (2)
of Residence B-A-A, A-A, A and B, to read as follows: "Residence B-A-A,
A-A, A, A-B and B." (10-18-60)]
[Amend Article V, Permitted Uses, as follows:
Residence B-A-A, A-A, A, A-B and B:
Single-family dwelling.
Church, public school or library, municipal or community building.
Private club, fraternity or lodge when approved by the Town Board,
except those of which the chief activity is a service customarily carried on as
a business.
Park, playground or municipal recreation building.
Telephone exchange where no commercial office, repair or storage
facilities are maintained.
Railway right-of-way or passenger station, but not including railway
yards.
Agriculture, nurseries, gardens, orchards, noncommercial greenhouse,
noncommercial poultry farms, including a small, temporary roadside stand
for sale at retail of products raised on the premises, provided there is no
display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the premises; and
further provided that all greenhouses having heating plants have the
smokestack at least fifty (50) feet from any side or rear line. Agricultural
pursuits enumerated under Article XVIII, Section 2 of this ordinance require
a permit from the Board of Appeals.
Golf course, polo field.
Laboratories to engage in pure and technological research and
development.
Automobile parking fields when authorized by the Town Board after
public hearing.
Marine wharf for pleasure craft only when authorized by the Town
Board after public hearing, provided there is no repair work or sale of any
products on the premises.
Public utility where no commercial office, repair or storage facilities
are maintained, when approved as a special exception by the Board of
Appeals pursuant to Article XVIII. Revised Zoning Ordinance of the Town
of Islip. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[Amend Article V. Permitted Uses, by rewording the heading "Residence BA-A, A-A, A and B," to read as follows: "Residence A-A-A, B-A-A, A A.
A, A-B and B." (9-25-62)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended at Paragraph 1 (2), by the insertion
of the following boldface words: Marine wharf or private club mooring
wharf for pleasure craft only when authorized by the Town Board after 
public hearing, provided there is no repair work or sale of any products other
than petroleum products on the premises. (5-5-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, amend last paragraph to read: "Private
membership club, fraternity or lodge when approved by the Town Board
after a public hearing, provided, however, no use shall be permitted when
conducted for gain, profit or as a commercial enterprise." (9-8-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Section 1 (2), delete fifth paragraph, "Golf
course, polo field." (9-8-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, at end of sentence commencing "Marine
wharf or private club mooring wharf," add:
"A temporary office for not more than two (2) doctors may be maintained in
an existing one-family dwelling in Residence District A-A or A when
authorized, after a public hearing, by the Town Board; provided, however:
a) No authorization shall be granted for period of more than three (3)
years;
b) A plot plan shall be filed with the Chief Building Inspector for
approval, showing:
1. Adequate off-street parking;
2. Self-contained drainage;
3. Control of egress and ingress by curbs and curb cuts;
4. Screen planting as required.
c) The minimum required width of lot shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
d) The minimum required plot area shall be eleven thousand two
hundred fifty (11,250) square feet.
e) A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be procured from the
Building Department for such temporary office use and occupancy." (11-24-
64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, add after paragraph authorizing doctor's office
in residence zone: "Cemetery, crematory, only when authorized by the Town
Board after a public hearing." (1-18-66)]
Residence C:
Apartment house.
[Amend Article V, Permitted Uses, under Residence C, by adding the
following: "Office buildings for doctors, dentists and allied professions
where no goods are sold." (3-14-50)]
[Residence C:
Two-family dwelling.
Boarding or lodging house.
Philanthropie institutions, other than a penal or correctional
institution.
Nursing home, hospital or sanitarium. (6-26-52)]
[Residence D:
Apartment house or hotel, medical center or professional building,
when authorized by the Town Board after public hearing, provided adequate
sanitary and parking facilities are provided on the premises. (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article V, Permitted Uses, by adding thereto under Residence D
after the words "professional building," the words "mortuary or undertaking
parlor." (6-8-54)]
[Amend Article V, Permitted Uses, by inserting under Residence D after the
words "Apartment house or hotel," the word "motel," and by adding the
following paragraph: "Plans and specifications for any use as above set forth
must be presented to the Town Board at the time of the public hearing." (6-
15-54)]
[Amend Article V. Permitted Uses, by inserting in Section D the following
clause: "House trailer camps, tourist camps and house trailers and similar
establishments." (5-10-55)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, amend Section 1, Paragraph 2, in part as
follows before paragraph entitled "Residence C-A-A," by adding the
following paragraph:
"Residence C:
One-family dwellings, attached. Such use to be allowed in no other
district." (6-7-66)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended by replacing the present language in
Residence C and Residence D with the following language, it being intended
to redefine the permitted uses in Residence C and Residence D to create
additional zones as indicated: (8-23-60)]
[Residence C-A-A:
Two-family dwelling. (8-23-60, readopted 9-19-61 and 10-17-61)]
[Residence C-A:
Apartment house, boarding or lodging house. (8-23-60)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, under Residence C-A, add the words "or
garden apartments" after the words "Apartment house." (1-3-61)]
[Residence C-A:
Apartment house or garden apartments, boarding or lodging house. (9-
19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[Add the following boldface words to Article V, Permitted Uses, Residence
C-A, so as to read:
"Residence C-A:
Apartment house or garden apartments, boarding or lodging house.
Such use to be allowed in no other district." (3-20-62)]
[General Service C:
Nursing home, hospital or sanitarium, philanthropic institution other
than a penal or correctional institution. (8-23-60, readopted 9-19-61 and 10-
17-61)]
[Amend General Service C:
Nursing home, hospital or sanitarium, philanthropic institution other than a
penal or correctional institution. Said section to be amended by adding the
words "rest home" after "Nursing home." (8-10-65)]
[General Service D:
Medical center or professional building, mortuary or undertaking
parlor. (8-23-60, readopted 9-19-61 and 10-17-61)]
[General Service E:
Hotel, motel or boatel. (8-23-60, readopted 9-19-61 and 10-17-61)]
[General Service F:
House trailer camps, tourist camps. (8-23-60)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended by adding the boldface words in the
following sentence:
"General Service F:
House trailer camps and tourist camps shall be permitted in this
district only and in no other district." (10-18-60)]
[General Service F:
House trailer camps and tourist camps shall be permitted in this
district only and in no other district. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, General Service F, is amended by deleting the
words "and tourist camps." (8-27-63)]
[It is also intended to rezone all existing Residential C and D property to the
newly created Residence C-A-A District. Any nonconforming use created by
such action shall lose such nonconformity unless a written claim of the
nonconformity, stating the nature and extent of such nonconformity, is filed
with the Town Clerk within one (1) year of the effective date of passage of
this amendment. (8-23-60)]
[All presently zoned Residence C and Residence D property is changed to
Residence C-A-A District. (8-23-60)]
[Article V. Permitted Uses, is amended by deleting the following language:
"Any nonconforming use created by such action shall lose such
nonconformity unless a written claim of the nonconformity, stating the
nature and extent of such nonconformity, is filed with the Town Clerk within
one (1) year of the effective date of the passage of this amendment." (10-18-
60)]
[It is also intended to rezone all existing Residential C and D property to the
newly created Residence C-A-A District. All presently zoned Residence C
and Residence D property is changed to Residence C-A-A District. (9-19-61,
readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, add new classification after "General Service
F," entitled "Recreation Service G District." The following uses shall be
permitted in this district only and in no other district:
Golf course, whether or not conducted for gain or profit; tennis courts;
swimming pool; cabanas, lockers or bath-houses; wading pool. Except,
however, that tennis courts, swimming pool, cabanas, lockers or bathhouses
or wading pools may be erected, maintained or used as an accessory use to
the permitted use in any residence district or general service district. (9-8-
64)]
Business:
Store, office, bank, studio.
Penal or correctional institution.
Restaurant or lunch room.
Theater or motion picture house.
Assembly or dance hall.
Mortuary.
Ice or milk delivery station.
Bathhouses.
Boathouses.
Riding or boarding stables.
Broadcasting station.
Motor vehicle sales room with service and repair in the rear.
Public garage, gasoline service station or other motor fuel station as
provided for in Article XIV.
Electric substation.
Printing plant.
Aviation field or airport.
Amusement park, fairgrounds or circus grounds.
Cemetery, crematory.
Dock, wharf, shipyard, boat repair yard, boat storage.
Net storage.
Shop for making articles sold at retail on the premises.
[Under Permitted Uses in the Business District in Article V, the following
shall be added: "Farming, nurseries, gardens, orchards, dairies and
greenhouses." (7-20-32)]
[Add to Article V, Business, the following use: "A cleaning and dyeing
establishment in which noninflammable fluids are used." (11-14-32)]
[Under heading "Business." strike out the words: "Farming. nurseries,
gardens, orchards, dairies and." (9-10-35)]
[Add the following words to Article V, Permitted Uses: "Knitting and
manual weaving establishments," and "Shops for constructing and
assembling small toys and novelties." (1-14-36)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, under heading "Business," strike out the
words:
"Knitting and manual weaving establishments. Shops for constructing
and assembling small toys and novelties.
Establishments for making and delivering ice cream, provided the
capacity does not exceed three hundred (300) gallons per day." (8-25-36)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, under "Business," strike out the words "Ice or
milk delivery station." (4-12-38)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, under "Business," revise the sixth line.
"Mortuary." to read "Mortuary or undertaking parlor." (1-10-39)]
[Business:
(Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
[Delete from Article V, Permitted Uses, under "Business," the words
"Mortuary or undertaking parlor." (6-1-54)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business District, add at the end of the first
paragraph thereof, the following words: "Auto repair shop or used-ear lot."
(6-3-58)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, add the following language at the end thereof:
"No vending machine shall be located, placed or erected any closer to a
street or side line in a Business District than the applicable setback
requirement for a building or structure in the said Business District; nor shall
any vending machine be farther from the main or principal building than
three (3) feet." (1-29-57)]
[Business:2
2 Editor's Note: The amendment adopted 9-19-61 and readopted 10-17-61
contained the following provisions:
"The existing single classification of Business District shall have added three
more districts entitled "Business 1," "Business 2" and "Business 3" Districts,
with the permitted uses as hereinafter described.
"All existing Business Districts shall, upon the effective date of change of
zone of this amendment, be rezoned to Business 1 Districts with the
following exceptions, which shall be left Business Districts, and in addition
any properties which have been rezoned upon separate application to the
Town Board or by court order subsequent to October 1, 1956 shall be also
excepted and confirmed In their present zoning classification.
"(Unless otherwise Indicated, the depth of the areas shall be as shown on the
various sections of the Amended Zoning Maps of the Town of Islip as of
June 1956.);
"All that property zoned Business as of June 1956, lying within the
following areas."
The amendment then detailed the portions of Bay Shore, Islip, East Islip,
Islip Terrace, Central Islip, West Sayville, Bayport, Brentwood and Sayville
that were to remain Business Districts. The description of these areas
appears in Minute Hook 61 at pages 1801 through 1803.
Store, office, bank, studio.
Penal or correctional institution.
Theater or motion picture house.
Restaurant or lunch room.
Assembly or dance hall.
Bathhouses.
Boathouses.
Riding or boarding stables.
Broadcasting station.
Motor vehicle sales room with service and repair in the rear.
Public garage, gasoline service station or other motor fuel station as
provided for in Article XIV.
Electric substation.
Printing plant.
Aviation field or airport.
Amusement park, fairgrounds or circus grounds.
Cemetery, crematory.
Dock, wharf, shipyard, boat repair yard, boat storage.
Net storage.
Shop for making articles sold at retail on the premises.
Cleaning and dyeing establishment in which noninflammable fluids
are used.
Auto repair shop or used-ear lot. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business, delete "Cemetery, crematory." (1-
18-66)]
[The following clauses are to be inserted before the words "Industrial
General":
Business 1 District:
In Business 1 District the operation of any retail business and the
conduct of any profession or personal service business will be permitted if
the same is confined to the interior of the building, except as otherwise
provided herein. (9-11-56)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 1 District, insert the following
language after the words "provided herein": "The following uses are also
permitted:
(a) The sale of Christmas trees and wreaths during the month of
December." (12-16-58)]
[Under Article V, Permitted Uses, insert at the end of Business 1:
Automobile parking field; provided, however, that plot plan for same be
submitted and approved, showing:
a. Type of surfacing,
b. Self-contained drainage,
c. Lighting,
d. Ingress,
e. Egress; and also provided that premises comply to approved plot
plan within ninety (90) days. (7-22-58)]
[Add the following at the end of Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 1
District, after the sentence ending "..........plot plan within ninety (90) days":
"In all cases sufficient hard-surface, off-street parking shall be provided to
accommodate the traffic; but in no case shall said parking area be less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. In addition, wherever the business
buildings or business uses within any given shopping area exceed two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the Town Board may require an
additional two hundred (200) square feet of parking area for each two
hundred (200) square feet of building area in excess of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet." (2-3-59)]
[After the words "plot plan within ninety (90) days," delete the following;
"In all cases sufficient hard-surface, off-street parking shall be provided to
accommodate the traffic; but in no case shall said parking area be less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. In addition, wherever the business
buildings or business uses within any given shopping area exceed two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the Town Board may require an
additional two hundred (200) square feet of parking area for each two
hundred (200) square feet of building area in excess of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet." (1-3-61)]
[Business 1 District:
In Business 1 District the operation of any retail business and the conduct of
any profession or personal service business will be permitted if the same is
confined to the interior of the building, except as otherwise provided herein.
The following uses are also permitted:
(a) The sale of Christmas trees and wreaths during the month of
December.
Automobile parking field; provided, however, that plot plan for same be
submitted and approved, showing:
a. Type of surfacing.
b. Self-contained drainage,
c. Lighting,
d. Ingress,
e. Egress; and also provided that premises comply to approved plot
plan within ninety (90) days.
In all cases sufficient hard-surface, off-street parking shall be provided to
accommodate the traffic; but in no case shall said parking area be less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. In addition, wherever the business
buildings or business uses within any given shopping area exceed two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the Town Board may require an
additional two hundred (200) square feet of parking area for each two
hundred (200) square feet of building area in excess of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, at the end of Business 1 District and Business
2 District paragraphs, add the following after the words "as otherwise
provided herein": (two places) "Curbing and sidewalks to be required along
all street frontages in accordance with Town of Islip Standard Highway
Specifications." (3-27-62)]
[Add the following language immediately preceding the paragraph entitled
"Business 2 District" in Article V, Permitted Uses:
"(c.) Indoor theater or motion picture houses, after public hearing by
the Town Board and its approval of the proposed location and use; provided,
however, that no such use shall be permitted without compliance with the
minimum requirements listed under Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3
District; and provided further that sanitary, parking and drainage facilities
and landscaping are installed to the satisfaction of the Town Board, and that
the applicant furnish a bond sufficient in form and amount to insure the
performance of the installation work required, and further provided that no
certificate of occupancy be issued until all required exterior improvements
have been installed, inspected and approved as in accordance with the
approved plot plan." (4-24-62)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 1 District, add the words in
boldface: "In Business 1 District the operation of any retail business and the
conduct of any profession or personal service business, including a drycleaning establishment where nonflammable fluids are used, will be
permitted. . ." (8-27-63)]
[Business 2 District:
In Business 2 District the operation of any business will be permitted
which is allowed in Business 1 District, and in addition any business
operation which requires outside service or display, except as otherwise
provided herein. (9-11-56)]
[Add the following at the end of Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 2
District, after the words "......... as otherwise provided herein": "Parking
requirements shall be the same as required under Business 1 District." (2-3-
59)]
[Under Business 2 Districts, delete the following: "Parking requirements
shall be the same as required under Business 1 District." (1-3-61)]
[Business 2 District:
In Business 2 District the operation of any business will be permitted
which is allowed in Business 1 District, and in addition any business
operation which requires outside service or display, except as otherwise
provided herein. Parking requirements shall be the same as required under
Business 1 District. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, at the end of Business 1 District and Business
2 District paragraphs, add the following after the words "as otherwise
provided herein": (two places) "Curbing and sidewalks to be required along
all street frontages in accordance with Town of Islip Standard Highway
Specifications." (3-27-62)]
[Business 3 District:
In Business 3 District the operation of any business not otherwise
prohibited will be permitted, provided that sanitary, parking and drainage
facilities and landscaping are installed to the satisfaction of the Town Board,
and provided further that the applicant furnish a bond sufficient in form and
amount to insure the performance of the installation work required: and
provided further that the zone change be in the public interest; except,
however, that the following uses may be granted in Business 3 District only
and in no other Business District, after public hearing by the Town Board:
All outdoor storage and permanent display; supply houses; laundries;
dry-cleaning establishments where the work is actually done on the
premises; all wholesale establishments; automobile body repair and paint
shops; gasoline service stations; public garages; auto laundries; printing
plants: bowling alleys; riding academies; pony rings; stables; amusement
parks, amusement areas and commercial recreational uses; broadcasting
stations and similar uses; skating rinks; airports: commercial bathhouses,
commercial boathouses and commercial beaches; commercial shipyards,
commercial boat repair yards or commercial boat storage; ferry slips; theater
or motion picture houses; drive-in theaters; bus terminals and other public
transportation terminal facilities; farmers' market; assembly hall or dance
hall; miniature golf courses; golf driving ranges; cemetery or crematory. (9-
11-56)]
[Delete the following words from the second paragraph following Business
3 District, Article V, Permitted Uses; "amusement parks, amusement areas
and commercial recreational uses; . . .drive-in theaters: . . .farmers' market."
(1-28-58)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, add the following words
after the word "crematory": "replacement or installation of automobile
mufflers, brakes or brake linings." (6-3-58)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, add the following word
following "linings"; "marina." (8-23-60)]
[Business 3 District:
In Business 3 District the operation of any business not otherwise
prohibited will be permitted, provided that sanitary, parking and drainage
facilities and landscaping are installed to the satisfaction of the Town Board,
and provided further that the applicant furnish a bond sufficient in form and
amount to insure the performance of the installation work required; and
provided further that the zone change be in the public interest; except,
however, that the following uses may be granted in Business, Business 3,
Industrial 1 and Industrial 2 Districts only and in no other district, after
public hearing by the Town Board. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article V, Business 3 District, add after words ". . . and in no other
Business District," "or Industrial 1 District." (3-3-64)]
[In Article V, Business 3 District, after words ". . . and in no other Business
District," delete "Industrial 1 District" and substitute therefor "or Industrial
Districts." (3-24-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, at the end of the first
paragraph, "and in no other Business District or Industrial District, after
public hearing by the Town Board," change to "or Industrial 1 District after
public hearing by the Town Board." (5-26-64)]
[All outdoor storage and permanent display; supply houses; laundries; drycleaning establishments where the work is actually done on the premises; all
wholesale establishments; automobile body repair and paint shops; gasoline
service stations; public garages; auto laundries; printing plants; bowling
alleys; riding academies; pony rings; stables; broadcasting stations and
similar uses; skating rinks; airports; commercial bath-houses, commercial
boathouses and commercial beaches; commercial shipyards, commercial
boat repair yards or commercial boat storage; ferry slips; theater or motion
picture houses; bus terminals and other public transportation terminal
facilities; assembly hall or dance hall; miniature golf courses; golf driving
ranges; cemetery or crematory; replacement or installation of automobile
mufflers, brakes or brake lining; marina. (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[Eliminate the following words in Article V. Permitted Uses, Business 3
District: "theater or motion picture houses." (4-24-62)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, add the words in
boldface: "All outdoor storage and permanent display; supply houses;
laundries; dry-cleaning establishments where flammable fluids are used and
where the work is actually done on the premises." (8-27-63)]
[At the end of the first paragraph, after the word "marina," delete period and
add comma and words "lumberyards, building material establishments." (3-
24-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, delete "cemetery or
crematory." (1-18-66)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, add the following
sentence at the end of the second paragraph; "In addition, amusement parks,
amusement areas and other commercial recreational uses, including racing
tracks, drive-in theaters and farmers' markets, will be permitted in a
Business 3 District only and in no other district, including Industrial
Districts, after a public hearing before the Town Board and compliance with
the requirements of the first paragraph herein." (1-28-58, readopted 9-19-61
and 10-17-61)]
[Unless specifically exempted therefrom, in whole or in part, by the Town
Board upon cause shown, no building hereafter erected or land hereafter
used in a Business 3 District for business purposes shall be so erected or
used unless and until full compliance has been had with the following
minimum requirements:
1. All parking areas must be hard-surfaced in accordance with Town
of Islip standard improvement specifications and amendments thereto.
2. The number and location of all entrances and exits must be
established on the plot to the satisfaction of the Town Board.
3. All curb cuts for driveways, entrances and exits shall be not less
than ten (10) feet nor more than twenty-five (25) feet, and the width of such
curb cut or cuts shall be determined within such range by the Town Board
and, in a proper case, by the County Superintendent of Highways or by the
State Department of Public Works.
4. Adequate screening with live shrubbery and/or a fence must be
provided and maintained to the satisfaction of the Town Board.
5. All drainage must be self-contained upon the subject property to the
satisfaction of the Town Board.
6. Curbs must be constructed along all street frontages in accordance
with Town of Islip standard highway specifications.
(In Article V, Permitted Uses, Business 3 District, Paragraph 6, add the
words "and sidewalks" after the word "curbs." 3-27-62)
7. All plans must be submitted to and approved by the Town Board.
8. No overnight parking of earth-moving or construction equipment
trailers over one (1) ton capacity or similar heavy equipment. (9-11-56,
readopted 9-19-61 and 10-17-61)]
[All existing parcels of land presently zoned Business shall, upon the
effective date of this amendment, become Business Zone 1 Districts, except
as may be otherwise shown on the Amended Zoning Maps. (9-11-56)]
Industrial:
General. Buildings and land may be used in an Industrial District for
any legal use except those stated below under special permit uses and
prohibited uses.
[Industrial:
(Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, is amended by the deletion of the word
"Industrial" and the sentence starting with "General" and ending with "uses"
and substituting therefor the following words, to be inserted before "Special
permit uses":
Industrial 1 District:
I. There are permitted in this district:
A. Any uses allowed in any residential district (except a dwelling
unless authorized by special permit as provided in Paragraph 1 of Special
Exceptions of Article XVIII: apartment house, boardinghouse, lodging
house and hotel) or in any business district and the uses hereafter set forth,
namely: the manufacturing of articles or the assembling of unfinished parts
by hand or machine, or both, except heavy industry, provided the noise
caused by the operation of the machinery, the emission of odors, stenches,
dust, smoke, gas or noise are confined within the building or premises where
such manufacturing or assembling of articles is carried on. A blower may be
of such horsepower as may be necessary, provided the noise thereof shall be
confined within the building and provided the duet shall not extend more
than six (6) feet above the roof level of the building. (3-12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, insert "motel," "multiple
residences" between "lodging house" and "hotel." (6-3-58)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, amend I-A by the
addition immediately following "residence district" of the following
language: "or general service district." (8-23-60)]
[Change Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, by the deletion of
"apartment house," "hotel," "motel" and "multiple residences," thus reading:
"A. Any uses allowed in any residential district (except a dwelling unless
authorized by special permit as provided in Paragraph 1 of Special
Exceptions of Article XVIII; boardinghouse and lodging house) or in any
business district and the uses hereafter set forth, namely: the manufacturing
of articles or the assembling of unfinished parts by hand or machine, or both,
except heavy industry, provided the noise caused by the operation of the
machinery, the emission of odors, stenches, dust, smoke, gas or noise are
confined within the building or premises where such manufacturing or
assembling of articles is carried on. A blower may be of such horsepower as
may be necessary, provided the noise thereof shall be confined within the
building and provided the duct shall not extend more than six (6) feet above
the roof level of the building." (8-23-60)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, Section IA, amend first
sentence so as to read as follows:
"I. There are permitted in this district:
A. Any uses allowed in any residential district or general service
district, except a dwelling, boardinghouse or lodging house." (5-10-66)]
[B. Any existing building, plant or premise which by virtue of the
enactment of this ordinance is placed on a nonconforming basis. These shall
be deemed to have the privilege of status quo, the right to reasonable
improvements and rebuilding to same capacity and purpose in case of
disaster or any act of God. (3-12-57)]
[C. Bakeshop or bakery where bread or cake, or both products, is baked or
sold at wholesale or retail, and occupies more than seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet of floor area. (3-12-57)]
[D. Lumberyard. (3-12-57)]
[In Paragraph ID delete after "D" the word "Lumberyard." (3-10-64)]
[E. Building which is used to store merchandise or packages for distribution,
with the right to house therein the motor vehicles used in such business.
Gasoline pumps, when authorized, shall be used solely for the vehicles used
in the business of the occupier of the building and for no other purpose. The
vehicles used in such business may be repaired therein. (3-12-57)]
[F. Repair shops. (3-12-57)]
[In Paragraph IF delete "F. Repair shops." (3-10-64)]
[G. Upholstery manufacturing and fabricating plants. (3-12-57)]
[H. A. No building or premises shall be used, and no building shall be
erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for any
of the following specified trades, industries or uses:
1. Asphalt manufacturing or refining plants (except plants for the
mixing and stabilization of bituminous road materials), cement plant or
cement-mix plant or lime mix or mixture, gypsum or plaster of paris mix or
mixture, or manufacture thereof, and such trade or substantially similar
trade, industry or use in which any such mixture or material used therein
falls or drips upon the roadways or streets of the town, and industry, trade or
use which requires haulage to or from the place where such industry, trade
or use is carried on, of any material or substance where such material or
substance is not so covered that the same may not be blown or dispersed into
the air or street while being hauled to or from any place of business in said
district.
2. Assaying, other than gold or silver.
3. Blacksmithing or horseshoeing.
4. Brewing or distilling of beer or liquors.
5. Commercial carpet or rug cleaning.
6. Crematory.
7. Electric central station power plant.
8. Fat rendering.
9. Lampblack manufacturing.
10. Sawmill or planing mill.
11. Smelting.
12. Starch, glucose, dextrin manufacturing.
13. Sugar refining.
14. Textile converting, finishing and dyeing plants. (3-12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, Section IIA, Paragraph 1.
amend as follows: first word inside parenthesis, "except," delete "except"
and substitute therefor "including." (3-24-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, Paragraph II, add: "15.
Retail stores, groups of retail stores commonly referred to as a shopping
center." (4-20-65)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, Paragraph 6, delete
"Crematory." (1-18-66)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, Section II, amend by
adding after 15: "16. Dwelling, boardinghouse or lodging house." (5-10-66)]
[II. B. There is prohibited in this district all buildings, structures and uses
prohibited in Industrial 2 District, unless herein expressly permitted. (3-12-
57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 1 District, at end of Paragraph IIB
add the following: "Any business or industrial operation which requires 
outside service, outside storage or outside display is prohibited in Industrial
1 Districts." (5-26-64)]
[Industrial 2 Districts:
1. There is permitted in this district all uses allowed in any Business
or Industrial 1 District, pasteurization and milk bottling station, mineral
water and soft drink bottling, and, in addition, all other uses, except that no
building or premises shall be used, nor a building erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed, for any of the following specified trades,
industries or uses:
A. Those uses which are a nuisance, including, but not limited to,
those nuisances which are noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of
odors, stenches, dust, smoke, gas, pollution or noise which cannot be
confined within the building and removed by the use of a blower. (3-12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 2 Districts, at end of Paragraph 1A.
add paragraph: "A.1. Any business operation which requires outside service,
outside storage or display is prohibited in industrial districts." (3-24-64)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 2 Districts, delete Paragraph A.1,
which reads as follows: "Any business operation which requires outside
service, outside storage or display is prohibited in industrial districts." (5-26-
64)]
[B. 1. A dwelling (unless authorized by special permit as provided in
Paragraph 1 of Special Exceptions, Article XVIII); apartment house,
boardinghouse, lodging house, hotel, nursing home or convalescent home.
2. Abattoirs or stockyards and poultry slaughterhouses or live storage
of poultry.
3. Acetylene gas manufacturing.
4. Ammonia, chloride or bleaching powder manufacturing.
5. Asphalt plants, except plants for the mixing and stabilization of
bituminous road material.
6. Gypsum or plaster of paris plant or mixing plant.
7. Blast furnaces, rolling mills, smelter or boiler works or glass
manufacture.
8. Brick, tile or terra-cotta manufacturing.
9. Convalescent homes, private or public hospital, or other places
where persons suffering from mental diseases of any kind whatsoever are
kept or treated.
10. Creosote manufacture or pressure or steam treatment of products
with creosote.
11. Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse grain, wood or bones,
except when conducted in a laboratory for research or analysis purposes.
12. Dumping of dead animal offal, garbage or rubbish.
13. Dyestuff manufacturing, dyeing, textile converting, and finishing
plants.
14. Emory cloth manufacturing or sandpaper manufacturing.
15. Fertilizer manufacturing.
16. Foundries, boiler shop, trolley, locomotive or railway repair shop.
17. Glue, sizing or gelatin manufacture.
18. Explosives, gunpowder or fireworks manufacturing, or storing of
any other articles or combination or ingredients which alone or in
combination may be or become explosive.
19. Manufacturing of lime, cement, gypsum or plaster of paris.
20. Manufacturing of matches and the storage of same in bulk.
21. Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
22. Ore reduction or the smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc, lead or any
other metal.
23. Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine, shellac, printing ink or enamel
manufacturing.
24. Sale, curing or tanning of rawhides or raw skins.
25. Rubber or gutta-percha manufacturing from crude or scrap
materials or the synthetic manufacture thereof.
26. Manufacturing of shoddy, wool pulling or scouring.
27. Rendering or manufacturing of soap, tallow, grease or lard or fat
and associated products.
28. Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture or
storage.
29. Tar distillation or manufacture thereof.
30. Tar waterproofing manufacture. (3-12-57)]
[In Article V. Permitted Uses, Industrial 2 District, delete the two said
sentences now being as follows:
"18. Explosives, gunpowder or fireworks manufacturing, or storing of
any other articles or combination or ingredients which alone or in
combination may be or become explosive."
"20. Manufacturing of matches and the storage of same in bulk." (1-
28-58)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, under Industrial 2 Districts, Paragraph B,
renumber as follows:
19 to 18
21 to 19
22 to 20
23 to 21
24 to 22
25 to 23
26 to 24
27 to 25
28 to 26
29 to 27
30 to 28
(1-3-61)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial 2 Districts, at the end of Paragraph
B. 1 delete period, add comma and words: "retail stores, groups of retail
stores commonly referred to as a shopping center." (5-11-65)]
[In Article V. Permitted Uses. Industrial 2 Districts, Section IB 1. amend B.1
to read as follows:
"B.1. A dwelling, apartment house, boardinghouse, lodging house,
hotel, nursing home or convalescent home." (5-10-66)]
[II. Loading zones. An off-street loading and unloading zone of sufficient
capacity to adequately handle the expected use and occupancy of the
premises shall be provided. (3-12-57)]
[Industrial Districts. Unless specifically exempted therefrom, in whole or in
part, by the Town Board upon cause shown, no building hereafter erected or
land hereafter used in an Industrial 1 and 2 District shall be so erected or
used unless and until full compliance has been had with the following
minimum requirements: (3-12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial Districts, add after the following
words, "minimum requirements"; "and provided further that the applicant
furnish a bond sufficient in form and amount to insure the performance of
the installation work required." (11-26-57)]
[A. All parking areas must be hard-surfaced in accordance with Town of
Islip standard improvement specifications and amendments thereto. The
amount of parking areas shall be determined by the expected use and
occupancy of the premises and shall be computed upon a basis of one (1)
square foot of parking area to each two (2) square feet of building floor area.
These requirements are subject to relaxation by the Town Board in such case
as the expected use and occupancy would indicate a lesser requirement. (3-
12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial Districts, amend second sentence of
Paragraph A by deleting "one (1) square foot of parking area to each two (2)
square feet of building floor area," and substituting the following: "one (1)
parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of building floor
area." (8-23-60)]
[B. The number and location of all entrances and exits must be established
on the plot to the satisfaction of the Town Board. (3-12-57)]
[B. The number and location of all entrances and exits must be established
on the plot to the satisfaction of the Chief Building and Zoning Inspector. (5-
26-64)]
[C. All curb cuts for driveways, entrances and exits shall be not less than ten
(10) feet nor more than twenty-five (25) feet, and the width of such curb cut
or cuts shall be determined within such range by the Town Board and, in a
proper case, by the County Superintendent of Highways or by the State
Department of Public Works. (3-12-57)]
[C. All curb cuts for driveways, entrances and exits shall be not less than ten
(10) feet nor more than twenty-five (25) feet, and the width of such curb cut
or cuts shall be determined within such range by the Chief Building and
Zoning Inspector and, in a proper case, by the County Superintendent of
Highways or by the State Department of Public Works. (5-26-64)]
[D. Adequate screening with live shrubbery and/or a fence must be provided
and maintained to the satisfaction of the Town Board as provided in XIII-A.
(3-12-57)]
[D. Adequate screening with live shrubbery and/or a fence must be provided
and maintained to the satisfaction of the Chief Building and Zoning
Inspector as provided in XIII-A. (5-26-64)]
[E. All drainage must be self-contained upon the subject property to the
satisfaction of the Town Board. (3-12-57)]
[E. All drainage must be self-contained upon the subject property to the
satisfaction of the Chief Building and Zoning Inspector. (5-26-64)]
[F. Curbs must be constructed along all street frontages in accordance with
Town of Islip standard highway specifications. (3-12-57)]
[F. Curbing must be constructed along street frontages adjacent to that part
of the premises to be used, in accordance with the Town of Islip standard
highway specifications. (3-27-62)]
[G. All plans, including details of exterior lighting and landscaping, must be
submitted to and approved by the Town Board (3-12-57)]
[G. All plans, including details of exterior lighting and landscaping, must be
submitted to and approved by the Chief Building and Zoning Inspector. (5-
26-64)]
Special permit uses. No building or land shall be used and no building shall
be structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for
any of the following purposes, except on special permit as provided in
Paragraph 1 of Special.
Exceptions of Article XVIII:
Auto wrecking.
Bag or carpet cleaning.
Dextrin, glucose or starch manufacture.
Brewing or distilling of beverages.
Grain drying or poultry feed manufacture from refuse, mash or refuse
grain.
Flour or feed mill.
Poultry slaughterhouse.
Gas manufacture from coal, coke, petroleum, or the storage thereof.
Carbon or lampblack manufacture.
Petroleum storage in quantities greater than tank car lots.
Power forge, structural iron or pipe works.
Rock crushing.
Railway roundhouse or shop.
Refuse dump.
Any industrial process emitting dust, odor, gas, fumes, noise or
vibration comparable in character to or in aggregate amount equaling that of
any use specified above in this subdivision.
[In Article V. Permitted Uses, Industrial Districts, add the following to the
list of special permit uses:
Kennel.
Commercial poultry farm.
Sheep or goat farm.
Fox, mink or similar animal farm. (3-25-41)]
[Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial Districts, is further amended by adding
the words "and junkyards" to "Auto wrecking" following "Special permit
uses." (3-12-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, Industrial Districts, Special permit uses, after
words "Auto wrecking and junkyards," add the words "in Industrial 2
District only." (3-10-64)]
[In Article V. Permitted Uses, add the following language immediately
preceding "Prohibited uses, Industrial 2 Districts": "Radioactive materials.
The processing, extraction or storage, either temporary or permanent, of
radioactive materials is permitted only in an Industrial 2 District and when
approved by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Paragraph 1, Article XVIII,
Revised Zoning Ordinance, Town of Islip." (12-26-61)]
[Amend Article V. Permitted Uses, immediately preceding "Prohibited uses.
Industrial 2 Districts," by deleting the period after the word "Islip" and
inserting a comma and adding the following words: "except that therapeutic
usage and storage of radioactive materials on human beings shall be
permitted by hospitals and duly licensed physicians in any zone, only when
approved by the New York State Department of Health." (11-17-64)]
Prohibited uses. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used for any of the following purposes:
Acetylene gas manufacture.
Oxygen manufacture.
Celluloid manufacture.
Paper manufacture.
Plaster manufacture.
Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.
Asphalt manufacture or refining.
Coal or tar distillation, including manufacture or treatment.
Boilermaking.
Locomotive or railway car manufacture.
Steel furnace.
Blooming or rolling mill.
Pickle, sauerkraut or vinegar manufacture.
Soap manufacture.
Curing or tanning of rawhides or skins.
Wool scouring.
Small-arms, ammunition or fireworks manufacture.
Linoleum or oilcloth manufacture.
Ammonia, bleaching powder or other chemical plants emitting
corrosive or toxic fumes carrying beyond the limits of the premises.
Petroleum or kerosene refining, or distillation of derivative byproducts.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
Chlorine or hydrochloric, nitric, picric or sulfuric acid manufacture.
Smelting of copper, tin, zinc, lead or iron ores.
Manufacture of explosives; storage of explosives in bulk.
Abattoir, meat packing, distillation of bones. Fat rendering and
manufacture of tallow, greases and oils. Fertilizer manufacture. Hair
manufacture. Offal or dead animal reduction, stockyards.
Glue, size or gelatin manufacture where the process includes the
refining or recovery of products of fish, animal refuse or offal.
Any industrial process emitting dust, gas, fumes, odor, noise,
vibration, etc., comparable in character to or in aggregate amount equaling
that of any use specified above in this subdivision.
[In Article V. under heading "Industrial," immediately under paragraph
headed "Prohibited uses," add: "Duck farms and piggeries." (9-10-35)]
[In Article V, under "Prohibited uses," omit "and piggeries." (11-13-41)]
[Special permit uses and prohibited uses:
(Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article V by the deletion of the following words from "Prohibited
uses. Industrial 2 Districts"; "storage of explosives in bulk." (1-28-58)]
[In Article V. Permitted Uses, subdivision "Prohibited uses," add after the
last paragraph the following: "Except as otherwise provided herein, sale of
farm produce, fish or bivalves in their natural state is forbidden unless from
within a covered and glassed structure for which a certificate of occupancy
has been issued." (2-1-55)]
[In Article V. Permitted Uses, the following is added at the end of Article V:
"It is hereby declared that the uncontrolled establishment of farmers' markets
within this township in proximity to farmers' markets heretofore established,
or hereafter established under presently existing provisions of the Islip town
ordinances, and areas of dense population, would tend to destroy or impair
the value of residential property in the vicinity, the safety and health of the
community, the aesthetic values of the township, and would interfere with
the orderly growth of heretofore undeveloped areas of this town.
Accordingly, in the interest of public safety, public health and general
welfare, the establishment of such farmers' markets is hereby limited as
follows:
1. No farmers' market shall be established hereafter in any district
unless, in a specific case and after notice and public hearing, the Town 
Board shall approve such use or the location thereof; provided, however, that
no such use shall be permitted unless:
a. A lot area of not less than fifteen (15) acres shall be provided.
b. No vending or selling of produce, merchandise, wares, foods
or other materials shall be permitted outside of any building or structure
used or intended to be used as farmers' market without specific approval of
the Town Board.
c. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on a suitably
paved area for such use to the ratio of not less than four (4) square feet of
parking space for each one (1) square foot of usable floor area.
d. No structure shall be erected or used for the operation of any
farmers' market unless it shall conform in all respects with the Building
Code of the Town of Islip.
e. The use of a public-address system or systems for the
purpose of vending any produce, wares or other materials is hereby
forbidden. (5-7-57)]
[In Article V, Permitted Uses, after next to last paragraph insert these words
as a paragraph: "No building shall be erected, altered or used as or for the
display of a sample residence home, model house or real estate sales office
in Industrial 1 or Industrial 2 Districts." (3-10-64)]
[If any provision or part of this section shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
validity of this section as a whole. (5-7-57)]
ARTICLE VI
Accessory Uses
A use accessory to an authorized use shall be permitted. A commercial
billboard in other than an industrial district, or an advertising sign in other
than a business or/and industrial dis-strict, shall not in any case be allowed,
except that the placing of one (1) sign in connection with the sale, renting,
construction or improvement of the property shall be permitted as an 
accessory use if placed by authorization of the owner. This permitted sign
shall not be larger than three (3) feet in height by four (4) feet in length and
shall, in a Residence A-A, A or B District, be at least fifteen (15) feet from
any street line; except that where acreage for, or in the process of,
subdivision is advertised for sale or letting, one (1) real estate sign not larger
than three (3) feet in height by eight (8) feet in length shall be permitted for
each five hundred (500) feet of street frontage. These permitted acreage
signs shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any street line. In all cases the said
three (3) feet in height shall be construed to mean the height of the sign itself
and not the height from the ground or curbline. A store, trade or business
shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any residence district, except
that the office of a doctor, surgeon, dentist, teacher, engineer, architect,
musician, lawyer, magistrate or other professional person may be located in
the dwelling used by said professional person: and except that any person
carrying on a customary home occupation, including dressmaking, millinery,
laundry or similar handicrafts, may do so in a dwelling occupied by him as a
residence; except that no goods shall be displayed on the premises and that
no signs or advertisements shall be shown other than a sign not larger than
six by eighteen (6 x 18) inches bearing only the name and occupation (words
only) of the practitioner.
[A use accessory to an authorized use shall be permitted. A commercial
billboard in other than an industrial district, or an advertising sign in other
than a business or industrial district, shall not in any case be allowed, except
that the placing of one (1) sign in connection with the sale, renting,
construction or improvement of the property shall be permitted as an
accessory use if placed by authorization of the owner and providing the
same conforms to Article XIV-A, Section 1 A, B, C, D, E, F, Section 4,
Section 6.
A store, trade or business shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any
residence district, except that the office of a doctor, surgeon, dentist, teacher,
engineer, architect, musician, lawyer, magistrate or other professional
persons may be located in the dwelling used by said professional persons;
and except that any person carrying on a customary home occupation,
including dressmaking, millinery, laundry or similar handicrafts, may do so
in the dwelling occupied by him as a residence, except that no goods shall be
displayed on the premises and that no signs or advertisements shall be
shown except as specified in Article XIV-A, Section 1 E, F. (6-11-46)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, second paragraph, by the addition
immediately following "residence district" of the words: "or general service
district, except that a restaurant or bar shall be a permitted accessory use to a
motel or hotel, and." (8-23-60)]
[Article VI, Accessory Uses, second paragraph, first sentence, is amended
by adding after the phrase ". . . except that a restaurant or bar shall be a
permitted accessory use to a motel or hotel. . .," the words ". . . or golf
course and clubhouse. . ." (1-19-65)]
As an accessory use in a residence district, a private garage or stable may
provide storage for not more than one (1) motor vehicle or one (1) horse and
wagon for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area in a Residence
A-A or A District, and for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet of lot area in a Residence B District, and for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of lot area in a Residence C District.
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, amend Paragraph 3 to read: "As an
accessory use in a residence district, a private garage or stable may provide
storage for not more than one (1) motor vehicle or one (1) horse and wagon
for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area in a Residence A-A, BA-A. A District, and. . . etc." (12-13-49)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, third paragraph, by the addition
immediately following the first "residence district" of the words "or general
service district," and the addition at the end of the words "Residence C
District" of "or general service district," deleting the period. (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article VI. Accessory Uses, third paragraph, by the deletion of the
words "Residence C District" and the addition of the words "Residence C-AA, C-A or General Service Districts"; and by the addition of "and A-B" after
the words "in a Residence A-A, B-A-A, A," and by the deletion of "a
Residence C District" and the substitution therefor of "other residence
districts." (10-18-60)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, third paragraph, by the addition of "AA-A" just before "A-A" in the words "in a Residence A-A, B-A-A, A and AB District." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, at the end of the third paragraph after the
words ". . . general service district," delete period, add comma and words;
"and may be located on a lot across any street from, or contiguous to, the lot
on which is located the main building or use, provided that the lot is owned
by the same person as the lot on which is located the main building or use."
(2-25-64)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, add to third paragraph so as to read as
follows; ". . . and for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area in
Residence C, C-A-A, C-A or General Service Districts. . ." (6-7-66)]
[In Article VI. Accessory Uses, add a new paragraph at the end of the
Article as follows: "In a residence district, a private garage may be attached
to a dwelling and shall be considered a part thereof; provided, however, that
when no part of the extension to the main building which comprises the
garage is used for residence purposes, four (4) feet may be deducted from
the total side yard requirements, but at no time shall such garage be
permitted to be nearer to any side line than four (4) feet nor shall such
garage be permitted to extend beyond the setback requirements for front
yard." (9-10-35)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, amend the fourth paragraph to have "four
(4)" changed to "seven (7)" so as to read: ". . .but at no time shall such
garage be permitted to be nearer to any side line than seven (7) feet . . ." (6-
3-58)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, amend the fourth paragraph by adding
immediately following "residence district" the words "or general service
district." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, amend the fourth paragraph by deleting the
following sentence: "provided, however, that when no part of the extension
to the main building which comprises the garage is used for residence
purposes, four (4) feet may be deducted from the total side yard
requirements, but at no time shall such garage be permitted to be nearer to
any side line than seven (7) feet nor shall such garage be permitted to extend
beyond the setback requirements for front yards." (10-18-60)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, add a paragraph to read as follows: "A
temporary sales office as an accessory use to a real estate subdivision or 
development, for not more than two (2) years in any use district, including
an accessory sign not to exceed three by four (3 x 4) feet." (3-28-44)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, the last paragraph is amended to read as
follows: "5. A temporary sales office as an accessory use to a real estate
subdivision or development, for not more than two (2) years in any use
district, including an accessory sign not to exceed three by four (3 x 4) feet,
is permitted." (5-28-56)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, add immediately following the fifth
paragraph: Swimming pools. In addition to all requirements of New York
State Building Code, all permanent-type swimming pools shall: (6-3-58)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, delete the capital letters "Swimming Pools"
between 5 and 6 and add them immediately following 6. (10-23-62)]
[a. Be completely enclosed by a four-foot restrictive-type fence with selfclosing gate and spring latch. (6-3-58)]
[b. Acceptable drainage system to be self-contained upon premises. (6-3-
58)]
[c. Front yard setback to be a minimum of eighty-five (85) feet Residential
A-A: sixty (60) feet Residential A and B-A-A; fifty-five (55) feet
Residential B; fifty (50) feet Residential C or D; thirty-five (35) feet
business; fifty (50) feet industrial zones. (6-3-58)]
[Amend Article VI. Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, c, by changing "fifty
(50) feet Residential C and D" to read "Residence C-A-A, C-A or General
Service Districts." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses. Swimming pools, c, by adding the
words "A-B and" after the words "fifty-five (55) feet Residential." (10-18-
60)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, 6e. by adding letters
"A-A-A" just before letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, amend 6e by adding
"Residence C" so as to read as follows: "c. Front yard setback to be a 
minimum of eighty-five (85) feet Residential A-A-A, A-A; sixty (60) feet
Residential A and B-A-A; fifty-five (55) feet Residential A-B and B; fifty
(50) feet Residence C, C-A-A, C-A or General Service District; thirty-five
(35) feet business; fifty (50) feet industrial zones." (6-7-66)]
[d. Side yards and rear yards to be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet-A-Ashortest side and rear; ten (10) feet-B-A-A–shortest side and rear; fourteen
(14) feet–A–shortest side and rear; eight (8) feet–B-C-D or lower–shortest
side and rear. (6-3-58)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, d, by changing "eight
(8) feet–B-C-D" to read "eight (8) feet–B or lower." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, d, by changing the
words "fourteen (14) feet–A–shortest side and rear" to read "fourteen (14)
feet–A and A-B–shortest side and rear," and by changing "eight (8) feet–BC-D or lower" to read "ten (10) feet–B or lower." (10-18-60)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, Swimming pools, 6d, by adding the
letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[Amend Article VI, Accessory Uses, 6, Swimming pools, by adding after
Paragraph 6d the following: "Any ladder providing access from the ground
to the pool shall be the removable type. Ladders shall be removed when the
pool is not in actual use. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the
maintenance of a permanent-type ladder when the same is utilized for access
from the water to the poolside." (6-29-65)]
[All portable-type pools to have acceptable self-contained drainage upon
premises. (6-3-58)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, add immediately following the sixth
paragraph: "Unreasonable or excessive use of bright-colored banners and
whirling pennants and other novelties shall be prohibited at all times.
Floodlighting and unreasonable or excessive external lighting shall not be
permitted after 10:00 p.m., prevailing time. Flashlighting or any other
lighting which impairs the vision or creates a hazard is prohibited." (11-25-
58)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, add new paragraph at end of this Article to
read as follows:
"8. Off-street parking requirements.
The following parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained
by the owner of property for each building which, after the date this
ordinance becomes effective, is erected, enlarged or altered for use for any
of the following purposes:
(a) Dwellings: two (2) family units up to and including four (4) family
units, one and one-half (1 1/2) parking spaces for each unit; five (5) or more
family units, at least one and one-fourth (1 1/4) parking spaces for each unit.
(b) Hotels, motels, lodging or boarding houses: one (1) parking space
for each sleeping room.
(c) All places of public assembly such as auditoriums, and, in
addition, churches and theaters: at least one (1) parking space for each four
(4) seats, or an area equivalent to four (4) permanent seats.
(d) Bowling alley, skating rink, dance hall, gymnasiums and similar
type of uses: at least one (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of
building area.
(e) Hospital, sanitarium or nursing home: at least one (1) parking
space for each two (2) beds.
(f) Mortuary and funeral homes: at least one (1) parking space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of building area, but in no case less than
twenty (20) parking spaces.
(g) Stores: at least one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of building area.
(h) Office buildings, dance and music studios: at least one (1) parking
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
(i) Professional offices: at least one (1) parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet, but in no case less than ten (10) parking spaces.
(j) Home occupation uses (except that of doctor, dentist or
chiropractor): at least one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of building area, but in no case less than two (2) parking spaces;
doctor, dentist or chiropractor: at least one (1) parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of building area, but in no case less than six (6)
parking spaces.
(k) Industrial or manufacturing establishments: at least one (1)
parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area,
excluding storage areas within the building, which shall require one (1)
square foot of parking area for each two (2) square feet of storage area.
All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the same lot
with the building, except that the Board of Appeals, pursuant to the authority
and standards set forth in Article XVIII herein, may permit the parking space
to be on a lot within five hundred (500) feet of the building if it determines
that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the building."
(8-23-60)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, amend Paragraph 8, Off-street parking
requirements, to read as follows:
"8. The following parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the owner of property for each building which, after the date
this ordinance becomes effective, is erected, enlarged or altered for use for
any of the following purposes:
(a) Dwellings: two (2) family units up to and including four (4) family
units, one and one-half (1 1/2) parking spaces for each unit; five (5) or more
family units, at least one and one-fourth (1 1/4) parking spaces for each unit.
(b) Hotels, motels, lodging or boarding houses: one (1) parking space
for each sleeping room.
(c) All places of public assembly such as auditoriums, and, in
addition, churches and theaters: at least one (1) parking space for each four
(4) seats, or an area equivalent to four (4) permanent seats.
(d) Bowling alley, skating rink, dance hall, gymnasiums or similar
type of uses: at least one (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor
area.
(e) Hospital, sanitarium or nursing home; at least one (1) parking
space for each two (2) beds.
(f) Mortuary and funeral homes: at least one (1) parking space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, but in no case less than
twenty (20) parking spaces.
(g) Stores: at least one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area.
(h) Office buildings, dance and music studios: at least one (1) parking
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
(i) Professional offices: at least one (1) parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet, but in no case less than ten (10) parking spaces.
(j) Home occupation uses (except that of doctor, dentist or
chiropractor); at least one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area, but in no case less than two (2) parking spaces;
doctor, dentist or chiropractor; at least one (1) parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of floor area, but in no case less than six (6)
parking spaces.
(k) Industrial or manufacturing establishments: at least one (1)
parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area,
excluding storage areas within the building, which shall require one (1)
square foot of parking area for each two (2) square feet of storage area.
In all cases sufficient hard-surface, off-street parking shall be provided to
accommodate the traffic. For uses not specifically listed, the parking area
shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for any business
buildings or business uses. In addition, wherever business buildings or uses
within any given plot exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet,
the Town Board may require an additional two hundred (200) square feet of
parking area for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area in excess 
of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Where parking areas are
required, a plot plan for the same to be submitted and approved, showing:
a – Type of surface.
b – Self-contained drainage.
c – Lighting.
d – Ingress.
e – Egress.
No certificate of occupancy to be issued until inspection and approval
of all exterior requirements." (1-3-61)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, Paragraph 8(a) is amended to read:
"8. (a) Dwellings: two (2) family units and over, one and one-half (1
1/2) parking spaces for each unit, and, in addition, each unit or part of a unit
leased or used for a professional office shall comply with the requirements
of Article VI, Accessory Uses, 8(i). No parking shall be permitted in the
front yard of any apartment house or garden apartment." (10-23-62)]
[Under the same section the Board of Appeals is authorized to relax the
number of parking spaces required in any district upon proof that the actual
use specified will not reasonably require such number of parking spaces. (8-
23-60)]
[In Article VI, Accessory Uses, Paragraph 8, delete the following words,
"Under the same section the Board of Appeals," and substitute the following
words "The Town Board," so that it will read as follows: "The Town Board
is authorized to relax the number of parking spaces required in any district
upon proof that the actual use specified will not reasonably require such
number of parking spaces." (1-3-61)]
[ARTICLE VI-A
Prohibited Uses
The outdoor storage of unlicensed motor vehicles, refrigerators, iceboxes,
washing machines, drying machines, sinks, toilets, radiators, freezers, tires,
stoves and bathtubs in a Residential A-A-A, B-A-A, A-A, A, A-B, B, C-AA, C A District. General Service C, D, E, F District and Business 1 District
is prohibited. (2-13-63)]
[In Article VI-A, Prohibited Uses, insert "C" between "B" and "C-A-A." (6-
7-66)]
ARTICLE VII
Height
General. A single-family or two-family dwelling shall not in any district
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
[Article VII, Height, is amended to read as follows:
"General:
1. A single-family or two-family dwelling shall not in any district
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height." (5-8-56)]
An apartment house shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height in a
residence district or sixty (60) feet in a business or industrial district.
[2. An apartment house shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height in any
district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article VII, Height, General, add following "2":
"2a. A garden apartment shall not exceed two (2) living stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height in any district." (1-3-61)]
An accessory building shall not in any district exceed eighteen (18) feet in
height. Any other permitted building shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height in a residence district or sixty (60) feet in height in a business or
industrial district.
[3. An accessory building shall not in any district exceed eighteen (18) feet
in height. Any other permitted building shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height in a residence district or sixty (60) feet in height in a business or
industrial district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article VII, Height, (3), the second sentence is amended to read: "Any
other permitted buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height in a
residence district or sixty (60) feet or four (4) stories in height in a business
or industrial district. In any industrial district an additional ten (10) feet are
allowed for a penthouse erected upon any such building. The penthouse is to
be used only for housing machinery used in the operation of the building and
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the roof. (3-12-57)]
[In Article VII, Height, General, 3, add immediately following "residence
district" in last sentence, the words "or general service districts." (8-23-60)]
Provided, however, that any portion of a building may be erected to a height
in excess of the above provisions if such portions are set back from all
required street and yard lines an additional two (2) feet for each one (1) foot
of such additional height in a Residence A-A, A or B District and an
additional one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of such additional height in a
Residence C, business or industrial district.
[In Article VII, Height, amend Paragraph 4 to read: "Provided, however, that
. . . all required street and yard lines an additional two (2) feet for each one
(1) foot of such additional height in a Residence A-A, B-A-A, A or B
District, and . . . etc." (12-13-49)]
[4. Provided, however, that any portion of a building may be erected to a
height in excess of the above provisions if such portions are set back from
all required street and yard lines an additional two (2) feet for each one (1)
foot of such additional height in a Residence B-A-A, A-A, A, B or a
business or industrial district in which a dwelling is constructed; and an
additional one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of such additional height in a
Residence C or business and industrial district in which the building
concerned is not a dwelling. (5-8-56)]
[Amend Article VII, Height, General, 4, by changing the words "Residence
C" to read "Residence C-A-A, C-A or General Service Districts." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article VII, Height, General, Paragraph 4, by adding the word "A-B
or" after the words "in a Residence B-A-A, A-A, A." (10-18-60)]
[Amend Article VII, Height, General, Paragraph 4, by adding the letters "AA-A" following the word "Residence" among the words "in a Residence BA-A, A-A, A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VII, Height, amend Paragraph 4 by adding "C" after "B" and
delete "or" before, so paragraph reads as follows: "Provided, however, that
any portion of a building may be erected to a height in excess of the above
provision if such portions are set back from all required street and yard lines
an additional two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of such additional height in a
Residence A-A-A, B-A-A, A-A, A, A-B, B or C, or a business or industrial
district in which a dwelling is constructed; and an additional one (1) foot for
each one (1) foot of such additional height in a Residence C-A-A, C-A or
general service districts, business and industrial district in which the
building concerned is not a dwelling." (6-7-66)]
Exceptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to restrict the
height of a church spire, tower or belfry, flagpole, wireless tower,
monument, chimney, water tank, elevator bulkhead, stage tower or scenery
loft.
[In Article VII, Height, Exceptions, at the end of the first paragraph,
following the word "loft," add: "unless it is within one and one-half (1 1/2)
miles of an established airport, and in that event a special permit must be
secured from the Board of Appeals." (6-12-45)]
[Exceptions:
(Same as existing provisions) (5-8-56)]
[Article VII, Height, is further amended by adding "stack, standpipe,
refrigeration or compression coil" to "Exceptions." (3-12-57)]
Nothing in these regulations shall apply to prevent the erection above the
height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament and without
windowsills, extending above such height limit not more than five (5) feet.
ARTICLE VIII
Percentage of Lot Occupancy
The total building area, including all buildings shall not exceed or occupy
more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a Residence A-A or A
District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area in a
Residence B or C District; nor above the ground story more than eighty
percent (80%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district for
interior lots; nor above the ground story more than ninety percent (90%) of
the total lot area in a business or industrial district for corner lots.
[Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, is amended to read: "The total
building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed or occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a Residence A-A or A District,
nor more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Residence
B-A-A District, nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area in a
Residence B or C District; nor above .....lots." (12-13-49)]
[Amend the first paragraph of Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, by
eliminating the following wording: "nor above the ground story more than
eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district
for interior lots; nor above the ground story more than ninety percent (90%)
of the total lot area in a business or industrial district for corner lots"; and
substituting in its place the following wording: "nor more than seventy-five
percent (75%) of the total lot area in a business district; nor more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total lot area in an industrial district." (4-24-51)]
[Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, is amended to read as follows:
"1 The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed or
occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a Residence AA or A District; nor more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area
in a Residence B-A-A District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the
total lot area in a Residence B or C District; nor more than seventy-five
percent (75%) of the total lot area in a business district; nor more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total lot area in an industrial district." (5-8-56)]
[Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, is amended to read: "The total
building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed or occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a Residence A-A or A District;
nor more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in Residence B-
A-A District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area in a
Residence B or C District; nor more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the
total lot area in a business district; nor more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total lot area in a Business 1 District; nor more than thirty-three and onethird percent (33 1/3%) of the total lot area in a Business 2 District; nor more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Business 3 District;
nor more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot area in an industrial
district. Upon the granting of an application therefor, the requirements
concerning percentage of lot occupancy in a Business 1, 2 or 3 District may
be relaxed or increased by the Town Board, either on its own motion or at
the request of the applicant, when and if conditions warrant." (The
remainder of this Article is to be unchanged.) (9-11-56)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 1 by
changing the words "Residence B or C" to read "Residence B, C-A-A, C-A
or general service districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 1 by
changing the words "or A District" to read "A or A-B District." (10-18-60)]
[Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 1, is amended to
read: "1. The total building area, including all buildings, shall not exceed or
occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a Residence AA, A or A-B District: nor more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
lot area in Residence B-A-A District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of
the total lot area in a Residence B, C-A-A, C-A or general service districts;
nor more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the total lot area in a business
district; nor more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area in a Business
1 District; nor more than thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/3%) of the
total lot area in a Business 2 District; nor more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total lot area in a Business 3 District; nor more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total lot area in an industrial district. Upon the granting
of an application therefor, the requirements concerning percentage of lot
occupancy in a Business 1, 2 or 3 District may be relaxed or increased by the
Town Board, either on its own motion or at the request of the applicant,
when and if conditions warrant." (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 1 by
inserting the letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 1 by
adding after ". . . general service districts," the words; "nor more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total lot area in a Residence C District." (6-7-66)]
A single-family dwelling shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%)
of the total lot area in a Residence A-A or A District; nor more than twentyfive percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Residence B District: nor more
than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area in a Residence C or business
district; nor more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area in an
industrial district.
[A single-family dwelling shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%)
of the total lot area in a Residence A-A, B-A-A or A District, nor more than
_____business or industrial district. (12-13-49)]
[2. A single-family dwelling shall not occupy more than twenty percent
(20%) of the total lot area in a Residence B-A-A, A-A, A, business or
industrial district; nor more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot
area in a Residence B District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total
lot area in a Residence C District. (5-8-56)]
[Amend Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 2, by
changing the words "Residence C" to read "Residence C-A-A, C-A or
general service districts." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 2, by adding
the word "A-B" after the words "in a Residence B-A-A, A-A, A." (10-18-
60)]
[Amend Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 2, by
inserting the letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 2 by
adding after ". . . Residence B District," the words: "nor more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total lot area in a Residence C District." (6-7-66)]
A two-family dwelling shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total lot area in a Residence A District; nor more than thirty percent
(30%) of the total lot area in a Residence B District; nor more than forty 
percent (40%) of the total lot area in a Residence C or business district; nor
more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area in an industrial district.
[3. A two-family dwelling shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%)
of the total lot area in a Residence B District; nor more than forty percent
(40%) of the total lot area in a Residence C District. (5-8-56)]
[Amend Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 3, by
changing the words "Residence C" to read "Residence C-A-A, C-A or
general service districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 3 to read as
follows: "3. A two-family dwelling shall not occupy more than thirty percent
(30%) of the total lot area in any permitted district." (1-3-61)]
An apartment house shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
total lot area in a Residence C District; nor above the ground story more than
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district.
[4. An apartment house shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of
the total lot area in a Residence C or D District. (5-8-56)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 4 by
changing the words "Residence C or D District" to read "Residence C-A-A,
C-A or general service districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 4 to read as
follows: "4. An apartment house or garden apartment shall not occupy more
than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in any permitted district." (1-3-
61)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, Paragraph 4. change "thirty
percent (30%)" to "twenty-five percent (25%)." (10-23-62)]
Other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, shall not occupy more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Residence A-A or A
District; nor more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in a
Residence B District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area
in a Residence C District; nor above the ground story more than eighty
percent (80%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district for 
interior lots; nor above the ground story more than ninety percent (90%) of
the total lot area in a business or industrial district for corner lots; except that
where these permitted buildings are used in whole or part for dwelling
purposes, they shall not occupy above the ground story more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total lot area in a business district; nor above the
ground story more than seventy percent (70%) of the total lot area in an
industrial district.
[Other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, shall not occupy more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Residence A-A, BA-A or A District; nor . . . industrial district. (12-13-49)]
[5. Other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, shall not occupy
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a Residence BA-A, A-A or A District; nor more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot
area in a Residence B District; nor more than forty percent (40%) of the total
lot area in a Residence C or D District; nor above the ground story more than
eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district
for interior lots; nor above the ground story more than ninety percent (90%)
of the total lot area in a business or industrial district for corner lots; except
that where these permitted buildings are used in whole or part for dwelling
purposes, they shall not occupy above the ground story more than twentyfive percent (25%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial district. (5-
8-56)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 5 by
changing the words "Residence C or D District" to read "Residence C-A-A,
C-A or general service districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 5 by
adding the word "A-B" after the words "in a Residence B-A-A, A-A." (10-
18-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 5 by
inserting the letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "B-A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 5 by
adding after ". . . Residence B District," the words: "nor more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot area in a Residence C District." (6-7-66)]
Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area in a Residence A-A or A District; nor more than fifteen percent
(15%) of the total lot area in a Residence B or C District; nor more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in a business or industrial
district.
[Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area in a Residence A-A, B-A-A or A District; nor more than . . .
etc. (12-13-49)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 6 by
changing the words "B or C District" to read "Residence B or C-A-A
District," and changing the word "D" to "Residence C-A, general service
districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 6 by
adding the word "A-B" after the words "A-A, B-A-A, A or A-B." (10-18-
60)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 6 by
inserting the letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article VIII, Percentage of Lot Occupancy, amend Paragraph 6 by
adding after "or C-A-A District," the words: "nor more than fifteen percent
(15%) of the total lot area in a Residence C District." (6-7-66)]
[ARTICLE VIII-A
Separately Owned Lots in A-A-A Residential District
A single-family dwelling or additions thereto may be erected on any lot
separately owned at the time of its rezoning to A-A-A Residential District
which does not meet the width and area requirements for A-A-A Residential
District, provided the front yard, side yard, rear yard and percentage of lot
occupancy requirements of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to such
rezoning to A-A-A Residential District are met. (11-13-62)]
ARTICLE IX
Housing Density
For buildings hereafter erected, or altered to accommodate or make
provisions for additional families or dwelling space, the minimum required
lot area for the single-family dwelling shall be eleven thousand two hundred
fifty (11,250) square feet in a Residence A-A District, four thousand five
hundred (4,500) square feet in a Residence A District, three thousand six
hundred (3,600) square feet in a Residence B District, one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet in a Residence C District, business or industrial
district; for a two-family dwelling, shall be nine thousand (9,000) square feet
in a Residence A District, five thousand (5,000) square feet in a Residence B
District, and two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet in a Residence
C, business or industrial district; for a hotel or boarding-house, five thousand
(5,000) square feet, but not less than five hundred (500) square feet for each
sleeping room, in a Residence B or C District, and three thousand (3,000)
square feet, but not less than three hundred (300) square feet for each
sleeping room, in a business or industrial district; for an apartment house,
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet for each family in a Residence
C District, and eight hundred (800) square feet for each family in a business
or industrial district; for other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings,
eleven thousand two hundred fifty (11,250) square feet in a Residence A-A
District, four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet per family in a
Residence A District, three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet per
family in a Residence B District, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet per family in a Residence C District, eight hundred (800) square feet per
family in a business district, and five hundred (500) square feet per family in
an industrial district.
[Article IX, Housing Density, shall be amended to read: "For buildings
hereafter erected or altered to accommodate or make provisions for
additional families or dwelling space, the minimum required lot area for the
single-family dwelling shall be eleven thousand two hundred fifty (11,250)
square feet in a Residence A-A District, six thousand (6,000) square feet in a
Residence B-A-A District, four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet in
a Residence A District, three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet in a
Residence B District, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in a
Residence C District, business or industrial district; for a . . . industrial
district; for other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, eleven
thousand two hundred fifty (11,250) square feet in a Residence A-A District,
six thousand (6,000) square feet in a Residence B-A-A District, four
thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet per family in a Residence A 
District, three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet per family in a
Residence B District, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per
family in a Residence C District, eight hundred (800) square feet per family
in a business district, and five hundred (500) square feet in an industrial
district." (12-13-49)]
If accessory buildings are to be used for sleeping quarters by the employees
of the occupant, the above minimum required lot areas shall be increased
five hundred (500) square feet per person in a residence district and three
hundred (300) square feet per person in a business or industrial district.
Provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
[Article IX, Area Density for Housing, is amended to read as follows: "For
buildings hereafter erected, or altered to accommodate or make provisions
for additional families or dwelling space, the minimum required lot area for
a single-family dwelling shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in a
Residence A-A District, eleven thousand two hundred fifty (11,250) square
feet in a Residence A District, six thousand (6,000) square feet in a
Residence B-A-A District, and seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet in any other district: for a two-family dwelling, the minimum required
lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in any permitted
district; for a hotel or apartment house, the minimum required lot area shall
be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in any permitted district and not less
than five hundred (500) square feet of lot area for each sleeping room in
such hotel or apartment house; for all other permitted buildings, not
accessory buildings, the minimum required lot area shall be forty thousand
(40,000) square feet in a Residence A-A District, thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet in a Residence A District, and twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in any other district except business or industrial districts, where the
minimum lot area shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for
each family or apartment; provided, however, that a single-family dwelling
may be erected on any lot separately owned at the time of the passage of this
ordinance, or on any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment
thereto heretofore adopted, and conforming to the requirements of the
Amended Zoning Ordinance prior to any such amendment." (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article IX, Area Density for Housing, by inserting after the words
"in such hotel or apartment house," the following: "For a motel, the 
minimum required lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet in any permitted district, and not less than five hundred (500)
square feet of lot area for each sleeping room in such motel." (6-15-54)]
[Article IX, Area Density for Housing, is amended to read as follows: 1. For
buildings hereafter erected, or altered to accommodate or make provisions
for additional families or dwelling space, the minimum required lot area for:
(a) A single-family dwelling, shall be twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in a Residence A-A, business or industrial district; eleven
thousand two hundred fifty (11,250) square feet in a Residence A District;
six thousand (6,000) square feet in a Residence B-A-A District; and seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in any other district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by adding
the words "ten thousand (10,000) square feet in a Residence A-B District"
after the words "in a Residence A District." (10-18-60)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by the
insertion of the words "forty thousand (40,000) square feet in a Residence
A-A-A District" following the words "shall be." (9-25-62)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by adding
after ". . . Residence B-A-A District," the words: "two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet in a Residence C District; no tract or parcel shall be
developed for attached one-family dwellings in Residence C District unless
the same is a minimum of two (2) acres in total area." (6-7-66)]
[(b) A two-family dwelling, shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in
any permitted district; but no two-family dwelling shall be permitted in a
business or industrial district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (b) to read as
follows: "(b) A two-family dwelling, shall be fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet in any permitted district." (1-3-61)]
[(e) A hotel or apartment house, shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in any permitted district and not less than five hundred (500) square feet
of lot area for each sleeping room in such hotel or apartment house; but no 
hotel or apartment house shall be permitted in a business or industrial
district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1(c) to read as
follows: "A hotel or apartment house, shall be twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in any permitted district and not less than one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of lot area for each sleeping room in such
hotel or apartment house; but no hotel or apartment house shall be permitted
in a business or industrial district." (9-1-59)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1(c) to read: "A
hotel, motel, boardinghouse or apartment house, shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in any permitted district and not less than one thousand
two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of lot area for each sleeping room in
such hotel, motel or apartment house." (8-23-60)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, Paragraph 1(c), delete "or
apartment house" and add a new provision to read: "An apartment house or
garden apartment, shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet in any
permitted district and not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet of lot area for each unit in such apartment house or garden apartment."
(10-23-62)]
[(d) A motel, shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in any
permitted district and not less than five hundred (500) square feet of lot area
for each sleeping room in such motel. (5-8-56)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, delete 1 (d) and renumber 1 (c) to
1 (d). (1-3-61)]
[(e) All other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, shall be forty
thousand (40,000) square feet in Residence A-A District, thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet in Residence A District, and twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in any other district. (5-8-56, renumbered "d" 1-3-61)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (e) by adding
the words "or A-B" following "Residence A." (10-18-60)]
[In Article IX, Area Density for Housing, amend Paragraph 1 (d) by the
insertion of the letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[2. Provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be erected
on any lot separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance or on
any lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto heretofore
adopted, and conforming to the requirements of the Amended Zoning
Ordinance prior to any such amendment. (5-8-56)]
[ARTICLE IX-A
Ground Floor Area
For single-family dwellings hereafter erected, the minimum required ground
floor area, exclusive of attached garages, carports, open porches and
breezeways, shall be:
1. For a one-story dwelling, eight hundred (800) square feet;
2. For all other types of dwellings, six hundred seventy-two (672)
square feet, provided, however, that at least one hundred twenty-eight (128)
square feet of floor area above the ground floor must be finished in
accordance with the provisions of the New York State Building Code.
For the purpose of this ordinance, ground floor area shall mean the area
within the exterior of the walls of a dwelling at grade level. (3-23-54)]
[Article IX-A, Ground Floor Area, is amended to read as follows:
"For single-family dwellings hereafter erected, the minimum required
ground floor area, exclusive of attached garages, carports, open porches and
breezeways, shall be:
1. For a one-story dwelling, eight hundred (800) square feet;
2. For all other types of dwellings, six hundred seventy-two (672)
square feet, provided, however, that at least one hundred twenty-eight (128)
square feet of floor area above the ground floor must be finished in
accordance with provisions of the New York State Building Code; except in
a Residence B-A-A District, where the minimum ground floor area shall be
six hundred (600) square feet.
For the purpose of this ordinance, ground floor area shall mean the area
within the exterior of the walls of a dwelling at grade level." (4-17-56)]
[Article IX-A, Ground Floor Area, is amended to read as follows: "For
single-family dwellings hereafter erected, the minimum required ground
floor area, exclusive of attached garages, carports, open porches and
breezeways, shall be:
(1) For a one-story dwelling, nine hundred (900) square feet." (12-10-
57)]
[In Article IX-A, Ground Floor Area, after Paragraph (1) add a new
Paragraph (2) to read: "For a two-story dwelling where the second story
contains the same living area as the first story, the minimum ground floor
area shall be six hundred fifty (650) square feet and both stories must be
finished in accordance with the provisions of the New York State Building
Code." (6-3-58)]
[(2) For all other types of dwellings, seven hundred fifty (750) square feet,
provided, however, that at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor
area above the ground floor must be finished in accordance with the
provisions of the New York State Building Code; except in a Residence BA-A District, where the minimum ground floor area shall be six hundred
(600) square feet. (12-10-57)]
[In Article IX-A, Ground Floor Area, renumber existing Paragraph (2) to
(3). (6-3-58)]
[For the purpose of this ordinance, ground floor area shall mean the area
within the exterior of the walls of a dwelling at grade level. (12-10-57)]
ARTICLE X
Width of Lot
For buildings hereafter erected, the minimum required width of lot for a
single-family dwelling shall be seventy-five (75) feet in a Residence A-A
District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence A District, forty (40) feet in a
Residence B, C or business district, and thirty-five (35) feet in an industrial
district; for a two-family dwelling, eighty (80) feet in a Residence A District,
fifty (50) feet in a Residence B, C or business district, and forty-five (45)
feet in an industrial district; for an apartment house, fifty (50) feet in a
Residence C District or business district, and forty-five (45) feet in an
industrial district; for other permitted buildings, one hundred (100) feet in a
Residence A-A District, eighty (80) feet in a Residence A District, fifty (50)
feet in a Residence B or C District, ten (10) feet in a business or industrial
district.
[Article X, Width of Lot, is amended to read: "For buildings hereafter
erected, the minimum required width of lot for a single-family dwelling shall
be seventy-five (75) feet in a Residence A-A District, sixty (60) feet in a
Residence B-A-A District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence A District, forty
(40) feet in a Residence B or C or business district, and thirty-five (35) feet
in an industrial district; for a ......... industrial district: for other permitted
buildings, one hundred (100) feet in a Residence A-A, B-A-A District,
eighty (80) feet in a Residence A District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence B or
C District, ten (10) feet in a business or industrial district." (12-13-49)]
Provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
[Article X, Width of Lot, is amended to read as follows: "For buildings
hereafter erected, the minimum required width of lot for a single-family
dwelling shall be one hundred (100) feet throughout in a Residence A-A
District, sixty (60) feet throughout in a Residence B-A-A District, and
seventy-five (75) feet throughout in any other district; the minimum required
width for a lot for a two-family dwelling, boarding or lodging house shall be
one hundred (100) feet throughout; the minimum required width for a lot for
a hotel or apartment house shall be two hundred (200) feet throughout; the
minimum required width for a lot for other permitted buildings, not
accessory buildings, shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet throughout in a
Residence A-A District, and one hundred (100) feet throughout in any other
district." (6-26-52)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, add a new sentence at the end of the first
paragraph to read as follows: "Except, however, that a lot which is
nonrectangular in shape need not have the required width throughout so long
as it conforms to the required width, measured in a straight line, at the
building line of the district in which it is located, and otherwise conforms
with all requirements of this ordinance." (6-22-54)]
[Provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot
separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance, or on any lot
separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto heretofore adopted,
and conforming to the requirements of the Amended Zoning Ordinance prior
to any such amendment. (6-26-52)]
[Article X, Width of Lot, is amended to read as follows:
1. For buildings hereafter erected, the minimum required width of lot for:
(a) A single-family dwelling, shall be one hundred (100) feet
throughout in a Residence A-A, business or industrial district, sixty (60) feet
throughout in a Residence B-A-A District, and seventy-five (75) feet
throughout in any other district. (5-8-56)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by adding the words "or
A-B" after the words "one hundred (100) feet throughout in a Residence AA." (10-18-60)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by adding the words
"one hundred fifty (150) feet throughout in a Residence A-A-A District" just
after the words "A single-family dwelling, shall be." (9-25-62)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, amend Paragraph 1 (a) by adding after
". . . .Residence B-A-A District," the words: "twenty-five (25) feet
throughout in a Residence C District." (6-7-66)]
[(b) A two-family dwelling, boarding or lodging house, shall be one hundred
(100) feet throughout. (5-8-56)]
[(c) A hotel or apartment house, shall be two hundred (200) feet throughout.
(5-8-56)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, amend Paragraph 1 (e) to read: "(c) A hotel,
apartment house or garden apartment, shall be two hundred (200) feet
throughout." (10-23-62)]
[(d) Other permitted buildings, not accessory buildings, shall be one hundred
fifty (150) feet throughout in a Residence A-A District, and one hundred 
(100) feet throughout in any other district; except that in a business or
industrial district the minimum required width shall be eighteen (18) feet. (5-
8-56)]
[In Article X, Width of Lot, amend Paragraph 1(d) by the insertion of the
letters "A-A-A" just before the letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[2. Except. however, that a lot which is nonreetangular in shape need not
have the required width throughout so long as it conforms to the required
width, measured in a straight line, at the building line of the district in which
it is located, and otherwise conforms with all requirements of this ordinance.
(5-8-56)]
[3. Provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be erected on any
lot separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance, or on any
lot separately owned at the time of any amendment thereto heretofore
adopted, and conforming to the requirements of the Amended Zoning
Ordinance prior to any such amendment. (5-8-56)]
ARTICLE XI
Front Yard
General. All buildings, except accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall
have a minimum required front yard of forty (40) feet in a Residence A-A
District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence A District, fifteen (15) feet in a
Residence B or C District, and ten (10) feet in a business or industrial
district; except as may be otherwise shown on the Zoning Map.
[Article XI, Front Yard, shall be amended to read: "General, All buildings,
except accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall have a minimum required
front yard of forty (40) feet in a Residence A-A District, twenty-five (25)
feet in a Residence B-A-A or A District, fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B or
C District, and ten (10) feet in a business or industrial district, except as may
be otherwise shown on the Zoning Map." (12-13-49)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, is amended to read as follows: "General. All
buildings, except accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall have a
minimum required front yard of forty (40) feet in a Residence A-A or A
District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A or A District, twenty-
five (25) feet in a Residence B, C or D District, and ten (10) feet in a
business or industrial district, except as may be otherwise shown on the
Amended Zoning Map." (6-26-52)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, at the end of the first paragraph, add: "Excepting
that in a Residence A Zone where the width of lot is one hundred (100) feet
or more, the front yard setback may be a minimum of thirty (30) feet." (9-
13-55)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, is amended to read as follows: General:
1. All buildings, except accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall
have a minimum required front yard of:
(a) Forty (40) feet in a Residence A-A and A District, or business and
industrial district on which a dwelling is erected, excepting that in a
Residence A Zone where the width of lot is one hundred (100) feet or more,
the front yard setback may be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. (5-8-56)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, is amended by the deletion of "and industrial district
on which a dwelling is erected," in "General, 1 (a)." (3-12-57)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (a), add "in the ease of a
dwelling" immediately following "business district." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (a), add the words "and
thirty (30) feet in a Residence A-B District" after the words "or business
district in the case of a dwelling." (10-18-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (a), add the words
"seventy-five (75) feet in a Residence A-A-A District" after 1 (a). (9-25-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (a), change the number
"seventy-five (75)" to "fifty (50)." (12-4-62)]
[(b) Twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A, B, C or D District. (5-8-
56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, amend Paragraph 1 (b) by changing the
words "C or D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service districts."
(8-23-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (b), add at the end,
changing the period to a semicolon: "except an apartment house or a garden
apartment shall be forty (40) feet from all streets and have at least fifty (50)
feet as the minimum separation distance between buildings." (10-23-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, amend Paragraph 1 (b) by adding after
"Twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A, B," the letter "C." (6-7-66)]
[(c) Ten (10) feet in a business or industrial district, except as may be
otherwise shown on the Amended Zoning Map, and further provided that
such buildings are not dwellings. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, amend Paragraph 1 (e) by deleting the
words "or industrial district." (3-12-57)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 1 (c), delete "or industrial."
(6-3-58)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, add Paragraph 1 (d) as follows: "(d)
Fifty (50) feet in any industrial district, except where additional distance is
required by any previous ordinance." (3-12-57)]
Provided, however, that if twenty-five percent (25%) of the block frontage
on either side of the street is improved with buildings having a greater depth
of front yard than is required by this ordinance, these new buildings shall
have a front yard whose depth shall be equal to the average depth of front
yard of such existing buildings; except that in no case shall the front yard be
required to be more than sixty (60) feet in a Residence A-A District, nor
more than forty (40) feet in a Residence A District, nor more than twentyfive (25) feet in a Residence B or C District. No front yard shall be required
on any street in a business or industrial district intersecting the Montauk
Highway, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the sides of the said
Montauk Highway.
[Provided, however, that if twenty-five percent (25%) of the block
frontage ................ except that in no case shall the front yard be required to 
be more than sixty (60) feet in a Residence A-A District, nor more than forty
(40) feet in a Residence B-A-A or A District, nor more than twenty-five (25)
feet in a Residence B or C District. (12-13-49)]
[Provided, however, that if twenty-five percent (25%) of the block frontage
on either side of the street is improved with buildings having a greater depth
of front yard than is required by this ordinance, these new buildings shall
have a front yard whose depth shall be equal to the average depth of front
yard of such existing buildings, except that in no case shall the front yard be
required to be more than sixty (60) feet in a Residence A-A District, nor
more than forty (40) feet in a Residence A District, nor more than twentyfive (25) feet in a Residence B, C or D District. No front yard shall be
required on any street in a business or industrial district intersecting the
Montauk Highway, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the sides of the
said Montauk Highway. (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article XI, Front Yard, General, by the elimination of the following
sentence in the second paragraph as follows: "No front yard shall be required
on any street in a business or industrial district intersecting the Montauk
Highway, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the sides of the said
Montauk Highway." (6-1-54)]
[2. Provided, however, that if twenty-five percent (25%) of the block
frontage on either side of the street is improved with buildings having a
greater depth of front yard than is required by this ordinance, these new
buildings shall have a front yard whose depth shall be equal to the average
depth of front yards of such existing buildings, except that in no case shall
the front yard be required to be more than:
(a) Sixty (60) feet in a Residence A-A District, or in a business or industrial
district in the case of a dwelling. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 2 (a), add the words "Ninetyfive (95) feet in a Residence A-A-A District" after 2 (a). (9-25-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 2 (a), change the number
"Ninety-five (95)" to "Seventy (70)." (12-4-62)]
[(b) Forty (40) feet in a Residence A District. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, Paragraph 2 (b), add the words "or A-B"
after the words "Forty (40) feet in a Residence A." (10-18-60)]
[(c) Twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B, C or D District. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, amend Paragraph 2 (c) by changing the
words "C or D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service districts."
(8-23-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, amend Paragraph 2 (c) by adding after
"Twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B," the letter "C." (6-7-66)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, add Paragraph 3 as follows: "3. Within
the limits of a front yard, no fence or wall, except a retaining wall, shall be
more than four (4) feet high unless the part above such height be not more
than one-fourth (1/4) solid nor impair the unobstructed view through it more
than twenty-five percent (25%)." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, General, add Paragraph 4 after Paragraph 3, as
follows: "4. Exception. For the purpose of front yard setbacks for garden
apartments, a group of buildings may be treated as a single unit." (1-3-61)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, above paragraph headed "Corner lots" and below
paragraph headed "General," add the following paragraph: "Fences. Within
the limits of a front yard, no fence or wall, except a retaining wall, shall be
more than four (4) feet high unless the part above such height be not more
than one-fourth (1/4) solid." (9-10-35)]
[Fences. (Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
Corner lots. All buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall also have a
front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at least twenty (20)
feet in a Residence A-A or A District, fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B
District, and ten (10) feet in a Residence C, business or industrial district,
except as above provided for streets in a business or industrial district
intersecting the Montauk Highway.
[Corner lots. All buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall also have a
front yard facing on the side street. This front yard shall be at least twenty
(20) feet in a Residence A-A, B-A-A or A District, fifteen (15) feet in a 
Residence B District, and ten (10) feet in a Residence C, business or
industrial district, except as above ........................ a through lot. (12-13-49)]
[Corner lots. All buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall also have a
front yard facing the side street. This front yard shall be at least twenty (20)
feet in a Residence A-A or A District, fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B. C
or D District, and ten (10) feet in a business or industrial district, except as
above provided for streets in a business or industrial district intersecting the
Montauk Highway. (The balance of this Article shall remain the same as the
existing provisions.) (6-26-52)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, is amended by the elimination of the final clause in
the fourth paragraph, as follows: "except as above provided for streets in a
business or industrial district intersecting the Montauk Highway." (6-1-54)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, the first paragraph is amended to
read:
1. All buildings hereafter erected on a corner lot shall also have a front yard
facing the side street.
2. This front yard shall be at least:
(a) Twenty (20) feet in a Residence A-A or A District, and in a
business or industrial district in the case of a dwelling. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (a) is amended to read
as follows: "Thirty (30) feet in a Residence A-A or A District, and twenty
(20) feet in a business or industrial district in the case of a dwelling." (3-8-
60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (a), add the words ", AB" after the words "Residence A-A." (10-18-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (a), add the words
"Sixty (60) feet in a Residential A-A-A District" after 2 (a). (9-25-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (a), change the number
"Sixty (60)" to "Fifty (50)." (12-4-62)]
[(b) Fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B, C or D District. (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (b), add B-A-A between
"Residence" and "B." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, amend Paragraph 2 (b) by changing
the words "C or D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service
districts." (8-23-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, amend Paragraph 2 (b) to read as
follows: "2 (b) Fifteen (15) feet in Residential B-A-A, B, C-A-A for singlefamily uses; but twenty-five (25) feet for all other uses in Residential C-AA, C-A and general service districts." (1-3-61)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, add to the end of Paragraph 2 (b),
changing the period to a semicolon: "except an apartment house or garden
apartment shall be forty (40) feet from all streets." (10-23-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, amend Paragraph 2 (b) by adding
after "................. Residential B-A-A, B," the letter "C," and after the words
".................. in Residential ..........," add the letter "C." (6-7-66)]
[(c) Ten (10) feet in a business or industrial district. (The balance of this
Article shall remain the same as the existing provisions.) (5-8-56)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 2 (c), delete "or
industrial." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, add immediately following
Paragraph 2 (c): "2 (d) Twenty-five (25) feet in an industrial district." (6-3-
58)]
On any corner lot no hedge, wall, fence or other boundary structure shall
have a height of more than four (4) feet above the street grade, and no tree,
shrubs or other growths shall be maintained in such location within such
required front yard space as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the
view.
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, the last paragraph is amended to
read: "3. On any corner lot no hedge, wall, fence or other boundary structure
shall have a height of more than three (3) feet above the street grade, and no
trees, shrubs or other growths or any outdoor display or any object for sale
or storage, including automobiles, shall be maintained in such location
within such required front yard space as to cause danger to traffic by
obstructing the view." (3-12-57)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots. Paragraph 3 is amended to read: "On
any corner lot no hedge, wall, fence or other boundary structure or any other
object, including automobiles, signs and displays, shall have a height of
more than three (3) feet above the street grade, and no trees, shrubs or other
growths shall be maintained in such location within such required front yard
space as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view." (3-19-57)]
[Amend Article XI, Front Yard, Corner lots, Paragraph 3, by deleting the
following words: "signs and displays." (8-13-57)]
Through lots. A front yard shall be required on both street frontages of a
through lot.
Accessory buildings. An accessory building shall in no case be nearer the
principal street line than eighty-five (85) feet in a Residence A-A District,
sixty (60) feet in a Residence A District, fifty-five (55) feet in a Residence B
District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence C District, thirty-five (35) feet in a
business district, and thirty (30) feet in an industrial district.
[Accessory buildings. An accessory building shall in no case be nearer the
principal street line than eighty-five (85) feet in a Residence A-A District,
sixty (60) feet in a Residence B-A-A or A District, fifty-five (55) feet in a
Residence B District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence C District, thirty-five
(35) feet in a business district, and thirty (30) feet in an industrial district.
(12-13-49)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, is amended to read as follows:
"An accessory building shall in no case be nearer any street line than eightyfive (85) feet in a Residential A-A District, sixty (60) feet in a Residential A
District, fifty-five (55) feet in a Residential B District, fifty (50) feet in a
Residential C District, thirty-five (35) feet in a business district, and thirty
(30) feet in an industrial district." (1-18-55)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, is amended to read as follows:
"An accessory building shall in no case be nearer any street line than eightyfive (85) feet in a Residence A-A District, sixty (60) feet in a Residence BA-A or A District, fifty-five (55) feet in a Residence B District, fifty (50)
feet in a Residence C or D District, thirty-five (35) feet in a business district
and thirty (30) feet in an industrial district; and in a Residence B-A-A
District, an accessory building shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five
percent (75%) of the total depth of the lot and shall in no case be nearer than
ten (10) feet to the side or rear property line." (3-9-56)]
[Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, is amended by changing the
words "C or D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service districts."
(8-23-60)]
[Change Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, by the substitution of
"fifty (50)" in place of "thirty (30)" feet in the line now reading "and thirty
(30) feet in an industrial district," and by the insertion of the following
language at the end of the line now reading "thirty (30) feet in an industrial
district": "except that in the case of a corner lot the accessory building shall
be set back from the side street sixty (60) feet in a Residence A-A District,
fifty (50) feet in a Residence A, B, C or D District, and thirty-five (35) feet
in a business district and fifty (50) feet in an industrial district." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, by the elimination of
the words "C or D" and the substitution therefor of "C-A-A-, C-A and
general service district"; by the addition of the words "A-B or" after the
words "fifty-five (55) feet in a Residence"; and by the addition of the words
"A-B" after the words "fifty (50) feet in a Residence A." (10-18-60)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, add the words "one hundred
seventy (170) feet in a Residence A-A-A District" after "street line than,"
and the letters "A-A-A" just before the second letters "A-A." (9-25-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, change the number "one
hundred seventy (170)" to "eighty-five (85)." (12-4-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, add at the end: "Accessory
buildings to apartment houses or garden apartments shall be set back a
minimum of eighty (80) feet from all streets." (10-23-62)]
[In Article XI, Front Yard, Accessory buildings, amend paragraph by adding
after ". . . .fifty (50) feet in a Residence. . . .," the letter "C." (6-7-66)]
ARTICLE XII
Side Yards
General. All main buildings hereafter erected in a residence district shall
have a side yard along each lot line other than a street or rear line. The sum
of the widths of the two (2) side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be
at least thirty (30) feet in a Residence A-A District, sixteen (16) feet in a
Residence A District, twelve (12) feet in a Residence B and ten (10) feet in a
Residence C District, with a minimum width for either of such yards of ten
(10) feet in a Residence A-A District, four (4) feet in a Residence A, B or C
District.
[Article XII, Side Yards, is amended to read: "General. All main buildings
hereafter erected in a residence district shall have a side yard along each lot
line other than a street or rear line. The sum of the widths of the two (2) side
yards for a single-family dwelling shall be at least thirty (30) feet in a
Residence A-A District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A District,
and sixteen (16) feet in a Residence A District, twelve (12) feet in a
Residence B District, and ten (10) feet in a Residence C District, with a
minimum width of either of such yards of ten (10) feet in a Residence A-A
or B-A-A District, four (4) feet in a Residence A, B or C District or business
district on the beach or islands." (12-13-49)]
[Article XII, Side Yards, is amended to read as follows: "General. All main
buildings hereafter erected in a residence district shall have a side yard along
each lot other than a street or rear line. The sum of the widths of the two (2)
side yards for a single-family dwelling shall be at least forty (40) feet in a
Residence A-A District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A District,
thirty-two (32) feet in a Residence A District, and eighteen (18) feet in a
Residence B, C or D District, with a minimum width of either of such yards
of eighteen (18) feet in a Residence A-A District, ten (10) feet in a
Residence B-A-A District, fourteen (14) feet in a Residence A District, and
eight (8) feet in a Residence B, C or D District." (6-26-52)]
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, first paragraph, first sentence, is amended
by adding immediately following the words "residence district," the words 
"or general service districts"; second sentence, by changing the words "C or
D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service districts," in both places.
(8-23-60)]
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, first paragraph, second sentence, is
amended to read: "The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for a
single-family dwelling shall be at least thirty-six (36) feet in a Residence AA and A-B District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence B-A-A District,
twenty-eight (28) feet in a Residence A District, twenty (20) feet in a
Residence B, C-A-A, C-A or general service district, with a minimum width
of either of such yards of eighteen (18) feet in a Residence A-A and A-B
District, ten (10) feet in a Residence B-A-A District, fourteen (14) feet in a
Residence A District and ten (10) feet in a Residence B, C-A-A, C-A or
general service district." (10-18-60)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, in the second sentence of the first
paragraph insert the words "at least eighty-five (85) feet in a Residence A-AA District" just after the words "shall be," and insert the words "twenty-five
(25) feet in a Residence A-A-A District" just after the words "such yards of."
(9-25-62)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, change in the first paragraph the
number "eighty-five (85)" to "sixty (60)." (12-4-62)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, amend Paragraph 1 by adding at the
end of the sentence: "In a Residence C District there shall be no side yards
required for attached one-family dwellings. In a Residence C District, onefamily dwelling units may be grouped into a cluster, provided, however, not
less than six (6) units nor more than sixteen (16) units shall be permitted in
any single cluster. There shall be a minimum separation between clusters of
attached one-family dwellings of fifty (50) feet." (6-7-66)]
The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for a two-family dwelling
shall be at least thirty-two (32) feet in a Residence A District, sixteen (16)
feet in a Residence B and ten (10) feet in a Residence C, with a minimum
width for either of such side yards of sixteen (16) feet in a Residence A,
eight (8) feet in a Residence B and four (4) feet in a Residence C.
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, second paragraph, is amended to read as
follows: "The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for a two-family 
dwelling or an automatic telephone exchange, where such uses are
permitted, shall be at least thirty-two (32) feet in a Residence A District,
sixteen (16) feet in a Residence B District, and ten (10) feet in a Residence C
District, with a minimum width for either of such side yards of sixteen (16)
feet in a Residence A, eight (8) feet in a Residence B, and four (4) feet in a
Residence C District." (9-13-38)]
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, second paragraph, is amended to read as
follows: "The sum of the width of the two (2) side yards for a two-family
dwelling, a boarding or lodging house or an automatic telephone exchange,
where such uses are permitted, shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet in any
district, with a minimum width of either of such yards of fifteen (15) feet."
(6-26-52)]
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, second paragraph, is amended by the
insertion of "in a residential district" immediately following the words
"telephone exchange." (8-23-60)]
The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for an apartment house in a
Residence C District shall be at least sixteen (16) feet, with a minimum
width of at least eight (8) feet for either of such side yards.
[Article XII, Side Yards, General, second paragraph, second sentence, is
amended to read as follows: "The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards
for an apartment house, hotel, nursing home, hospital or sanitarium, where
such use is permitted, shall be at least fifty (50) feet, with a minimum width
of at least twenty-two (22) feet for either of such side yards." (6-26-52)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, second paragraph, second sentence,
omit "apartment house" and add at the end of the paragraph: "The sum of the
widths of the side yards of any apartment house or garden apartment shall be
at least one hundred (100) feet, with a minimum of fifty (50) feet for any of
such side yard." (10-23-62)]
[The sum of the width of the two (2) side yards for any residence erected in
a business or industrial district shall be at least thirty-two (32) feet, with a
minimum width of either of such yards of fourteen (14) feet. (6-26-52)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, the third paragraph is amended to read
as follows: "3. The sum of the width of the two (2) side yards for any 
residence erected in a business or industrial district shall be at least forty
(40) feet, with a minimum width of either of such yards of eighteen (18)
feet." (All other provisions are to be the same as existing provisions.) (5-8-
56)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, third paragraph, change the figure
"forty (40)" to "thirty-six (36)" so that it will read as follows: "The sum of
the width of the two (2) side yards for any residence erected in a business or
industrial district shall be at least thirty-six (36) feet, with a minimum width
of either of such yards of eighteen (18) feet." (1-3-61)]
The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for any other permitted
building, not an accessory building, shall be at least forty (40) feet in a
Residence A-A District, thirty-two (32) feet in a Residence A or B District
and sixteen (16) feet in a Residence C District, with a minimum width for
either of such yards of twenty (20) feet in a Residence A-A District, sixteen
(16) feet in a Residence A or B District and eight (8) feet in a Residence C
District.
[The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards for any other permitted
building, not an accessory building, shall be at least fifty (50) feet in a
Residence A-A District, forty (40) feet in a Residence A District, thirty (30)
feet in a Residence B, C or D District, with a minimum width of either of
such yards of twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence A-A District, twenty (20)
feet in a Residence A District and fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B, C or D
District. (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article XII, Side Yards, General, fourth paragraph, by changing the
words "C or D District" to read "C-A-A, C-A or general service districts," in
both places. (8-23-60)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, add the words "or A-B" after
"Residence A" and before "District," in fourth paragraph, in both places. (1-
3-61)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, fourth paragraph, insert the letters "AA-A" just before the letters "A-A" in both places. (9-25-62)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, General, change the fourth paragraph to read as
follows: "The sum of the width of the two (2) side yards for any other 
permitted building, not an accessory building, shall be at least sixty (60) feet
in Residence A-A-A District, fifty (50) feet in a Residence A-A District,
forty (40) feet in a Residence A or A-B District, thirty (30) feet in a
Residence B, C-A-A, C-A or general service districts, with a minimum
width of either of such yards of thirty (30) feet in a Residence A-A-A
District, twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence A-A District, twenty (20) feet
in a Residence A or A-B District and fifteen (15) feet in a Residence B, CA-A, C-A or general service district." (12-4-62)]
Accessory buildings in any residence district used for dwelling purposes
shall not be nearer any side line than four (4) feet.
[Accessory buildings in any residence district used for dwelling purposes
shall not be nearer any side line than ten (10) feet. (6-26-52)]
Fences. Within the limits of a side yard, no fence or wall, except a retaining
wall, shall be more than four (4) feet high, unless the part above such height
be not more than one-fourth (1/4) solid.
[Fences. (Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article XII, Side Yards, Fences, by changing the period to a comma
and by the addition of the following words: "except that in specific zoning
applications the Town Board may authorize a solid fence or wall to be more
than four (4) feet in height, provided such authorization be in the interest of
the public." (8-13-57)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, Fences, change the existing terminology to read:
"Within the limits of the side yard, no fence or wall except a retaining wall
shall be more than four (4) feet high from the front property line to a point
twenty (20) feet back of the front property line, nor more than six (6) feet
high for the remainder of the side yard, unless the part above such height be
not more than one-fourth (1/4) solid, except that in specific zoning
applications the Town Board may authorize a solid fence or wall to be more
than four (4) feet in height, provided such authorization be in the interest of
the public." (9-8-59)]
Exception. The space in a side yard shall be open except for the ordinary
projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, open terraces,
pergolas and other features of a strictly landscape or ornamental character.
[Exception. (Same as existing provisions) (6-26-52)]
[In Article XII, Side Yards, Exception, insert new paragraph following the
words "and other features of a strictly landscape or ornamental character," to
read as follows: "For the purpose of side yard for garden apartments, a group
of buildings may be treated as a single unit." (1-3-61)]
ARTICLE XIII
Rear Yard
General. All main buildings hereafter erected in a residence district shall
have a rear yard whose depth is not less than twenty-five (25) feet or less
than the height of the building. All main buildings hereafter erected in a
business or industrial district which are used in whole or in part for dwelling
purposes shall have a rear yard whose depth is not less than fifteen (15) feet
or less than forty percent (40%) of the height of the building.
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, revise the first sentence of Paragraph 1
to read: "All main buildings hereafter erected in a residence district shall
have a rear yard whose depth is not less than twenty-five (25) feet, except
apartment houses, where the rear yard shall be not less than the height of the
building." (1-10-39)]
[Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, is amended to read: "All main buildings
hereafter . . . than forty percent (40%) of the height of the building. All main
buildings hereafter erected in a business district on the beach or islands shall
have a rear yard whose depth is not less than four (4) feet." (12-13-49)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, insert a new sentence to read as
follows: "All main buildings hereafter erected in any business district to be
used for business purposes exclusively shall have a rear yard of not less than
ten (10) feet." (9-11-56)]
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, first paragraph, by adding
immediately following the words "residence district," the words "or general
service district." (8-23-60)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, reword first sentence of first paragraph
to read as follows: "All main buildings hereafter erected in a residence
district or general service district shall have a rear yard whose depth is not
less than twenty-five (25) feet, except apartment houses, where the rear yard
shall be not less than thirty-five (35) feet." (1-3-61)]
[Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, is amended by the insertion of the
following sentence: "All main buildings hereafter erected in any business
district to be used for business purposes exclusively shall have a rear yard of
not less than ten (10) feet." (9-19-61, readopted 10-17-61)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, change first sentence to read: "All main
buildings hereafter erected in a residence district or general service districts
shall have a rear yard whose depth is not less than twenty-five (25) feet,
except apartment houses or garden apartments, where the rear yard shall be
not less than fifty (50) feet." (10-23-62)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, first paragraph, first sentence, is
amended by the addition of the following language instead of the period:
"and in a Residence A-A-A District, where the rear yard shall not be less
than forty (40) feet." (12-4-62)]
Accessory buildings in any residence district used for dwelling purposes
shall not be nearer the rear line than four (4) feet.
[Article XIII, Rear Yard, as it relates to accessory buildings, is amended to
read as follows: "Accessory buildings in any residence district used for
dwelling purposes shall not be nearer the rear line than ten (10) feet." (All
other provisions of this Article shall remain the same.) (6-26-52)]
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, second paragraph, by adding
immediately following the words "residence district," the words "or general
service district." (8-23-60)]
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, second paragraph, by the addition
of the following language in place of the period: "except that twenty-five
(25) feet will be required when the residential district is Residential A-A-A."
(12-4-62)]
[Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, is amended by the insertion of the
following language immediately before "Fences": "Rear yards in an
industrial district are required of not less than ten (10) feet except when
sharing common boundaries with a residential zone, in which case other
requirements will be provided by the Town Board in order to protect the
character of the residential district." (3-12-57)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, delete the sentence reading as follows:
"Rear yards in an industrial district are required of not less than ten (10) feet
except when sharing common boundaries with a residential zone, in which
case other requirements will be provided by the Town Board in order to
protect the character of the residential district." (1-3-61)]
[In Article XIII, Rear Yard, General, add at end of first paragraph: "Rear
yards in an industrial district are required of not less than ten (10) feet except
when sharing common boundaries with a residential zone, in which case
twenty (20) feet will be required unless zoning stipulations filed require
otherwise." (3-1-61)]
Fences. Within the limits of a rear yard, no fence or wall, except a retaining
wall, shall be more than four (4) feet high, unless the part above such height
be not more than one-fourth (1/4) solid.
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, Fences, by changing the period to a comma
and adding the following words: "except that in specific zoning applications
the Town Board may authorize a solid fence or wall to be more than four (4)
feet in height, provided such authorization be in the interest of the public."
(8-13-57)]
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, Fences, by changing the existing
terminology to read: "Within the limits of a rear yard, no fence or wall,
except a retaining wall, shall be more than six (6) feet high, unless the part
above such height be not more than one-fourth (1/4) solid, except that in
specific zoning applications the Town Board may authorize a solid fence or
wall to be more than six (6) feet in height, provided such authorization be in
the interest of the public." (9-8-59)]
Exceptions. The space in the rear yard shall be open except for the ordinary
projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, open terraces,
pergolas and other features of a strictly landscape or ornamental character.
[Amend Article XIII, Rear Yard, Exceptions, by inserting a new paragraph
following the words "and other features of a strictly landscape or ornamental
character," to read as follows: "For the purpose of rear yard for garden
apartments, a group of buildings may be treated as a single unit." (1-3-61)]
Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the rear yard area in a residence district nor more than fifty percent (50%)
of the rear yard area in a business or industrial district. The yard area
occupied by accessory buildings, however, shall be included in computing
the maximum percentage of lot area which may be built upon or occupied.
[ARTICLE XIII-A
Screen Planting
Where a parking area, business district or industrial district adjoins any
residence district, or where such parking area or district adjoins land owned
and maintained by the Long Island State Park Commission as a state park or
parkway, there shall be provided a landscaped area of at least five (5) feet in
depth adjoining such district or districts or such park or parkway. Such
landscaping shall consist of evergreens which shall be so located and of
sufficient density to effectively screen the parking area, business district and
industrial district from the residential district or from land owned and
maintained by the Long Island State Park Commission. Said screening shall
be subject to the approval of the Building Department. Any site plan
required under this ordinance shall designate the evergreens intended to be
planted and the location thereof. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the
provisions of this section may not apply where the parking area, business
and industrial districts and any residence district or land owned and
maintained by the Long Island State Park Commission are separated by a
street, road or highway. (9-11-56)]
[Amend Article XIII-A, Screen Planting, by the addition of the following
words at the end of the first paragraph after ". . . or highway": "except that in
specific zoning applications the Town Board may authorize the substitution
of a solid fence or wall in lieu of the required screen planting." (10-28-58)]
[Amend Article XIII-A, Screen Planting, by the addition of the following
words at the end thereof: "2. Such screening may start at ground level ten 
(10) feet back of the front property line and taper to full height at a point
twenty (20) feet back of the front property line." (8-13-57)]
ARTICLE XIV
Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces
No garage for more than five (5) motor vehicles in any district, nor any
gasoline or motor fuel filling station or any public parking space shall be
permitted unless approved by the Board of Appeals, and said Board may
require an arrangement of the height, location and dimensions of the
buildings and construction of the buildings, pumps and other structures as it
deems best to insure safety, minimize traffic difficulties and to safeguard
adjacent property. No public garage or parking space shall have an entrance
or exit for vehicles within two hundred (200) feet of an entrance or exit of a
school, playground, public library or church. No automobile repair or
adjustment work shall be done out-of-doors. The entrances and exits shall be
at least ten (10) feet wide for any public garage, motor fuel filling station or
public parking space and shall communicate directly with the street.
Auto wrecking shall not be permitted as an accessory use.
The same regulations as are above prescribed for a garage shall apply to
stables, except that one (1) horse and one (1) wagon shall be considered as
equivalent to one (1) motor vehicle.
[Article XIV, Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces, is
revised to read: "No public garage, filling station or parking space shall have
an entrance or exit for vehicles within two hundred (200) feet of an entrance
or exit of a school, playground, public library or church. No automobile
repair or adjustment work shall be done out-of-doors. The entrances and
exits shall be at least ten (10) feet wide for any public garage, motor fuel
filling station or public parking space and shall communicate directly with
the street." (3-22-38)]
[Article XIV, Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces, is
amended as follows: "No public garage, filling station or parking space shall
be located within two hundred (200) feet of a school, playground, public
library or church except with the approval of the Board of Appeals and the
written consent to such use from any school, playground, public library or 
church located within the two-hundred-foot radius. No automobile
adjustment work shall be done out-of-doors. The entrances and exits shall be
at least ten (10) feet wide for any public garage, motor fuel filling station or
public parking space, and shall communicate directly with the street." (9-13-
38)]
[Amend Article XIV, Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces,
by the insertion of the following words at the end of the first paragraph: In
the interests of public safety, public health and general welfare, the erection
and operation of gasoline service stations is hereby limited as follows:
(1) No gasoline service station shall be established hereafter in any permitted
district unless in a specific case and after due notice and public hearing the
Town Board shall approve such use or the location thereof; provided,
however, that no such use shall be permitted without compliance with the
following: (8-13-57)]
[(1) No gasoline service station shall be established hereafter in any
permitted district unless in a specific case and after due notice and public
hearing the Town Board shall approve such use of the location thereof;
provided, however, that no such use shall be permitted without compliance
with the following additional requirements: (1-14-58)]
[a. Gas pumps are considered structures and will be required to comply with
the setback requirements as established in the area or along the highway in
question and in no case less than twenty-five (25) feet, unless permitted by
the Board of Appeals. (8-13-57)]
[a. All structures will be required to comply with the front yard setback
requirements as established in the area or along the highway in question and
in no case less than twenty-five (25) feet, unless permitted by the Board of
Appeals. Gas pumps are included in the term "structures." (1-14-58)]
[In Article XIV, Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces,
amend Paragraph 1 (a) to read as follows: "(a) All structures will be required
to comply with the front yard setback requirements as established in the area
or along the highway in question and in no case less than twenty-five (25)
feet, unless permitted by the Town Board upon application therefor at the
public hearing for approval of the use or location of such gasoline service
station. Gas pumps are included in the term "structures." (5-26-64)]
[b. Maximum of one (1) pump island will be allowed for each seventy-five
(75) feet of frontage along any highway. (8-13-57)]
[c. Gasoline service station operations located within fifty (50) feet of a
residence will be required to provide and maintain a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet of evergreen screen planting and stockade fencing in accordance with
Article XIII-A of the Amended Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip. A
minimum of ten (10) feet will be required where a residence is within one
hundred (100) feet of the gas station site. (8-13-57)]
[d. Ingress and egress to the service station shall be limited to one (1) each
for each street frontage. Curbing and sidewalks shall be required along all
street frontages. Such entrances or exits shall not be closer than twenty-five
(25) feet to the corner of the property, except ten (10) feet on an interior lot,
and no wider than twenty-five (25) feet unless modified by the Town Board.
Where there is a pie-shaped or rounded corner, the distance shall be
measured from the point of tangency of the property line with the curve of
the corner and a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet will be required in
place of twenty-five (25) feet. (8-13-57)]
[Amend Article XIV, Garages, Stables, Filling Stations and Parking Spaces,
Paragraph 1 (d), to read as follows: "d. Ingress and egress to the service
station shall be limited to one (1) each for each street frontage; and only
access permitted shall be from an improved street and not from any
adjoining properties. All adjoining property to be separated by fence or
suitable barrier. Curbing and sidewalks shall be required along all street
frontages. Such entrances or exits shall not be closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to the corner of the property, except ten (10) feet on an interior lot, and
no wider than twenty-five (25) feet unless modified by the Town Board.
Where there is a pie-shaped or rounded corner, the distance shall be
measured from the point of tangency of the property line with the curve of
the corner and a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet will be required in
place of twenty-five (25) feet." (12-29-59)]
[e. Outdoor storage and display of accessories, portable signs and outdoor
repair work shall be prohibited at all times. Premises shall not be used for
the sale or display of automobiles, trailers, boats or other vehicles. (8-13-
57)]
[f. The use of bright-colored banners, whirling pennants and other novelties
shall be prohibited at all times. The use of flood-lighting, flashlighting and
other external neon lighting shall be prohibited after 10:00 p.m., prevailing
time. This restriction is not intended to prohibit the use of ordinary interior
or exterior lighting necessary for the operation of the filling station. (8-13-
57)]
[g. Adequate drainage plans and other plans in compliance with the above
provisions shall be submitted to the Town Board and substantially followed.
(8-13-57)]
[Auto wrecking shall not be permitted as an accessory use. (3-22-38)]
[The same regulations as are above prescribed for a garage shall apply to
stables. (3-22-38)]
[ARTICLE XIV-A
Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards
Section 1. Residential districts.
In a residential district, no advertising signs or commercial billboards shall
be permitted except the following: (6-11-46)]
[Amend Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards,
Section 1, Residential districts, by changing the words "residential districts"
to read "residential and general service districts," in both places. (8-23-60)]
[A. One (1) sign displaying the street number or name of the occupancy of
the premises, or both, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. (6-11-46)]
[B. A "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in
area and advertising only the property on which the same is erected. Such
sign may in no case be located nearer to any street line than the minimum
setback line required by the Amended Zoning Ordinance for residences,
except that it may be placed on the face of an existing nonconforming
building. (6-11-46)]
[C. Building contractor and subcontractors' signs maintained on buildings
while the same are actually under construction, provided that no sign shall
exceed twelve (12) square feet in area or be located nearer to any street line
than the minimum setback line required by the Amended Zoning Ordinance
for buildings in that use district. (6-11-46)]
[D. Where acreage is advertised for sale or letting or is in the process of
subdivision, one (1) real estate sign not larger than twenty-four (24) square
feet in area shall be permitted for each five hundred (500) feet of street
frontage. These signs shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any street
line. (6-11-46)]
[E. One (1) sign not larger than one (1) square foot in area bearing only the
name and occupation (words only) of a professional person or one
conducting a home occupation as listed under Article VI. (6-11-46)]
[F. Advertising signs and commercial billboards erected prior to the
adoption of the several Amended Zoning Ordinances of the Town of Islip,
New York, may continue such nonconformity until they are destroyed,
structurally altered, reconstructed, changed or moved; but no advertising
sign or commercial billboard shall hereafter be structurally altered,
reconstructed, changed or moved unless application shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals and a permit be issued by such Board, upon such
terms and conditions as the Board may impose, permitting said advertising
signs or commercial billboards to be structurally altered, reconstructed,
changed or moved for a period not exceeding two (2) years. (6-11-46)]
[In passing upon such application, the Board shall have the power to
consider the original intended use of the sign or billboard, the adaptability of
said sign or billboard to structural alterations, reconstructions or changes
contemplated, the conformity or lack of conformity of the proposed sign or
billboard to the provisions of this ordinance; the appropriate development of
the particular lot or parcel of land; and such other facts as in the judgment of
the Board may be necessary and proper in connection with such application.
(6-11-46)]
[Section 2. Business districts.
In business districts, no advertising signs, commercial billboards or other
device for advertising purposes shall hereafter be permitted except the
following:
A. Advertising signs or commercial billboards as permitted in Section
1, except overhanging street signs and attached roof signs. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Business districts, amend Paragraph A by deleting "and attached roof signs."
(8-22-50)]
[B. Marquees designating a theater or hotel. (6-11-46)]
[C. Advertising signs painted on an awning over a show window facing on a
public highway or street, when used to advertise any business conducted on
the premises of which such window is a part; but in no case shall signs be in
excess of twelve (12) inches in height. (6-11-46)]
[D. Facial signs painted on, applied on or attached to a wall of a building or
of a store front, projecting not more than twelve (12) inches from such wall,
when used for advertising the merchandise or products sold on the premises
or the name of the merchant or company conducting such business. No facial
sign shall be so constructed or attached to any building as to obstruct any
window, door or other opening of the same. (6-11-46)]
[E. The customary sign which is an integral part of a gasoline pump used at
filling stations, or the standard signs of a nationally operated gas companies
attached to a pole, providing the same does not project beyond the property
line or over a sidewalk or driveway. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
rewrite Paragraph E to read as follows: "E. Signs, not exceeding forty-eight
(48) square feet in area, suspended from or attached to a pole or poles, post
or posts embedded in the ground, providing the same does not project
beyond the property line or over a public sidewalk or public driveway." (8-
22-50)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph E, insert the words "a combined total of" between the words
"exceeding" and "forty-eight (48)." (6-3-58)]
[F. Customary barberpoles which conform to the requirements of the
Highway Department and when attached to the wall of a building shall not
extend more than twelve (12) inches from the same. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
add new Paragraph G to read as follows: "G. Roof signs properly
constructed and installed, and located at least three (3) feet from the front,
rear or sides of the building; not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in area; and in no case shall the sign, together with its base, exceed ten
(10) feet in height." (8-22-50)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph G is amended by changing the period at the end to a semicolon
and adding the following words: "provided that where such sign is to be
placed on an integral part of the structure and where such sign does not
create a hazard to fire fighting, such sign may be authorized by the Town
Board upon application to the Building Inspector even if it would be closer
than three (3) feet from the front, rear or sides of the building." (4-30-57)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2.
Business districts, add the following: II, Directional signs, other than
provided in Section 7 hereof, may be placed after obtaining a permit
therefor, subject to the following conditions:
1. The sign must indicate a business conducted in the Town of Islip.
2. No more than two (2) signs may be used to indicate the location of a
business. (1-8-52)]
[In Article XIV-A. Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2.
Paragraph H(2), change the figure "two (2)" between the words "than" and
"signs" to "four (4)." (6-3-58)]
[3. No sign shall be so placed without the written authorization of the owner
of the property. (1-8-52)]
[4. No sign shall be further away than one (1) mile by highway measure
from the place of business it serves to indicate; and no such sign shall be 
permitted on the same highway upon which such business is located. (1-8-
52)]
[Amend Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, by
eliminating the period at the end of the sentence at Section 2, Paragraph
H(4), and by substituting a comma therefor and by adding after the comma
the clause: "except where a visual obstruction exists which might reasonably
be deemed to interfere with the view of such business, and in such case one
(1) such sign shall be permitted on the same highway on which such
business is located, provided a variance permitting such sign is granted by
the Board of Appeals after public notice and hearing." (6-22-54)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph H(4), change "one (1) mile" to "three (3) miles." (6-3-58)]
[5. No sign shall be larger than six (6) square feet. (1-8-52)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph H(5), change the number "six (6)" to "twelve (12)." (6-3-58)]
[6. Such sign shall be placed on a pole or poles or a post or posts no higher
from the ground than eight (8) feet and no thicker than six (6) inches at any
point. (1-8-52)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph H(6), add at the end thereof: "in addition, the total height of such
sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet from the ground." (6-3-58)]
[7. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be allowed on any one (1) piece of
property, except that an owner may install a pole or poles or a post or posts
on his property no higher from the ground than eight (8) feet and no thicker
than six (6) inches at any point, and may attach thereto a total of not more
than four (4) such signs, the lowest of which shall be at least four (4) feet
above the ground. (1-8-52)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph H(7), insert the word "interior" between "one (1)" and "piece." (6-
3-58)]
[8. No permits shall be issued for such a sign to be painted, pasted or
otherwise attached to a tree or bridge or to any part of a building. (1-8-52)]
[9. No sign shall be erected or maintained within five hundred (500) feet of
the border of any state park or parkway. (1-8-52)]
[10. Requests for permits for signs shall be made to the Building Inspector
on a special form prepared for this purpose. The application form will
require all information necessary to determine whether the sign complies
with these regulations. No permit will be issued for any sign until an
inspection of the proposed location has been made and approved. (1-8-52)]
[11. The annual fee for the calendar year for each such sign shall be fifteen
dollars ($15.) and shall be paid to the Town of Islip. (1-8-52)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
Paragraph H(11) and H(12), the present sentence following (11) to be
deleted and the present sentence (12) to be renumbered (11). (6-3-58)]
[12. Such signs erected or maintained which do not comply with the
requirements of this section shall be made to comply or be removed prior to
May 1, 1952. (1-8-52)]
[13. Fraternal and charitable organizations, service clubs and membership
corporations are exempted from compliance with the provisions of this
section. (1-8-52)]
[Amend Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards,
Section 2. Business districts, by the addition of the following words: "13.
Corner lots. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, a
sign shall not be closer to the street grade than ten (10) feet unless it is
within three (3) feet of the street grade. The pole supporting such sign, if
such sign is ten (10) feet or higher from the street grade, shall not exceed a
diameter of twelve (12) inches, nor shall such sign have an area in excess of
forty-eight (48) square feet." (8-13-57)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 2,
renumber Paragraph H(13) as Paragraph 1. (6-3-58)]
[Section 3. Industrial districts.
In industrial districts, no advertising signs or commercial billboards or other
device or display for advertising purposes shall be permitted except the
following:
A. Advertising signs or commercial billboards as permitted in Section
1 and Section 2.
B. Commercial billboards not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in
length and twelve (12) feet in height, of safe construction, erected a
minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of a
highway with another highway or railroad, or one hundred (100) feet from
any curve, corner, angle or turn of a highway, or one hundred (100) feet of
any official traffic sign, or two hundred (200) feet of a cemetery, public
park, public school, public playground, place of historical interest or railroad
station. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 3
B, the period after "station" is to be changed to a semicolon and the
following words added: "provided, however, that all such signs shall have at
least a thirty-foot setback from any road or highway, and further provided
that a maximum of one (1) sign will be permitted for each five hundred
(500) feet of road or highway frontage." (3-17-59)]
[C. Commercial billboards heretofore erected and which do not
conform to the provisions of this ordinance may be continued as
nonconforming uses until they are destroyed, structurally altered,
reconstructed, changed or moved, but no commercial billboard shall
hereafter be structurally altered, reconstructed, changed or moved unless
application shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals and a permit be
issued by such Board, upon such terms and conditions as the Board may
impose, permitting said commercial billboards to be structurally altered,
reconstructed, changed or moved. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A. Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 3,
Industrial districts, at the end of the first paragraph under C, add the
following: "for a period not exceeding two (2) years." (8-22-50)]
[In passing upon such application the Board shall have the power to consider
the original intended use of the billboard, the adaptability of said billboard to
structural alterations, reconstruction or changes contemplated, the
conformity or lack of conformity of the proposed billboard to the provisions
of this ordinance, the appropriate development of particular lot or parcel of
land, and such other facts as in the judgment of the Board may be necessary
and proper in connection with such application. (6-11-46)]
[Section 4. General.
In any use district, a community hospital or church sign shall be permitted,
provided, however, it is set back a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from
the nearest street or property line. (6-11-46)]
[Section 5.
Signs or notices of a public utility, highway, police, fire department or
municipal agency, not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, shall be
permitted in any use district when necessary or convenient for the direction,
information or safety of the public. (6-11-46)]
[Section 6.
One (1) advertising sign for permitted uses, other than residential, in
residential districts, shall be permitted, providing it is a facial sign not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area or it is set back a minimum
distance of ten (10) feet from the nearest street or property line. (6-11-46)]
[Section 7.
Directional signs for aviation painted on flat roofs shall be permitted in any
use district. (6-11-46)]
[Section 8.
Advertising signs and commercial billboards now erected or maintained in
any use district in the Town of Islip, which do not conform to the
requirements of this Article, shall be made to conform or removed prior to
July 1, 1948. (6-11-46)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 8,
change the words "July 1, 1948" to "October 1, 1958." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, add new
Section 9 to read as follows: "Section 9. No sign shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered within the zoned areas of the Town of Islip until a permit
authorizing the same shall have been issued by the Building Inspector." (8-
22-50)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section 9,
add at the end: "Such permit shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from
the date of issuance." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, add new
Section 10 to read as follows: "Section 10. All fees shall be collected by the
Building Inspector and remitted to the Supervisor monthly; and the
following rates are established: two dollars ($2.) for each one hundred
dollars ($100.) or fraction thereof up to five hundred dollars ($500.), and
fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional one hundred dollars ($100.) or fraction
thereof on the cost of the sign and construction thereof." (8-22-50)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, revise
Section 10 to read as follows: "All fees shall be collected by the Building
Inspector and remitted to the Supervisor monthly; and the following rates are
established: three dollars ($3.) per one hundred dollars ($100.) up to and
including five hundred dollars ($500.), and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50)
per one hundred dollars ($100.) additional exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.). The minimum fee to be three dollars ($3.). All permits will expire
twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance. Renewal fee will be the
same as the original fee. No permit will be issued for a longer or lesser
length of time. Any sign left erected on an expired permit is in violation of
Article XIV-A, Section 9." (6-3-58)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, Section
10 is revised by changing the following sentence, "Renewal fee will be the
same as the original fee," to read: "Renewal fee will be one dollar ($1.) for
each sign for a period of twenty-four (24) months." (9-6-60)]
[In Article XIV-A, Advertising Signs and Commercial Billboards, add
Section 11 following Section 10, as follows: "Section 11. Signs that have
become dangerous or hazardous or signs erected in violation of this 
ordinance are subject to having their permit revoked and/or the penalties
included in the Revised Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Islip." (6-3-58)]
ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
Any lawful use of property existing at the time of the passage of this
ordinance that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the sections
of this ordinance shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming
use may be continued but shall not be extended, except that the extension of
a use to any portion of a building, which portion was arranged or designed
for such nonconforming use at the time of the passage of this ordinance,
shall not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use. A building
arranged, designed or devoted to a nonconforming use at the time of the
passage of this ordinance may not be reconstructed or structurally altered to
an extent exceeding in aggregate twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground
area of the building, unless the use of said building is changed to a
conforming use. A nonconforming use of land may not be extended in the
aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area occupied at the
time of the passage of this ordinance. A nonconforming use shall not be
changed unless changed to a conforming use. A nonconforming use, if
changed to a conforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use.
[In Article XV, Nonconforming Buildings and Uses, after the first sentence,
which reads as follows, "Any lawful use of property existing at the time of
the passage of this ordinance that does not conform to the regulations
prescribed in the sections of this ordinance shall be deemed a
nonconforming use," add the following: "except signs as covered in Article
XIV-A." (6-11-46)]
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition a wall declared unsafe.
[ARTICLE XV-A
Industrial Wastes
No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used which
shall include any pipe, conduit or other device which carries or is intended to
carry any industrial waste fluids or effluent of any kind from any sewage
treatment, collection or disposal system, if said effluent in said pipe, conduit
or other device shall run or flow directly into any stream, river, lake, pond,
bay or other waterway. (8-11-64)]
ARTICLE XVI
Administration
General. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered within the area
covered by the Zoning Map until a permit authorizing the same shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall require that the application for a building
permit and the accompanying plot plan contain all the information necessary
to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building complies with the
provisions of this ordinance.
No building permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector has certified
that the proposed building or alteration complies with the provisions of this
ordinance.
Planning Board. If there exists a Planning Board empowered to approve
subdivision plots or plans, as provided in Section 149-0 of the Town Law as
amended, said Planning Board shall also have the power to modify the
zoning regulations for such subdivisions as provided in Section 149-r of the
Town Law as amended, and the said Planning Board shall study the
application of this ordinance and shall from time to time recommend to the
Town Board such changes in the ordinance and in the boundaries of the
various districts as it shall deem advisable to further promote the health,
safety, morals or the general welfare of the community.
[In Article XVI, Administration. Planning Board, the first paragraph is
amended by the deletion of the following language: "said Planning Board
shall also have the power to modify the zoning regulations for such 
subdivisions as provided in Section 281 of the Town Law as amended, and
the." (4-30-57)]
If there exists a Planning Board as provided by Article 6-B of the Town
Law, the Building Inspector shall be an adjunct of the Planning Board and
shall come under the direct supervision of the executive head of such
Planning Board.
[In Article XVI, Administration, Planning Board, delete the second
paragraph, reading as follows: "If there exists a Planning Board as provided
by Article 6-B of the Town Law, the Building Inspector shall be an adjunct
of the Planning Board and shall come under the direct supervision of the
executive head of such Planning Board." (9-10-46)]
[Add a new paragraph at the end of Article XVI, Administration, to read as
follows: "Abandonment of project for which authorization, approval or
special exception is granted. Any building permit authorized, approved or
granted by special exception by the Town Board shall become null and void
if the said building permit has not been secured within six (6) months from
the date of such authorization, approval or special exception, and work
commenced thereunder and completed within eighteen (18) months from the
date of the issuance of said permit, or the lot or premises used for the
purposes granted by the said authorization, approval or special exception
within six (6) months from the date of order or decision of the said Town
Board." (6-7-60)]
[In Article XVI, Administration, the following sentence is to be added at the
end of the last paragraph: "The Town Board, by resolution, may extend the
time limitations herein in a specific case." (4-26-66)]
ARTICLE XVII
Interpretation: Purpose
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the ordinance, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience or the general welfare. The lot or yard
areas required by this ordinance for a particular building shall not be
diminished and shall not be included as a part of the required lot or yard
areas of any other building. If the lot or yard areas required by this ordinance
for a particular building are diminished, the continued existence of such
building shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. The lot or yard
areas of buildings existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall
not be diminished below the requirements herein provided for buildings
hereafter erected, and such required areas shall not be included as a part of
the required areas of any building hereafter erected. This ordinance shall not
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing
provisions of law or ordinance or rules or regulations previously adopted or
issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use
of buildings or premises; provided that where this ordinance imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the heights
of buildings, or requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by
such existing provisions or regulations, the provisions of this ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XVIII
Board of Appeals
Organization. There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of five (5)
members appointed by the Town Board. The Board of Appeals shall have
the powers granted by and be controlled by the provisions of Article 17-C,
Section 349-0 of the General Town Law.
[In Article XVIII. Board of Appeals, in paragraph headed "Organization,"
strike out second sentence and replace with the words: "The Board of
Appeals shall have the powers granted by and be controlled by the provision
of the Town Law and any amendments thereto." (9-10-35)]
Special exceptions. When in its judgment the public convenience and
welfare shall be substantially served and the appropriate use of neighboring
property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of
Appeals may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the
regulations herein established as follows:
1. Grant a permit wherever it is provided in this ordinance that the
approval of the Board of Appeals is required.
2. Permit the location in any use district of a state or municipal
building or use, college building, hotel, boathouse, dock, wharf, bathhouse,
crematory, cemetery, public utility plant, aviation field, sanitarium, hospital,
greenhouse, dairy or kennel.
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, in Paragraph 2
strike out "or kennel" and add: ", kennel, commercial poultry farm, sheep
farms, stables, dairies." (9-10-35)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, at the end of
Paragraph 2 add the words: "community directional devices and historical
tablets." (8-25-36)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, revise Paragraph 2
to read: "2. Permit the location in any use district of a state or municipal
building or use, college building, hotel, boathouse, dock, wharf, bathhouse,
crematory, cemetery, public utility plant, aviation field, sanitarium, hospital,
greenhouse, dairy, kennel, commercial poultry farm, sheep or goat farm, fox,
mink or similar animal farm, stable, dairy, community directional device and
historical tablet." (1-10-39)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, under Paragraph 2
add "pig" before the words "sheep or goat farm" so that it reads "pig, sheep
or goat farm." (11-13-41)]
[Under Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, Paragraph 2,
between the words "use" and "college building," insert the words "private
school." (10-24-44)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, Paragraph 2, delete
the following words: "crematory, aviation field, sanitarium, greenhouse,
dairy, kennel, commercial poultry farm, pig, sheep or goat farm, fox, mink
or similar animal farm, stable"; and add before the word "hospital," the word
"nonprofit." (8-30-55)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, after Paragraph 2
insert new paragraph to read: "2a. Permit the location in a business district of
knitting and manual weaving establishments; shops for constructing and
assembling small toys and novelties; sewing and dressmaking
establishments; establishments for making and delivering ice cream, 
provided the capacity does not exceed three hundred (300) gallons per day."
(8-25-36)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, beginning at the
end of Paragraph 2a, add the following: "establishments for light
manufacturing which, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals, would not
interfere with traffic, emit noxious or offensive odors, dust, smoke or gas
fumes, create undue noise or a fire hazard, would not be a detriment to
adjoining retail businesses, and would not be a detriment to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community." (2-26-46)]
3. Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use,
or permit the extension of a nonconforming use or building upon the lot
occupied by such use or building at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
4. Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted district
immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than fifty (50) feet beyond the
boundary line of the district in which such building or use is authorized.
5. Grant in undeveloped sections of the town temporary and conditional
permits for not more than two-year periods for any structure or use.
6. Permit in any district such modifications of the requirements of these
regulations as said Board may deem necessary to secure appropriate
development of a lot where adjacent to such lots on two (2) or more sides
there are buildings that do not conform to these regulations.
7. Permit such modifications to the yard or lot area or lot width
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a
parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the
passage of this ordinance and is of such restricted area that it cannot be
appropriately improved without such modifications.
[Add all of the following boldface words in Article XVIII, Board of
Appeals, Special exceptions. Paragraph 7, immediately following the word
"ordinance," so as to read: "7, Permit such modifications to the yard or lot
area or lot width regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate
improvement of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at
the time of the passage of the ordinance and has not come into common
ownership with adjoining land at any time thereafter, and is of such 
restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved without such
modifications." (9-13-60)]
8. Permit the erection of a building or portion of a building covering
not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lot to a height not
more than fifty (50) feet in excess of the limits prescribed herein.
9. Grant in a Residence B or Residence C District temporary and
conditional permits for not more than ninety-day periods for amusement
parks, fairgrounds, circus or carnival grounds.
[Delete Paragraph 9 of Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions,
which reads: "9. Grant in a Residence B or Residence C District temporary
and conditional permits for not more than ninety-day periods for amusement
parks, fairgrounds, circus or carnival grounds." (5-31-55)]
[Amend Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, by the
addition of the following paragraph: "9. Permit in any use district for not
more than a five-year period the offices of two (2) professional persons,
provided:
a. Adequate self-contained drainage is provided.
b. Adequate hard-surfaced, off-street parking is provided.
c. One (1) of the professional persons resides on the premises."
(3-15-60)]
[Delete Paragraph 10 of Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special
exceptions, which reads: "10. Permit the erection in a Residence A District
of two-family dwellings where the plot area exceeds nine thousand (9,000)
square feet and the lot width is eighty (80) feet or more." (5-31-55)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, after Paragraph 10
add a paragraph to read as follows: "11. Permit the location of a wholesale
food distribution station in any business district." (4-12-38)]
[Add Paragraph 12 to Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions,
to read as follows: "12. Permit the location in any use district of a camping
area for not more than a five-year period, providing said area is and remains 
under one (1) ownership during the period of the permit; and regulate the
location of structures and streets within the area." (8-27-40)]
[Amend Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, by adding a
paragraph to be known as 13 and to read as follows: "13. Permit location of
a two-story motel or series of two-story motels in any permitted district
where lot is of such restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved
without such modification." (6-15-54)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, delete the
following paragraph: "13. Permit location of a two-story motel or series of
two-story motels in any permitted district where lot is of such restricted area
that it cannot be appropriately improved without such modification." (1-3-
61)]
[The following language is to be added to Article XVIII, Board of Appeals,
Special exceptions: "13. Permit the location in a Business 1 or 2 District of a
dry-cleaning establishment or outdoor display when related to a so-called
shopping center or a group of connected stores." (4-30-57)]
[Amend Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions. Paragraph 13,
by adding after words "dry-cleaning establishment," the words "or bank
drive-in window service." (4-23-63)]
[In Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, amend Paragraph
13 by the deletion of the words "a dry-cleaning establishment or." (8-27-63)]
[Amend Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, Special exceptions, to read as
follows: "14. Permit, in the case of public utility buildings, where no
commercial office, repair or storage facilities are maintained, modifications
of the height, width, lot area, lot width and percentage of lot occupancy
regulations, provided that as a condition to the granting of such
modification, the Board may impose reasonable restrictions in order to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the town." (11-16-
65)]
[Amend Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, by adding at the end of the Article
the following: "Abandonment of project for which variance is granted. Any
variance granted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to this Article or under
the provisions of Section 267 of the Town Law shall become null and void if
the building permit has not been secured within six (6) months and work
commenced thereunder and completed within eighteen (18) months from the
date of the issuance of said permit, or the lot or premises used for the
purposes granted by the variance within six (6) months from the date of
order or decision of said Board of Appeals." (6-7-60)]
[Amend the last paragraph of Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, by the
insertion of the words "and/or special exception" after the word "variance"
so that the paragraph will read as follows: (added words in boldface)
"Abandonment of project for which variance and/or special exception is
granted. Any variance and/or special exception granted by the Board of
Appeals pursuant to this Article or under the provisions of Section 267 of
the Town Law shall become null and void if the building permit has not
been secured within six (6) months and work commenced thereunder and
completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of the issuance of said
permit, or the lot or premises used for the purposes granted by the variance
and/or special exception within six (6) months from the date of order or
decision of said Board of Appeals." (4-24-62)]
[Amend the last paragraph of Article XVIII, Board of Appeals, to read as
follows: "Abandonment of project for which variance and/or special
exception is granted. Any variance and/or special exception granted by the
Board of Appeals pursuant to this Article or under the provisions of Section
267 of the Town Law shall become null and void if the building permit has
not been secured within eight (8) months and work commenced thereunder
and completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of the issuance of
said permit, or the lot or premises used for the purposes granted by the
variance and/or special exception within eight (8) months from the date of
order or decision of said Board of Appeals." (11-9-65)]
ARTICLE XIX
Completion of Existing Buildings
Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in the plans, construction
or designed use of a building actually under construction at the time of the
passage of this ordinance or for which a building permit has heretofore been
issued; provided such entire building shall be completed within one (1) year
from the date of the passage of this ordinance. If an amendment to this
ordinance is hereafter adopted incorporating additional areas in the Zoning 
Map or changing the boundaries of districts, the provisions of this ordinance
with regard to existing buildings or uses of premises, or buildings under
construction, or building permits previously issued, shall apply to existing
buildings or uses of premises, or buildings under construction, or permits
previously issued in the area affected by such amendment.
[Change the existing language of Article XIX, Completion of Existing
Buildings, so as to read: "Nothing herein contained shall require any changes
in the plans, construction or designed use of a building actually under
construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance or any amendment
thereto for which a building permit has heretofore been issued, provided
such entire building shall be completed within one (1) year from the date of
the passage of this ordinance or the amendment thereto." (4-17-62)]
[In Article XIX, Completion of Existing Buildings, add a new paragraph to
read: "Opening of unofficial highways. No unofficial highway located on
real estate subdivision maps that have not been approved by the Planning
Board shall be opened or improved until a permit for same has been obtained
from the Building Department after Planning Board and Highway
Department approval. Application for permit to open or improve an
unofficial highway may be obtained from the Building Department and shall
be filed with the Building Inspector on a form prescribed by him, together
with a bond sufficient in form and amount to insure the performance of the
proposed work. All fees for permits to open or improve roads shall be
collected by the Building Inspector or authorized agents as appointed by the
Town Board, and remitted to the Supervisor monthly, and the following
rates are hereby established: ten cents ($0.10) per lineal foot of road and/or
four percent (4%) of the cost of items such as catch basins, curbs, etc., when
required." (3-27-62)]
ARTICLE XX
Penalties
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.), and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall 
constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or
premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this ordinance shall
be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person,
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in
the commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as herein provided.
[Amend Article XX, Penalties, by striking out the words "liable to a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.), and each day such violation shall
be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense," and substituting
therefor the words: "punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.)
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both, and each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation."
(4-24-34)]
[Article XX, Penalties, is amended by changing the word "misdemeanor,"
found in the first sentence, to the word "offense." (2-3-59)]
ARTICLE XXI
Amendments
The Town Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify
or repeal this ordinance, including the Zoning Map, by proceeding in the
following manner:
The Town Board, by resolution adopted at a stated meeting, shall fix the
time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause
public notice thereof to be given, stating the general nature of the proposed
amendment.
Whenever the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage in any
district or part thereof shall present to the Town Board a petition duly signed
and acknowledged requesting an amendment, supplement or change,
modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for, or of the Zoning
Map including, such district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Town
Board to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given
in the manner prescribed above.
At a public hearing full opportunity to be heard shall be given to any citizen
and all parties in interest.
[Article XXI, Amendments, is revised to bring it into conformity with the
new state laws, to read:
The Town Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify
or repeal this ordinance, including the Zoning Map, by proceeding in the
following manner:
The Town Board, by resolution adopted at a stated meeting, shall fix the
time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause
fifteen (15) days' public notice thereof to be given, stating the purport of the
proposed amendment. (3-22-38)]
[Article XXI, Amendments, is amended, in the second paragraph thereof, by
changing the provisions of the fifteen-day public notice to ten-day public
notice. (5-25-54)]
[Whenever the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage in any
district or part thereof shall present to the Town Board a petition duly signed
and acknowledged requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for, or of the Zoning
Map including, such district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Town
Board to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given
in the manner prescribed above. (3-22-38)]
[Whenever a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty per
centum (20%) or more either of the area of the land included in such
proposed change or of that immediately adjacent extending one hundred
(100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendments
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least four (4)
members of the Town Board. (3-22-38)]
[In Article XXI. Amendments, revise the fourth paragraph to read:
"Whenever a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty per
centum (20%) or more either of the area of the land included in such
proposed change or of that immediately adjacent extending one hundred
(100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land is presented, such 
amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at
least four (4) members of the Town Board." (1-10-39)]
ARTICLE XXII
Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall
not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision
thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid and unconstitutional.
ARTICLE XXIII
Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect March 12, 1932 and shall automatically
rescind the previous ordinance, together with all subsequent amendments
thereto.