Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Be it enacted by the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit, County of
Monroe, New York, as follows:
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of
Irondequoit, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 235, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the Town of Irondequoit," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the Town of Irondequoit" to any other
local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference
shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article
number or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Town of Irondequoit in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Irondequoit prior to the effective
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
Irondequoit or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of
Irondequoit.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Irondequoit.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Irondequoit or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town
of Irondequoit or other instruments or evidence of the town's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to September 1, 1996.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. All legislation regulating sewers, the sewer system and use regulations.
§ 1-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 1-5
1:4
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Irondequoit and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Irondequoit by impressing thereon the Seal of the
town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town
Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Irondequoit" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town Board to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Irondequoit required to be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in
said Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as
to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment
of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such
changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of
Irondequoit upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town
Board, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Irondequoit or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Irondequoit to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Irondequoit, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Town of Irondequoit, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law as
set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof (chapter
and section number references are to the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
town offices.
§ 1-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Terminology
[Adopted 1-20-1977 by §§ 1.2 and 1.3 of the 1977 Code; amended in
its entirety 6-19-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 1-14. Definitions.
A. Specific terms. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly
stated or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of
Monroe and State of New York.
ASSISTANT TO THE COMMISSIONER — The designated officer of the
Department of Public Works of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of
Monroe and State of New York who aids and advises the Commissioner
of Public Works.
ATTORNEY or TOWN ATTORNEY — The Town Attorney of the Town
of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York or
an attorney retained by the Town Board to render legal advice and
assistance.
BOARD OF APPEALS or ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of
Appeals of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State
of New York.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Town officer appointed by the Town
Board to be in charge of the office of the Building Inspector of the
Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York
designated by the Town Board to enforce jointly with the Fire Marshal
Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and Chapter
235, Zoning, and such other similar and related ordinances and local
laws as may be determined by the Town Board.
CHIEF OF POLICE or POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town
of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
CLERK or TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Irondequoit
in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
CODE — The Town of Irondequoit Municipal Code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Includes Building Inspector, Fire
Marshal, and Director of Community Development.
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS/SUPERINTENDENT OF
HIGHWAYS — The Town officer who is the chief executive officer of
the Department of Public Works and Superintendent of Highways of the
Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
COUNCIL MEMBER — A Council member of the Town of Irondequoit in
the County of Monroe and State of New York.
COUNTY — The County of Monroe in the State of New York.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Monroe in the
State of New York.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The department
formulated by, but not limited to, the Office of the Fire Marshal, the
Office of the Building Inspector, the Division of Planning and Zoning,
headed by the Director.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE — The Department of State of the State of
New York.
DEPUTY TOWN ATTORNEY — The attorney appointed or retained by
the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe
and State of New York to render legal advice and assistance primarily
in those matters pertaining to zoning, building code enforcement and
other similar and related matters.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The Town officer who
is chief executive officer of the Department of Community Development
of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New
York.
DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION — The Town officer who is
the chief executive officer of the Department of Parks and Recreation
of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New
York.2
DIRECTOR OF RECREATION — The Town officer who is the chief
executive officer of the Department of Recreation of the Town of
Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York.[Added
6-18-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of a local law, ordinance or parts thereof
for which he or she is so designated.
FIRE CHIEF — Any of the Fire Chiefs of any (volunteer) fire company
which has contracted with the town to render service in any fire district
or area of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State
of New York.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any of the (volunteer) fire companies under
contract to render services in the Town of Irondequoit in the County of
Monroe and State of New York.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Town officer appointed by the Town Board to be
in charge of the Office of the Fire Marshal of the Town of Irondequoit
in the County of Monroe and State of New York, designated by the
Town Board to enforce jointly with the Building Inspector Chapter 98,
Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and such other similar and
2. Editor’s Note: The former Department of Parks and Recreation is now the Department of
Recreation. See Ch. 44 and the definition of "Director of Recreation" below.
§ 1-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 1-14
1:10
related ordinances and local laws as may be determined by the Town
Board.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe
and State of New York.
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural person,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Irondequoit
in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
RECEIVER OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS — The Receiver of Taxes
and Assessments of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe
and State of New York.
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — The Sealer of Weights and
Measures of the County of Monroe in the State of New York.
SECRETARY OF STATE — The Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
STATE — The State of New York.
SUPERVISOR or TOWN SUPERVISOR — The Supervisor of the Town of
Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
TENANT — A person occupying real property under an oral or written
lease or who is in possession of real property under the actual or tacit
consent of the owner. Whenever a person, not the owner, occupies real
property, it shall be presumed that he or she occupies the same as a
"tenant."
TOWN BOARD or BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit
in the County of Monroe and State of New York.
TOWN ENGINEER or ENGINEER — The duly appointed Town Engineer
of the Town of Irondequoit or a consulting engineer retained by the
Town of Irondequoit or such other Town officer duly designated to
perform the duties and exercise the powers granted to the Town
Engineer.
TOWN JUSTICE — A Town Justice of the Town of Irondequoit in the
County of Monroe and State of New York.
TOWN or TOWN OF IRONDEQUOIT — The Town of Irondequoit in the
County of Monroe and State of New York.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from
time to time, including the Building Code of New York State, the
Residential Code of New York State, the Fire Code of New York State,
the Plumbing Code of New York State, the Mechanical Code of New
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:11
§ 1-15. Word usage.
York State, the Fuel Gas Code of New York State, and the Property
Maintenance Code of New York State. "Uniform Code" shall also
include the New York State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
B. Other words. All other words in this Code and not otherwise specifically
defined shall be construed in the manner that they are normally used
unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise, but words that
have acquired a technical meaning in law and are so used shall be
construed and understood in accordance with such meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 1-15
1:12
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 1-20-1977 by §§ 1.10 and 1.12 of the 1977 Code; amended
in its entirety 6-19-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 1-16. Penalties for offenses.
§ 1-17. Deputies, assistants and representatives.
A. Unless otherwise provided, any offense against any provision of this
Code deemed a violation shall be punishable as follows:
(1) Class A violations: a fine not less than $250 nor more than $500 or
not more than 15 days' imprisonment, or both, plus costs of
restoration.
(2) Class B violations: a fine not less than $100 nor more than $250 or
not more than 15 days' imprisonment, or both, plus costs of
restoration.
(3) Class C violations: a fine not less than $25 nor more than $100 or
not more than 15 days' imprisonment, or both, plus costs of
restoration.
B. An offense against any provision of this Code deemed a misdemeanor
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment not to
exceed one year, or both, plus costs of restoration.
C. Each day an offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. In addition to the above penalties, the Town Board may also maintain an
action or proceeding in the name of the Town in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction any
offense against any provision of this Code.
A. Wherever any officer of the Town is granted certain powers or duties or
is designated as the enforcement officer of a specific chapter or portion
thereof, it shall also be construed to include the deputies, assistants and
representatives of such officer as may be designated, delegated or
authorized by such officer to exercise such powers or duties.
B. While acting within the scope of their employment, it shall be presumed
that all acts performed by such deputies, assistants and representatives
were duly delegated and authorized.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Fees
[Adopted 12-13-1984; amended in its entirety 6-19-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
§ 1-18. Authority of Town officials to establish fee schedules.
[Amended 6-18-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, Town
Clerk, Chief of Police, Director of Community Development, and Director
of Recreation and such other Town officials and employees as may be
authorized by the Town Board shall, in the performance of their respective
duties under all Town ordinances and local laws which establish various fee
schedules or charges, from time to time, establish such fee schedules or
charges, subject to Town Board approval.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:15
Chapter 3
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 3-1. Appointment; compensation; terms; vacancies.
The Town Board shall be empowered to appoint an Architectural Review
Committee consisting of three members and two alternates, all of whom
shall be residents of the Town of Irondequoit. Members shall serve without
compensation. Of the members first appointed, two members shall be
appointed for two-year terms and one member and two alternates shall be
appointed for one-year terms. Their successors shall be appointed for twoyear
terms. Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Board for unexpired terms
of any members whose position on the Architectural Review Committee
shall become vacant.
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
Chapter 12
CONSERVATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Trees — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 12-1. Findings; intent.
The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and manmade
environment within the Town of Irondequoit, in the face of population
growth, urbanization and technologic change, with their accompanying
demands on natural resources, are found to be of increasing and vital
importance to the health, welfare and economic well-being of present and
future inhabitants and require forthright action by the governing body of
the Town of Irondequoit. It is recognized that the biologic integrity of the
natural environment on which man is dependent for survival and the natural
and functional beauty of our surroundings which condition the quality of
§ 1-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 12-1
3:16
our life experience cannot be protected without the full cooperation and
participation of all the people of the town working in partnership with local
and state officials and with various public and private institutions, agencies
and organizations. Establishment of a Conservation Board is a necessary
step in fostering unified action on environmental problems.
§ 12-2. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Town of
Irondequoit to preserve and improve the quality of the natural and manmade
environment on behalf of the present and future inhabitants thereof.
This chapter is not intended and shall not be deemed to impair the powers
of any other public corporation.
§ 12-3. Creation.
The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit hereby creates a board which
shall be known as the "Irondequoit Conservation Board," hereinafter called
the "Conservation Board."
§ 12-4. Composition; vacancies; terms of office.
The Conservation Board shall consist of nine members who shall be
appointed by the Town Board and who will serve at the pleasure of the Town
Board. Persons residing within the Town of Irondequoit who are interested
in the improvement and preservation of environmental quality shall be
eligible for appointment as a member of the Conservation Board. Vacancies
on the Conservation Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment, except that a vacancy occurring other than by the expiration
of term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the unexpired term.
It is further provided that members shall hold office for terms of two years.
§ 12-5. Officers; meetings.
The Town Board shall designate a member of the Conservation Board to
act as Chair thereof. At the first meeting of the Conservation Board, its
members shall elect from among themselves a recording secretary. The
Conservation Board shall adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It
shall keep accurate records of its meetings and activities and shall file an
annual report as provided in § 12-8 of this chapter.
§ 12-6. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Conservation Board shall be to:
A. Advise the Town Board on matters affecting the preservation,
development and use of the natural and man-made features and
conditions of the town insofar as beauty, quality, ecologic integrity and
other environmental factors are concerned and, in the case of man's
activities and developments, with regard to any major threats posed to
§ 12-1 CONSERVATION BOARD § 12-6
12:17
environmental quality so as to enhance the long-range value of the
environment to the people of the town.
B. Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the Town
Board, conduct a program of public information in the community
which shall be designed to foster increased understanding of the nature
of environmental problems and issues and support for their solutions.
C. Conduct studies, surveys and inventories of the natural and man-made
features within the Town of Irondequoit and such other studies and
surveys as may be necessary to carry out the general purposes of this
chapter.
D. Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in public or
private ownership within the municipality, including but not limited to
natural landmarks, glacial and other geomorphic or physiographic
features; streams and their floodplains, swamps, marshlands and other
wetlands; unique biotic communities; scenic and other open areas of
natural or ecological value; and of the ownership, present use and
proposed use of such open areas so as to provide a base of information
for recommendations by the Conservation Board for their preservation
and/or use.
E. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups,
institutions and individuals within the Town of Irondequoit in accord
with the purposes of this chapter.
F. Maintain liaison and communications with public and private agencies
and organizations of local, state and national scope whose programs
and activities have an impact on the quality of the environment or who
can be of assistance to the Conservation Board.
G. Work in cooperation with the Planning Board, recommend from time to
time to the Town Board features, plans and programs relating to
environmental improvement for inclusion in the Comprehensive Plan of
the Town of Irondequoit and, similarly, recommend to the Town Board
appropriate and desirable changes in existing local laws and ordinances
relating to environmental control or recommend new local laws and
ordinances.
H. Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in
accord with the purposes of this chapter.
I. Obtain and maintain in orderly fashion maps, reports, books and other
publications to support the necessary researches of the Conservation
Board into local environmental conditions.
J. When authorized by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of
Irondequoit, accept by gift, grant, devise, bequest or otherwise
property, both real and personal, in the name of the Town of
Irondequoit, as may be necessary to conserve and otherwise properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water resources within the
§ 12-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 12-6
12:18
§ 12-7. Operational guidelines.
boundaries of the Town of Irondequoit. Such real property may be
accepted in fee for land and water rights or as any lesser interest,
development right, easement, including conservation easement,
covenant or other contractual right, including conveyance with
limitations or reversions.
K. Further assist the town in the development of sound open area planning
and assure preservation of natural and scenic resources on the local
level pursuant to General Municipal Law § 239-y, as amended or
changed, as follows:
(1) Review each application received by the Town Board or by the
Building Department, Zoning Board, Planning Board, Board of
Appeals or other administrative body which seeks approval for the
use of development of any open area listed in the open space index.
(2) Submit a written report to the referral body within 45 days of
receipt of such application. Such report shall evaluate the proposed
use or development of the open area in terms of the open area
planning objectives of the municipality and shall include the effect
of such use or development on the open space index. The report
shall make recommendations as to the most appropriate use or
development of the open area and may include preferable
alternative use proposals consistent with open area conservation. A
copy of every report shall be filed with the Town Board.
(3) Make available for public inspection at the office of the
Conservation Board copies of all such reports of the Conservation
Board.
(4) Perform any duties assigned to it by resolution of the Town Board.
(5) Exercise any of the functions and responsibilities heretofore
granted to the Conservation Advisory Board as hereinabove stated.
A. Automatic referral of proposals for development or permits in areas on
the open space index shall be made by the Building Department to the
Conservation Board.
B. An environmental review questionnaire shall be completed by the
developer when he or she presents his or her application to the Building
Department. Unresolved questions may require subsequent
appearance by the developer's representative at a regular Conservation
Board meeting.
C. Conservation Board review and recommendations shall be furnished to
the referring body for its hearing on the matter, timing to be
coordinated to fall within the legislative time allotment where possible.
A copy shall also be furnished to the Town Clerk.3
§ 12-6 CONSERVATION BOARD § 12-8
12:19
§ 12-8. Reports.
The Conservation Board shall submit an annual report to the Town Board
not later than the 31st day of December of each year concerning the
activities and work of the Conservation Board and from time to time shall
submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 12-9. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Conservation Board shall receive no compensation for
their services as members thereof but may be reimbursed for reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties within
the appropriations made available therefor.
Chapter 16
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Attorney — See Ch. 5. Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 16-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the town, but shall not include an independent
contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his or her
estate or judicially appointed personal representative. 4
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
§ 16-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
specified herein which have been commenced, instituted or brought on or
after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 16-3. Defense to be provided; fees and expenses.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 16-4 of this
chapter, the town shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 12-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 16-3
16:20
§ 16-4. Conditions upon duty to defend.
The duties to defend provided in this chapter shall be contingent upon:
have occurred while the employee was acting or in good faith
purporting to act within the scope of his or her public employment or
duties. Such defense shall not be provided where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the town.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter, the employee shall be
represented by the Town Attorney or an attorney employed or retained
by the town for the defense of the employee. The Town Board shall
employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the employee wherever:
(1) The town does not have a Town Attorney;
(2) The Town Board determines, based upon its investigation and
review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Town Attorney would be inappropriate; or
(3) A court of competent jurisdiction determines that a conflict of
interest exists and that the employee cannot be represented by the
Town Attorney.
C. Reasonable attorney fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the
town to such attorney employed or retained, from time to time, during
the pendency of the civil action or proceeding, subject to certification
by the Town Supervisor that the employee is entitled to representation
under the terms and conditions of this chapter. Payment of such fees
and expenses shall be made in the same manner as payment of other
claims and expenses of the town. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by the Town Attorney or by an
attorney employed or retained for such purposes or with respect to the
amount of the fees or expenses shall be resolved by the court.
D. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Town Attorney or the Town Supervisor as required by § 16-4 of this
chapter, the Town Attorney or the Supervisor, as the case may be, shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of an attorney under
the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section, on
behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any question relating to the obligation of the town to
provide a defense.
A. 5Delivery to the Town Attorney or, if none, to the Town Supervisor of the
original or a copy of any summons, complaint and process, notice,
demand or pleading within 10 days after he or she is served with such
document; and
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 16-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 16-4
16:21
§ 16-5. Construal with other statutes.
§ 16-6. Insurance policies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 16-7. Construal of provisions.
As otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the town or any right to defense provided for
any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with or by reason
of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
Chapter 18
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 18-1. Establishment; composition; powers and duties.
B. The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or
proceeding and defense of any action or proceeding against the town
based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that
the town provide for his or her defense pursuant to this chapter, unless
the employee shall state, in writing, that a defense is not requested.
A. The benefits of this chapter will inure only to employees as defined
herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party,
nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or
repeal any provisions of the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. The benefits of this chapter shall be extended to an employee of a
negotiating unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant
to Civil Service Law Article 14, as amended or changed, only if such
agreement expressly so provides.
A. There is hereby established in the Town of Irondequoit, pursuant to the
provisions of the Suburban Town Law6 and the Municipal Home Rule
6. Editor's Note: See Article 3-A of the Town Law.
§ 16-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 18-1
16:22
§ 18-2. Director; deputies to the Director; powers and duties.
§ 18-3. Additional powers and duties; appearance tickets.
The Director of the Department of Community Development and any
assistant and/or deputies who may, from time to time, be appointed by
the Town Board shall perform the following duties and have the following
powers, in addition to any other prescribed by the Town Board:
Law of the State of New York, a department to be known as the
"Department of Community Development " to replace and have the
same powers and duties as the Development Services. Said Department
shall include the following divisions:
(1) Office of the Fire Marshal.
(2) Office of the Building Inspector.
(3) Division of Planning and Zoning.
(4) Any other office or section of the Town government which the Town
Board may, from time to time, place under the jurisdiction and
control of said Department.
B. Said Department shall undertake and perform such duties and
functions as may, from time to time, be assigned thereto by the Town
Board of the Town of Irondequoit.
A. Said Department shall be headed by a director to be appointed by the
Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit who shall be vested with full
authority, direction and control over the Department, including the
power and authority to appoint and remove officers and employees in
said Department, subject to the approval of the Town Board. The
Director shall exercise and perform such other powers and duties as are
prescribed, from time to time, by the Town Board.
B. The Town Board may appoint such assistants and/or deputies to the
Director as it may find necessary for efficient operation of said
Department and prescribe the titles, powers and duties of each. Said
assistants and/or deputies shall have the power to act generally for and
in place of his or her principal, and the office of such assistants and/or
deputies shall be in the exempt class of the civil service system.
A. Director.
(1) He or she shall have jurisdiction and control over the various
divisions which are a part of this Department, subject to direction
from the Town Board.
(2) He or she shall be responsible for the proper and efficient
operation of this Department and all of the divisions thereof,
coordinating insofar as possible the activities of the various
divisions under his or her jurisdiction and control.
§ 18-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-3
16:23
(3) He or she shall carry out other duties and powers as prescribed by
the Town Board.
B. The Director of the Department of Community Development, the
Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or any employee of the
Department with code enforcement authority and any of their
assistants and/or deputies shall have the authority, pursuant to Article
150 of the Criminal Procedure Law, as amended or changed, and
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 4(a), as amended or
changed, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by him or her
directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal
court in connection with his or her alleged commission of a designated
offense of any ordinance, local law or provision of the Code of the Town
of Irondequoit that the Director of the Department of Community
Development, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal and any employee of the
Department with code enforcement authority and any of their
assistants and/or deputies are required or authorized to enforce.
C. The Division of Planning and Zoning shall have such officers and
employees as may be authorized by the Town Board to carry out the
functions of the Division of Planning and Zoning and shall serve within
the Department of Community Development. The Division of Planning
and Zoning shall, under the direction of the Director of the Department
of Community Services, have the following powers and duties, subject
to approval of the Town Board:
(1) Planning Board.
(a) The Director of the Department of Community Development
shall serve as Clerk of the Town Planning Board and assist the
Town Board and the Town Planning Board in the review,
administration and management of all development and land
subdivision projects within the Town and to coordinate such
review with the appropriate county, state and federal agencies
and other adjoining municipalities as needed and required by
law.
(b) The Director of the Department of Community Development
shall be responsible for preparing and keeping all records of
the Town Planning Board proceedings and decisions, as well as
maintenance and update of the Town's Official Zoning Map.
(2) Community planning: to manage and supervise special projects and
planning studies that address the special needs of the Town and its
neighborhoods, and to work with and represent the Town in
planning efforts undertaken by the federal, state, county and other
areawide organizations, as directed by the Town Board.
(3) Zoning Board of Appeals. The Director of the Department of
Community Development shall act as Clerk of the Zoning Board of
Appeals and assist such Board in the administration and
interpretation of the Official Zoning Map and Zoning Law7 of the
§ 18-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 18-3
16:24
Chapter 20
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16. Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 20-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ethics Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 20-2. Purpose.
The proper administration of the government of the Town of Irondequoit
requires its officers and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or
unpaid, to be independent, impartial and free from conflicts of interest in
fulfilling their public responsibilities so that the public will have confidence
in the integrity of its town government. The purpose of this chapter is to
Town, as well as appeals from the provisions of such laws, as
authorized by the Town Board, and to prepare and keep records of
all Zoning Board of Appeals proceedings and decisions.
(4) Conservation Board: to provide administrative and staff support to
the Town's Conservation Board.
(5) Environmental quality review (SEQRA): to coordinate and advise
each board in regards to the determinations, findings and filing of
notices and recordkeeping requirements for all Town actions as
required under Article 8 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law and its corresponding rules and regulations,
more commonly referred to as the "State Environmental Quality
Review Act" (SEQRA).
(6) Floodplain management: to administer and manage the Town's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and issue Flood Insurance Rate
Map certificates upon request by the public.
(7) Surplus Town lands: to coordinate and administer the sale and
disposition of surplus Town lands.
(8) Other responsibilities: to perform such other duties and functions
that are prescribed to be performed by the Department in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful direction of the
Supervisor. However, the Director of Planning and Zoning may
delegate any of the powers or direct any of the duties to be
performed by any of his or her subordinates.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 18-3 ETHICS § 20-2
20:25
establish minimum standards for the ethical conduct of town officers and
employees to help ensure that the business of town government is free from
improper influence that may result from opportunities for private gain. At
the same time, it is recognized that public service cannot require a complete
divesting of all proprietary interests, nor impose overly burdensome
disclosure requirements, if local governments are to attract and hold
competent administrators. Although the assurance of ethical conduct will
continue to rest primarily on the personal integrity of the officers and
employees themselves, on the commitment of elected and appointed
officials and on the vigilance of their communities, the establishment of
the standards and guidelines set forth in this chapter is an additional
step toward providing the highest caliber of public administration of local
government and increased confidence in public officials. By requiring public
disclosure of financial interests that may influence or be perceived to
influence the actions of public officials, this chapter is intended to facilitate
consideration of potential problems before they arise, to minimize
unwarranted suspicion and to enhance the accountability of government to
the people.
§ 20-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms will have the meanings
indicated:
APPROPRIATE BODY — The Board of Ethics created by this chapter.
CHIEF FISCAL OFFICER — The Supervisor, Director of Finance, a
Comptroller, Commissioner of Finance or other officer of the town
possessing similar powers and duties.
COMMISSION — The State of New York Temporary State Commission on
Local Government Ethics.
CONTRACT — Any claim, account or demand against or agreement with the
town, express or implied, and shall include the designation of a depository
of public funds and the designation of a newspaper, including but not
limited to an official newspaper for the publication of any notice, resolution,
ordinance or other proceeding where such publication is required or
authorized by law.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to
a town officer or employee as a result of a contract with the town. For the
purposes of this chapter, a town officer or employee shall be deemed to have
an "interest" in the contract of:
His or her spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the town which such officer or employee serves;
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
§ 20-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-3
20:26
LOCAL ELECTED OFFICIAL — An elected official of the town except judges
or justices of the unified court systems.
LOCAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — The head (other than local elected
officials) of any agency, department, division, council, board, commission
or bureau of the town and their deputies and assistants, and the officers
and employees of such agencies, departments, divisions, boards, bureaus,
commissions or councils who hold policy-making positions as annually
determined by the appointed authority and set forth in a written instrument
which shall be filed by the appropriate body during the month of February;
except that the term "local officer or employee" shall not mean a judge,
justice, officer or employee of the unified court system.
MINISTERIAL MATTER — The same meaning as ascribed to such term by
Subdivision 1 of § 73 of the Public Officers Law, as amended or changed.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
town, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative
board, commission or any other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed
to be a "municipal officer or employee" solely by reason of being a volunteer
fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a Fire Chief or Assistant Fire
Chief.
RELATIVES — Such individuals, spouse, child, stepchild, stepparent or any
person who is a direct descendent of the grandparents of the reporting
individual or of the reporting individual's spouse.
SPOUSE — The husband or wife of the reporting individual unless living
separate or apart from the reporting individual with the intention of
terminating the marriage or providing for permanent separation or unless
separated pursuant to:
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
UNEMANCIPATED CHILD — Any son, daughter, stepson or stepdaughter
who is under the age of 18, unmarried and living in the household of the
appropriate individual.
§ 20-4. Conflicts of interest.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by any such officer or employee.
D.
A. A judicial order, decree or judgment; or
B. A legally binding separation agreement.
A. Except as provided in § 802 of the General Municipal Law, as amended
or changed:
(1) No municipal officer or employee or local elected official or local
officer or employee shall have an interest in any contract with the
town when such officer or employee, individually or as a member of
a board, has the power or duty to:
§ 20-3 ETHICS § 20-4
20:27
(a) Negotiate, prepare, authorize or approve the contract or
authorize or approve payment thereunder.
(b) Audit bills or claims under the contract.
(c) Appoint an officer or employee who has any of the powers or
duties set forth above.
(2) No chief fiscal officer, treasurer or his or her deputy or employee
shall have an interest in a bank or trust company designated as a
depository, paying agent, registration agent or for investment of
funds of the town.
B. No municipal officer or employee or local elected official or local officer
or employee shall engage in any act which is in conflict or gives the
appearance of conflict with the performance of his or her official duties.
A municipal officer or employee is prohibited from and deemed to have
a conflict of interest if he or she:
(1) Directly or indirectly solicits any gift having a value of $75 or more,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise or in any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift
was intended to influence him or her or could reasonably be
expected to influence him or her in the performance of his or her
official duties or was intended to be an award for any official action
on his or her part;
(2) Discloses confidential information acquired by him or her in the
course of his or her official duties or uses such information to
further his or her personal interests;
(3) Receives or enters into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any town agency of which he or she is an officer, member or
employee or of any town agency over which he or she has
jurisdiction or to which he or she has the power to appoint any
member, officer or employee;
(4) Receives or enters into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of the town whereby his or her compensation is
to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not
prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable
value of services rendered; or
(5) Willfully engages in any business transaction or professional
activity or shall have a financial or any other private interests,
direct or indirect, or incur any obligation of any nature which is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her official
§ 20-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-4
20:28
§ 20-5. Disclosure of interest required.
§ 20-6. Board of Ethics.
duties, unless he or she abstains from voting or otherwise officially
acting with respect to the subject matter affected.
C. The provisions of this section shall in no event be construed to preclude
the payment of lawful compensation and necessary expenses of any
municipal officer or employee in one or more positions of public
employment, the holding of which is not prohibited by law.
D. In addition to the foregoing regulations, Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law, entitled "Conflicts of Interest of Municipal Officers and
Employees," is incorporated as part of this chapter as if the same had
been set forth in full, together with any amendments of or additions to
said Article hereafter adopted by the Legislature.
E. In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who knowingly and intentionally violates this section may be
fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner
provided by law.
A. Any municipal officer or any employee or local elected official or any
local officer or employee who has, will have or later acquires an interest
in any actual or proposed contract with the town shall publicly disclose
the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the Town Board
thereof as soon as he or she has knowledge of such actual or
prospective interest. Such written disclosure shall be made part of and
set forth in the official record of the proceedings of such body, and a
copy shall be forwarded to the Town Clerk to be kept in a separate file.
Once disclosure has been made by an officer or employee with respect
to an interest in a contract with a particular person, firm, corporation or
association, no further disclosures need be made by such officer or
employee with respect to additional contracts with the same party
during the remainder of the fiscal year.
B. Any municipal officer or any employee or local elected official or any
local officer or employee, agent or representative of the town who has
or later acquires an interest in any actual or proposed transaction or
matter with the town shall disclose the nature and extent of such
interest, in writing, to the Town Board as soon as he or she has
knowledge of such actual or prospective interest. Such written
disclosure shall be referred by the Town Board to the Board of Ethics
for opinion and decision, in writing, and a copy shall be forwarded to
the Town Clerk to be kept in a separate file.
A. The Town Board of the town has previously established a Board of
Ethics by resolution adopted on the sixth day of August 1987, and this
chapter confirms the establishment of said Board of Ethics pursuant to
§ 808, Subdivision 3, of the General Municipal Law, as amended or
§ 20-4 ETHICS § 20-6
20:29
changed, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and to review all claims of conflict of interest. The composition of the
Board of Ethics (hereinafter referred to throughout this chapter as the
"Board") shall be as set forth below.
B. The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Town Board, a
majority of whom are not otherwise officers or employees of the town,
who shall serve without compensation for terms of five years. The
original members selected shall serve at staggered terms of five years,
four years, three years, two years and one year. Such Board shall
include at least one member who is an elected or appointed town officer
or employee.
C. The powers and duties of the Board shall include but not be limited to
the following:
(1) Acting as the sole and exclusive repository for completed annual
financial disclosure forms filed pursuant to § 20-7 and reviewing
the same for possible conflicts of interest.
(2) Adopting, amending and rescinding rules and regulations to govern
procedures of the Board which shall include but not be limited to
the procedure whereby a person who is required to file an annual
financial disclosure statement with the Board may request an
additional period of time within which to file such statement due to
justifiable cause or undue hardship; such rules or regulations shall
provide for a date beyond which in all cases of justifiable cause or
undue hardship no further extension of time will be granted.
(3) Promulgating guidelines to assist the Town Board in determining
which persons hold policy-making positions for purposes of § 20-7
of this chapter.
(4) Making available forms for annual statements of financial
disclosure required to be filed pursuant to § 20-7 of this chapter.
(5) Reviewing completed financial disclosure statements in
accordance with provisions of § 20-7.
(6) Receiving and hearing all sworn complaints alleging any violations
of this chapter upon the written request of any individual. This
request must be signed by the individual complainant and must
include his or her address.
(7) Permitting any person required to file a financial disclosure
statement to request the Board to delete from the copy thereof
made available for public inspection one or more items of
information, which may be deleted by the Board upon a finding by a
majority of the total number of members of the Board without
vacancy that information which would otherwise be required to be
disclosed will have no material bearing on the discharge of the
reporting person's official duties. If such request for deletion is
§ 20-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-6
20:30
denied, the Board, in its notification of denial, shall inform the
person of his or her right to appeal the Board's determination
pursuant to its rules governing adjudicatory proceedings and
appeals adopted pursuant to Subsection H of this section.
(8) Permit any person required to file a financial disclosure statement
to request an exemption from any requirement to report one or
more items of information which pertain to such person's spouse or
unemancipated children, which item or items may be exempted by
the Board upon a finding by a majority of the total number of
members of the Board without vacancy that the reporting
individual's spouse, on his or her own behalf or on behalf of an
unemancipated child, objects to providing the information
necessary to make such disclosure and that the information which
would otherwise be required to be reported will have no material
bearing on the discharge of the reporting person's official duties. If
such request for exemption is denied, the Board in its notification of
denial, shall inform the person of his or her right to appeal the
Board's determination pursuant to its rules governing adjudicatory
proceedings and appeals adopted pursuant to Subsection H of this
section.
(9) Permitting any person who has not been determined by his or her
appointing authority to hold a policy-making position but who is
otherwise required to file a financial disclosure statement to
request an exemption from such requirement in accordance with
rules and regulations governing such exemptions. Such rules and
regulations shall provide for exemptions to be granted either on the
application of an individual or on behalf of persons who share the
same job title or employment classification which the Board deems
to be comparable for purposes of this section. Such rules and
regulations may permit the granting of an exemption where, in the
discretion of the Board, the public interest does not require
disclosure and the applicant's duties do not involve the negotiation,
authorization or approval of:
(a) Contracts, leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions,
variances, special permits or licenses as defined in § 73 of the
Public Officers Law, as amended or changed;
(b) The purchase, sale, rental or lease of real property, goods or
services or a contract therefor;
(c) The obtaining of grants of money or loans; or
(d) The adoption or repeal of any rule or regulation having the
force and effect of law.
D. The Board may determine a question common to a class or defined
category of persons or items of information required to be disclosed,
where determination of the question will prevent undue repetition of
§ 20-6 ETHICS § 20-6
20:31
requests for exemption or deletion or prevent undue complication in
complying with the requirements of such section.
E. The Board shall inspect all financial disclosure statements filed with the
Board to ascertain whether any person subject to the reporting
requirements of this chapter has failed to file such a statement, has
filed a deficient statement or has filed a statement which reveals a
possible violation of any provision of this chapter or Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law, as amended or changed.
F. If a person required to file a financial disclosure statement with the
Board has failed to file a disclosure statement or has filed a deficient
statement, the Board shall notify the reporting person, in writing, state
the failure to file or detail the deficiency, provide the person with a
fifteen-day period to cure the deficiency and advise the person of the
penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirements. Such
notice shall be confidential if the person makes such filing or cures the
deficiency within the specified time period. If the person fails to make
such filing or fails to cure the deficiency within the specified time
period, the Board shall send a notice of delinquency:
(1) To the reporting person; and
(2) To the appointing authority for such person.
G. If a reporting person has filed a statement which reveals a possible
violation of this chapter or the Board receives a sworn complaint
alleging such a violation or if the Board determines on its own initiative
to investigate a possible violation, the Board shall notify the reporting
person, in writing, describe the possible or alleged violation of this
chapter and provide the person with a fifteen-day period in which to
submit a written response setting forth information relating to the
activities cited as possible or alleged violation of law. If the Board
thereafter makes a determination that further inquiry is justified, it
shall give the reporting person an opportunity to be heard. The Board
shall also inform the reporting individual of its rules regarding the
conduct of adjudicatory proceedings and appeals and the due process
procedural mechanisms available to such individual. If the Board
determines at any stage of the proceeding that there is no violation or
that any potential conflict of interest violation has been rectified, it shall
so advise the reporting person and the complainant, if any. All of the
foregoing proceedings shall be confidential except if the Board
determines that there is a violation or that any potential conflict of
interest violation has not been rectified. If the Board determines that
there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation has occurred, it
shall send a notice of reasonable cause:
(1) To the reporting person;
(2) To the complainant, if any; and
(3) To the appointing authority for such person.
§ 20-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-6
20:32
H. The Board shall be deemed to be an agency within the meaning of
Article 3 of the State Administrative Procedure Act, as amended or
changed, and shall adopt rules governing the conduct of adjudicatory
proceedings and appeals taken pursuant to a proceeding commenced
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, as amended or
changed, relating to the assessment of the civil penalties herein
authorized and Board denials of requests for certain deletions or
exemptions to be made from a financial disclosure statement as
authorized in Subsection C(7) or (8) of this section. Such rules, which
shall not be subject to the approval requirements of the State
Administrative Procedure Act, shall provide for due process procedural
mechanisms substantially similar to those set forth in such Article 3, as
amended or changed, but such mechanisms need not be identical in
terms or scope. Assessment of a civil penalty or Board denial of such a
request shall be final unless modified, suspended or vacated within 30
days of imposition, with respect to the assessment of such penalty, or
unless such denial of request is reversed within such time period, and,
upon becoming final shall be subject to review at the instance of the
affected reporting individuals in a proceeding commenced against the
Board pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, as
amended or changed.
I. A copy of any notice of delinquency or notice of reasonable cause sent
pursuant to Subsections F and G of this section shall be included in the
reporting person's file and be available for public inspection if the same
is not confidential as provided in said Subsections F and G.
J. Upon written request from any person who is subject to the jurisdiction
of the Board, the Board shall render advisory opinions on the
requirements of this chapter. An opinion rendered by the Board, until
and unless amended or revoked, shall be binding on the Board in any
subsequent proceeding concerning the person who requested the
opinion and who acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted
or misstated by the person in the request for an opinion. Such opinion
may also be relied upon by such person and may be introduced and
shall be a defense in any criminal or civil action. Such requests shall be
confidential, but the Board may publish such opinions, provided that
the name of the requesting person and other identifying details shall
not be included in the publication.
K. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 7 of the Public Officers Law,
as amended or changed, no meeting or proceeding of the Board shall be
open to the public except if expressly provided otherwise by the
Commission.
L. Any opinion of the Board expressing a conflict of interest shall be made
public pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the Board.
M. The Board shall have such other powers and duties as provided to the
Commission pursuant to § 813 of the General Municipal Law, as
amended or changed.
§ 20-6 ETHICS § 20-6
20:33
§ 20-7. Annual financial disclosure; violations; penalties. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
The Town of Irondequoit recognizes that matters of finance do exist which
are so personal in nature and are so unrelated to the performance and
duties of a municipal officer or employee that no useful purpose can be
served by such disclosure. Nonetheless, certain financial information may
be relevant to the duties of a municipal officer or employee and impact upon
the integrity of the town government, and to that end:
N. The Town Board shall appropriate necessary and sufficient moneys for
the maintenance and personal services to be provided by the Board.
A. All elected town officials, department heads and their deputies and
assistants, policymakers and those officers and employees whose duties
involve the negotiation, authorization or approval of any of the matters
listed in § 813, Subdivision 9k(i) through (iv), of the General Municipal
Law, as amended or changed, and each candidate for elected town
office shall file with the Board an annual statement of financial
disclosure containing the information and in the form set forth in
Appendix A8 as the same may be amended from time to time by the
Town Board, provided that any such amendment to the disclosure
statement shall provide for not less than the minimum level of financial
disclosure as required by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law,
amended or changed. Such statements shall be filed only with the
Board within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter or within 30
days of taking office and no later than the 15th day of May with respect
to the preceding calendar year. The time for filing such statements may
be extended, pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the
Board for justifiable cause and/or undue hardship, upon application to
the Board. For the purposes of this section, all persons required to file
an annual statement of financial disclosure will be referred to as
"employees."
B. Those municipal officers or local employees or local elected officials or
municipal officers and employees who are required to file an annual
statement of financial disclosure as required in Subsection A above are
as follows:
(1) Chief fiscal officer.
(2) Members of the Town Board.
(3) Town Attorney and any Deputy Town Attorney(s).
(4) Director of Development Services and any assistants.
(5) Assessor.
8. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 20-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-7
20:34
(6) Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways and
any deputy(ies) or assistant(s).
(7) Director of Planning and Zoning.
(8) Chief of Police and all Captains.
(9) Director of Parks and Recreation and any assistant(s).
(10) Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(11) Members of the Planning Board.
(12) Fire Marshal and any deputy(ies).
(13) Town Clerk and any Deputy Town Clerk(s).
(14) Library Board of Trustees.
(15) Sea Breeze Commissioners of Fire and Water Districts.
(16) Comptroller.
(17) Budget Officer.
C. All statements filed with the Board shall become a public record except
for categories of amount and except for those matters deleted or
exempted in accordance with § 20-5 above.
D. Any part of a financial disclosure statement that has been granted
confidentiality or exempt status by the Board pursuant to the
employee's request shall be maintained by the Board as confidential
information. It shall be a violation for any Board member or any other
individual, except for the employee who filed the statement, to disclose
any information that has been granted confidential and/or exempt
status. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500, as may be determined by the Board.
E. If the Board, in accordance with its rules and regulations, determines
that any part of a financial disclosure statement filed with it which has
not been granted confidentiality or exempt status by the Board
pursuant to a request by the employee should be made public, the same
will be filed with the Town Clerk as a public record, and any part of the
statement which has been granted exemption or deletion by the Board
shall be deleted before the same is so filed, and the original information
shall be retained by the Board pursuant to Subsection D above.
Categories of amounts shall be confidential.
F. If, after review of the statement, the Board determines that a conflict of
interest exists or that there appears to be an impropriety that could
reflect upon the integrity of the town government, the Board shall take
the following procedures:
§ 20-7 ETHICS § 20-7
20:35
§ 20-8. Conflicts with other codes of conduct.
§ 20-9. Distribution.
(1) The Board shall specify by written opinion that a conflict or
impropriety exists, stating its findings and the basis for its opinion,
and shall mail its opinion by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the employee at the address listed on his or her
personal record and notify the Town Board. Such opinion shall be
confidential.
(2) The employee shall have 15 days from the date he or she receives
the opinion from the Board to respond, rebut or refute the Board's
findings.
(3) The Board may recommend to the employee a manner in which the
conflict of interest or appearance of impropriety may be rectified.
(4) If the employee fails to respond to the Board within 15 days of the
receipt of the Board's opinion of impropriety or if an agreement to
eliminate the conflict cannot be reached with the employee,
acceptable to the Board, the Board shall publicly disclose the
employee's statement or relevant portions of such statement along
with the Board's opinion by filing them with the Town Clerk.
(5) The Board shall determine such penalties for violation of any
provision of this chapter in accordance with § 813 of the General
Municipal Law, as amended or changed.
A. Recognizing the need for professional integrity and the fact that various
professional associations have set down standards of conduct for their
members, the town hereby requires that each officer or employee who
is affected by a professional Code of Ethics be bound, in addition to the
within chapter, by their respective Codes of Ethics. Any conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and a given officer's or
employee's professional code of conduct is to be resolved by the Board
of Ethics. However, the Board of Ethics must at all times give the
greatest latitude to said individual's professional code of conduct and,
whenever possible, reconcile the within chapter to complement and
respect the individual's professional code of conduct.
B. Substantial consideration shall be given to the effect deviation from an
individual's professional code of conduct will have on that individual's
ability to practice his or her profession. If need be, the Board of Ethics
is authorized and required to obtain advisory opinions from the
appropriate professional association to clarify any given situation.
A. Pursuant to § 807 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or
changed, the Supervisor shall cause a copy of this chapter and Article
18 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, to be made
available to all officers and employees of the town within 30 days from
§ 20-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 20-9
20:36
§ 20-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person willfully violating this Code of Ethics shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed.
§ 20-11. Construal with statute.
In the event that there are any inconsistencies between this chapter and
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, said
Article 18 shall control.
the enactment of this chapter or as soon thereafter as practical. The
Supervisor shall also cause a copy of this chapter and Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, to become posted
in each public building under the jurisdiction of the town in a place
conspicuous to its officers and employees and have copies of the same
made available for public inspection at the Town Clerk's office.
B. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer or employee
to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with
such code nor the enforcement of the provisions thereof.9
A. Any elected official guilty of a negligent violation of this chapter shall be
subject to penalties as provided and shall be subject to a civil penalty of
loss of pay not to exceed one month's salary. In addition to the sanctions
for aiding, abetting, seeking or requesting a violation of this chapter,
any person or organization which willfully attempts to secure
preferential treatment in its dealings with the town by offering any
valuable gifts, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, in
any form to any town official or employee, shall have its current
contracts with the town canceled and shall not be able to bid on any
other town contract for a period of two years.
B. An employee of the town found guilty of a negligent violation of this
chapter shall be subject to civil penalties up to and including
termination from employment and/or loss of pay not to exceed one
month's salary.
C. Members of boards and commissions found guilty of a negligent
violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate removal from
such appointment.
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 20-9 ETHICS § 20-11
20:37
Chapter 28
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procurement policy — See Ch. 51.
§ 28-1. Applicability.
This investment policy applies to all financial resources available to the
Town of Irondequoit for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any
other entity or individual.
§ 28-2. Objectives.
The primary objectives of the town's investment activities are, in priority
order:
§ 28-3. Delegation of authority.
The governing board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Comptroller, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. All powers assigned to the Comptroller shall
be assumed to extend to the Supervisor as chief fiscal officer of the town.
Such procedures shall include an adequate internal control structure to
provide a satisfactory level of accountability based on a database of records
incorporating description and amounts of investments, transaction dates
and other relevant information and regulate the activities of subordinate
employees.
§ 28-4. Prudence.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements.
B. To adequately safeguard principal (safety).
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity).
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield), subject to market
conditions.
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the Town of Irondequoit to govern
effectively.
§ 20-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 28-4
28:38
§ 28-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the Town of Irondequoit to diversify its deposits and
investments by financial institution, by investment instrument and by
maturity date.
§ 28-6. Internal controls.
The Comptroller shall be responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute,
assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss from
unauthorized use or disposition and that transactions are executed in
accordance with management's authorization and recorded properly and
are managed in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
§ 28-7. Designation of depositories. [Amended 11-30-1999 by L.L.
No. 10-1999]
As detailed in General Municipal Law § 10, as amended or changed, and this
policy, the Comptroller may deposit funds in accordance with the statute
and this policy. The Comptroller is authorized to deposit funds of the town
or under the town's control in commercial banks and/or trust companies
which are federally insured and which can provide unencumbered collateral
in excess of the amount of the deposit.
§ 28-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law § 10, as
amended or changed, all deposits of the Town of Irondequoit, including
certificates of deposit, in excess of the amount insured under the provisions
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, shall be secured (collateralized) by
either or both of:
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for the speculation, but for investments, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
A. A pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value as
provided by General Municipal Law § 10, as amended or changed, equal
to or greater than the aggregate amount of deposits, together with
agreed-upon interest, from the categories designated in Appendix A to
the policy.10 Specific types of eligible securities are further identified in
the State Comptroller's Financial Management Guide for Local
Governments, in the Cash Management and Investments Policies and
Procedures section, Subsection 2.1130. The Comptroller shall have
discretionary authority to reject the pledge of specific eligible securities
if it is believed the securities are inappropriate for use as collateral.
10.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 28-4 INVESTMENT POLICY § 28-8
28:39
§ 28-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
§ 28-10. Permitted investments.
B. An eligible surety bond payable to the Town of Irondequoit for an
amount equal to or greater than the aggregate amount of deposits,
together with agreed-upon interest, to be secured in this manner. Such
surety bond must be issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in New York State and whose claims ability is rated in the
highest rating category by at least two nationally recognized statistical
rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by the
depository bank and/or a third-party bank or trust company, at the
discretion of the Town of Irondequoit, subject to security and custodial
agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure deposits of the town, together with all agreed-upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the town to exercise its rights
against the pledged securities. In the event that the securities are not
registered or inscribed in the name of the town, such securities shall be
delivered in a form suitable for transfer or with an assignment in blank
to the Town of Irondequoit or its custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company or agent of and custodian for the town will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or
trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with
or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other liabilities.
The agreement should also describe that the custodian shall confirm
the receipt, substitution or release of the securities. The agreement
shall provide for the frequency of revaluation of eligible securities and
for the substitution of securities when a change in the rating of a
security may cause ineligibility. Such agreement shall include all
provisions necessary to provide the town a perfected interest in the
securities.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, as amended or changed,
the Town of Irondequoit authorizes the Comptroller to invest moneys
not required for immediate expenditure for terms not to exceed its
projected cash flow needs in the following types of investments:
(1) Interest-bearing savings/checking accounts.
(2) Certificates of deposit.
(3) Obligations of the United States of America.
§ 28-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 28-10
28:40
§ 28-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers. [Amended
11-30-1999 by L.L. No. 10-1999]
§ 28-12. Purchase of investments.
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America.
(5) Obligations of the State of New York.
(6) Obligations issued pursuant to Local Finance Law § 24.00 or 25.00,
as amended or changed, (with approval of the State Comptroller)
by any municipality, school district or district corporation other
than the Town of Irondequoit.
(7) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the
general state statutes governing such entities or whose specific
enabling legislation authorizes such investments.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the Town of Irondequoit within such times as the proceeds will be
needed to meet expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were
provided and, in the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of
bonds or notes, shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the
Town of Irondequoit within two years of the date of purchase. For
repurchase agreements, the repurchase date and not the maturity date
of the underlying security shall govern.
A. The Town of Irondequoit authorizes the Comptroller to deposit funds
with financial institutions and dealers approved for investment
purposes. All financial institutions with which the town conducts
business must be creditworthy. Security dealers not affiliated with an
authorized bank shall be required to be classified as reporting dealers
affiliated with the New York Federal Reserve Bank as primary dealer.
B. The Comptroller, with the assistance of higher levels of government
(principally the state), is responsible for evaluating the financial
condition of authorized financial institutions and security dealers.
A. The Comptroller is authorized to contract for the purchase of
investments:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5-G of General
Municipal Law, as amended or changed, where such program
meets all the requirements set forth in the Office of the State
§ 28-10 INVESTMENT POLICY § 28-12
28:41
§ 28-13. Annual review.
This policy shall be reviewed on no less than an annual basis and modified
by formal action of the Town Board as necessary.
Chapter 32
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meetings — See Ch. 36.
Comptroller Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been
authorized by the Town Board.
(3) Through a repurchase agreement (REPO), subject to terms of a
required master repurchase agreement. For REPO's, trading
partners are limited to those authorized banks and security dealers
as identified above. Obligations purchased shall be limited to
obligations of the United States of America and/or by obligations
guaranteed by agencies of the United States.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the Town of Irondequoit, shall be purchased through, delivered to and
held in the custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed, in writing, to the Town of Irondequoit
by the bank or trust company. Any obligation held in the custody of a
bank or trust company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law § 10, as amended or
changed.
C. All purchased obligations, unless registered in the name of the Town of
Irondequoit, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held in the
custody of a custodial bank. All purchased obligations shall be held
separately from the general assets of the custodial bank or securities
dealer. Such obligations shall be purchased, sold or redeemed in
accordance with prior authorization of the Comptroller. All transactions
shall be confirmed, in writing, by the custodial agreement as described
in General Municipal Law § 10, as amended or changed. Such
agreement shall include all provisions necessary to provide the town a
perfected interest in the obligation(s) purchased.
§ 28-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 32-1
32:42
§ 32-1. Public hearing; summary notice.
No local law shall be adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit
until a public hearing has been held thereon in its final form before such
Town Board not less than three nor more than 30 days after public notice
has been given of the time and place of the holding of such public hearing.
Such notice shall be given by the Town Clerk by causing the same to be
published once in the official newspaper of the town. Such notice shall
contain the title of the proposed local law and a brief explanatory statement
thereof.
§ 32-2. Copies; posting of notice.
The Town Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law and shall, not later than the day such notice is
published, post one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, on the
signboard at his or her office and shall also make copies of such proposed
local law available at his or her office for inspection by and distribution to
any interested person during business hours.
§ 32-3. Posting and publishing notice of adoption. [Amended
7-6-1978 by L.L. No. 6-1978]
In addition to the filing and publication of local laws required under § 27
of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or changed, the Town Clerk
shall immediately upon the adoption of a local law by the Town Board post a
copy thereof on the bulletin board maintained for that purpose in the Town
Hall.
§ 32-4. Filing of proof of publication and posting.
Proof of publication of the notice of public hearing required by § 32-1 hereof
and proof of the posting and publications required by § 32-3 hereof shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Chapter 36
MEETINGS
§ 32-1 MEETINGS § 32-4
36:43

ARTICLE I
Conduct of
[Adopted 1-16-1996]
§ 36-1. Supervisor to preside; Chair; quorum.
Pursuant to § 63 of the Town Law, as amended or changed, "The supervisor,
when present, shall preside at the meetings of the town board. In the
absence of the supervisor, the other members shall designate one of their
members to act as temporary chairman. A majority of the board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number
may adjourn. The vote upon every question shall be taken by ayes and noes,
and the names of the members present and their votes shall be entered in
the minutes. Every act, motion or resolution shall require for its adoption
the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the town board."
§ 36-2. Agenda to be acted upon first.
No additional matters are to be considered until each matter on the
prepared agenda has been acted upon by the Town Board.
§ 36-3. Order of voting.
Members of the Town Board shall vote starting with the member furthest
to the Supervisor's right and proceeding from the Supervisor's right to the
Supervisor's left, with the Supervisor voting last.
§ 36-4. Public input.
A. Public input shall be administered as follows:
(1) Speakers may call the Town Clerk to schedule to speak until 4:30
p.m. of the day of the meeting.
(2) Speakers may sign the speaker's schedule until commencement of
the meeting.
(3) Order of appearance is based upon the order of sign-up.
(4) Comments on items scheduled for public hearings will not be
permitted during public input.
(5) Speakers will be limited to three minutes and may speak only once
on each topic.
(6) Speakers will address comments to the Town Board, staff or
department heads and not to other members of the audience in the
form of an attack or a debate.
(7) Personal attacks will not be tolerated.
§ 36-1 MEETINGS § 36-4
36:45
§ 36-5. Proof of posting agenda items.
Whenever the Supervisor asks the Town Clerk to read the next agenda
item, the Town Clerk shall provide proof of posting and publication to the
Supervisor.
(8) Public input will be scheduled for one-half (1/2) hour at the
beginning of each Town Board meeting (7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m.).
(9) If all scheduled speakers have not been heard, public input will be
continued at the conclusion of the regular meeting for anyone else
desiring to speak.
(10) No public hearing will be scheduled prior to 7:35 p.m.
B. No member of the public shall engage in any demonstration, booing,
handclapping or otherwise disrupt the formality of the Town Board
meeting.
C. No member of the public shall be permitted to address the Town Board
unless recognized by the Supervisor. In no event may any such person
speak on one occasion for more than three minutes.
D. Any person recognized by the Supervisor shall give his or her name and
address and the nature of his or her business briefly.
E. No such person has the right to demand an answer to a specific
question(s) from a member of the Board. All such questions shall be
directed to the Supervisor, who may either answer them or refer the
question to the attorneys for the town, if present, or to a Town Board
member or to a department head.
F. No person recognized by the Supervisor shall engage in any personal
attacks against any Town Board member, department head, any town
official or employee or any other person in the audience or any person
having any matter before the Board; any such person shall conduct
themselves at all times in a civil manner.
G. No person desiring to speak during the public input period may speak a
second time until everyone who wants to speak has spoken.
§ 36-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 36-5
36:46
Chapter 40
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16.
Ethics — See Ch. 20.
Conduct of meetings — See Ch. 36, Art. I.
§ 36-5 MEETINGS § 36-5
36:47

ARTICLE I
Terms of Office
[Adopted 5-21-1981]
§ 40-1. Term to be four years.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 24-a of the New York State Town Law, as
amended or changed, and subject to a resolution referendum to be held
in conjunction with the 1981 biennial town election, the terms of office
of all town officers hereafter elected shall be for a period of four years
commencing with the term to begin on January 1, 1984.
§ 40-2. Referendum required.11
Pursuant to §§ 82 and 90 of the Town Law, as amended or changed, within
10 days from the date of this Article, the Town Clerk shall post and publish
a notice which shall set forth the date of the adoption of the Article, shall
contain an abstract of such Article concisely setting forth the purpose
and effect thereof, shall specify that this Article was adopted subject to
a resolution referendum and shall publish such notice in the Irondequoit
Press, a newspaper published in Monroe County, having general circulation
in the Town of Irondequoit; and in addition thereto, the Town Clerk shall
post or cause to be posted on the signboard of the Town of Irondequoit a
copy of such notice within 10 days after the date of the adoption of this
Article.
11.Editor's Note: This resolution was approved by the electorate at referendum on 11-3-1981.
§ 40-1 MEETINGS § 40-2
36:49

ARTICLE II
Residency Requirements for Comptroller
[Adopted 1-27-1994 as L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 40-3. Authority.
This Article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Chapter 365 of the
Laws of 1976 which added a new subparagraph (3) to paragraph d of
Subdivision 1 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or
changed, authorizing the Town of Irondequoit to adopt a local law which
amends or supersedes any provision of Town Law § 23, as amended or
changed, and Public Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, in relation to
the property, affairs or government of the Town of Irondequoit or in relation
to any of the other enumerated subject matters in such § 10, unless there is
a state legislative restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 40-4. Purpose.
In order to permit the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit greater
latitude in selecting a qualified individual for the position of Comptroller, it
is necessary that prospective applicants not be limited to residents of the
Town of Irondequoit.
§ 40-5. Comptroller to be county resident. [Amended 6-18-2019 by
L.L. No. 3-2019]
Town Law § 23, as amended or changed, and Public Officers Law § 3,
as amended or changed, are hereby amended and superseded in their
application to the Town of Irondequoit as follows: provisions of Public
Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, and Town Law § 23, as amended
or changed, requiring a person to be a resident of the political subdivision
or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall be chosen
or which his or her official functions are required to be exercised, shall
not prevent a person from holding the office of Comptroller of the Town of
Irondequoit, provided that such person resides within Monroe County, New
York.
§ 40-3 MEETINGS § 40-5
36:51

ARTICLE III
Residency Requirements for Budget Officer
[Adopted 5-17-1994 as L.L. No. 3-1994]
§ 40-6. Authority.
This Article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Chapter 365 of the
Laws of 1976 which added a new subparagraph (3) to paragraph d of
Subdivision 1 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or
changed, authorizing the Town of Irondequoit to adopt a local law which
amends or supersedes any provision of the Town Law § 23, as amended or
changed, and Public Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, in relation to
the property, affairs or government of the Town of Irondequoit or in relation
to any of the other enumerated subject matters in such § 10, unless there is
a state legislative restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 40-7. Purpose.
In order to permit the Town Board and/or the Supervisor of the Town
of Irondequoit greater latitude in selecting a qualified individual for the
position of Budget Officer, it is necessary that prospective applicants not be
limited to residents of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 40-8. Budget Officer to be county resident. [Amended 6-18-2019
by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Town Law § 23, as amended or changed, and Public Officers Law § 3,
as amended or changed, are hereby amended and superseded in their
application to the Town of Irondequoit as follows: the provisions of Public
Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, and Town Law § 23, as amended
or changed, requiring a person to be a resident of the political subdivision
or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall be chosen
or which his or her official functions are required to be exercised, shall not
prevent a person from holding the office of Budget Officer of the Town of
Irondequoit, provided that such person resides within Monroe County, New
York.
§ 40-6 MEETINGS § 40-8
36:53

ARTICLE IV
Residency Requirements for Commissioner of Public Works, Deputy
Commissioner of Public Works, Superintendent of Highways and
Deputy Superintendent of Highways
[Adopted 3-23-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 40-9. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Chapter 365 of the
Laws of 1976, which added a new Subparagraph (3) to Paragraph (d) of
Subdivision 1 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or
changed, authorizing the Town of Irondequoit to adopt a local law which
amends or supersedes any provision of Town Law § 23, as amended or
changed, and Public Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, in relation to
the property, affairs or government of the Town of Irondequoit or in relation
to any of the other enumerated subject matters in such § 10, unless there is
a state legislative restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 40-10. Purpose.
In order to permit the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit greater
latitude in selecting the most qualified individuals to hold the appointed
offices of Commissioner of Public Works, Deputy Commissioner of Public
Works, Superintendent of Highways and Deputy Superintendent of
Highways, it is necessary that prospective applicants not be limited to
residents of the Town of Irondequoit but shall still reside within the limits of
Monroe County.
§ 40-11. Commissioner of Public Works, Deputy Commissioner of
Public Works, Superintendent of Highways and Deputy
Superintendent of Highways to be county residents. [Amended
6-18-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Town Law § 23, as amended or changed, and Public Officers Law § 3,
as amended or changed, are hereby amended and superseded in their
application to the Town of Irondequoit as follows: provisions of Public
Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, and Town Law § 23, as amended
or changed, requiring a person to be a resident of the political subdivision
or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall be chosen
or which his or her official functions are required to be exercised, shall
not prevent a person from holding the offices of Commissioner of Public
Works, Deputy Commissioner of Public Works, Superintendent of Highways
and Deputy Superintendent of Highways, provided that such person resides
within Monroe County, New York.
§ 40-9 MEETINGS § 40-11
36:55

ARTICLE V
Deputy Court Clerk
[Adopted 7-19-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
§ 40-12. Deputy Court Clerk position created.
There shall be up to two positions created by the Town Board of the Town
of Irondequoit that shall be known as "Deputy Court Clerk." Said Deputy
Court Clerks shall serve under the supervision and direction of the Town
Justices in conjunction with the Chief Court Clerk and shall possess all the
powers and duties as assigned to them by the Town Justices. The appointed
Deputy Court Clerks shall be considered as full-time exempt employees and
shall be paid at a rate to be established by the Irondequoit Town Board.
The appointed Deputy Court Clerks shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Board.
§ 40-12 MEETINGS § 40-12
36:57

ARTICLE VI
Removal or Disciplining of Members of Certain Boards, Committees
or Commissions Appointed or Confirmed by Town Board
[Adopted 8-19-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
§ 40-13. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this Article VI is to ensure the general welfare
of citizens of the Town, to instill and promote confidence of the residents
of the Town and the general public in the orderly and principled operation
of Town government and the conduct of its affairs, to provide a means by
which acts or omissions of certain Town officials which may not further such
purposes may be identified and to provide a mechanism and procedure by
which complaints regarding such acts or omissions may be identified and
disposed of in a fair and appropriate manner.
§ 40-14. Applicability.
This Article VI shall apply to all members of all boards, committees and
commissions who, pursuant to the provisions of this Code and/or applicable
law of the State of New York, are appointed or confirmed by the Town
Board of the Town and who, pursuant to the provisions of this Code and/
or applicable state law, serve for a term of years. Nothing contained in this
Article VI shall apply to any member of any board, committee or commission
who serves at the pleasure of the Town Board, nor shall anything contained
in this Article VI limit, affect or impair, or be deemed to limit, affect or
impair, the ability of the Town Board to remove or otherwise discipline any
member of any board, committee or commission who serves at the pleasure
of the Town Board.
§ 40-15. Severability.
The provisions of this Article VI are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Article VI or the application
thereof to any person, entity, establishment or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of
this article.
§ 40-16. Disciplinary action for cause.
Any member of any board, committee or commission who is appointed or
confirmed by the Town Board and who serves for a term of years pursuant
to this Code or applicable state law may, for cause, be removed from office,
suspended from office for a period of time, censured or otherwise subjected
to disciplinary and/or remedial action, in each instance by the Town Board.
As used in this Article, "cause" shall mean any one or more of the following:
A. Negligent or willful violation of the Ethics Code as set forth in Chapter
20 of this Code;
§ 40-13 MEETINGS § 40-16
36:59
§ 40-17. Proceedings for review of acts or omissions of board,
committee and commission members.
B. Failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the board, committee or
commission to which the member is appointed;
C. Failure in any calendar year to attend more than 50% of the regularly
scheduled meetings of the board, committee or commission to which
the member is appointed;
D. Failure to take training courses or classes required, or otherwise
provided, by the state;
E. Gross neglect of, or refusal to perform, official duties and
responsibilities imposed by law;
F. Engaging in any act or omission which is illegal under federal, state or
local law;
G. Willful and flagrant exercise of authority or power not authorized by
law;
H. Misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or otherwise guilty of
misconduct in office; or
I. Acting in any manner detrimental to the interests of the board,
committee or commission to which such member is appointed or of the
Town.
A. Proceedings for the review of the acts or omissions of any member of
any board, committee or commission appointed or confirmed by the
Town Board for a term of years on the basis of cause, as hereinbefore
defined, shall be commenced by filing with the Town Clerk a written
complaint specifically setting forth the nature of the complaint and, in
reasonable detail, the factual basis for such complaint. Such complaint
may only be filed by the following persons:
(1) The chairperson of the board, committee or commission on which
such member who is the subject of the complaint serves;
(2) A majority of the total members of the board, committee or
commission on which such member who is the subject of the
complaint serves;
(3) The Town Supervisor; or
(4) Two of the members of the Town Board.
B. Procedure following filing of complaint.
(1) The Town Clerk shall, within 10 days following the filing of the
complaint, personally deliver or mail by first-class United States
mail, postage prepaid, a true and complete copy of the same to:
§ 40-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 40-17
36:60
(a) The member of the board, committee or commission who is the
subject of the complaint.
(b) The members of the Town Board; and
(c) The members of the board, committee or commission on which
such member who is the subject of the complaint serves.
(2) The Town Board shall, with the assistance of the Town Attorney (or
the Attorney to the Town, as the case may be) or the Deputy Town
Attorney (or the Deputy Attorney to the Town, as the case may be),
conduct a hearing on the complaint not later than 60 days following
the date on which such complaint was filed with the Town Clerk.
The Town Board shall cause the Town Clerk to give written notice
of such hearing to the member of the board or commission who is
the subject of the complaint no later than 20 days prior to the date
set forth in the notice for the hearing. Such notice shall be given by
personal delivery or by first-class United States mail, postage
prepaid. Such notice shall specify the time, date and location of
such hearing and advise the member who is the subject of the
complaint that 1) the hearing shall be conducted in an open
meeting of the Town Board, 2) the Town Board may conduct such
hearing by calling, examining and/or cross-examining such
witnesses and accepting such written evidence and documents and
other information as the Town Board shall, in its sole judgment and
discretion, deem necessary or appropriate, 3) the member may, at
his or her election and sole expense, be represented by legal
counsel at such hearing, and 4) the member may call, examine and
cross-examine witnesses and offer to the Town Board for its
consideration such written evidence and documents and such other
information as such member may deem appropriate. The Town
Board may, in its sole discretion, adjourn or recess any hearing
once the same has been convened and reconvene such hearing at a
later date and/or time.
(3) Public notice of such hearing shall also be given in the manner, and
in accordance with the requirements of, the Public Officers Law of
the State of New York applicable to public meetings of the Town
Board.
(4) The Town Board shall, no later than 30 days following the
conclusion of such hearing, by a majority of the voting strength of
the Town Board, make a finding in writing as to whether or not the
complaint is, in whole or in part, meritorious. If the Town Board
determines that there is no merit to the complaint, it shall set forth
such determination in its written findings. If the Town Board
determines that the complaint is meritorious, in whole or in part, it
shall set forth such determination, and the basis thereof, in
reasonable detail in its written findings, together with its
determination as to the appropriate remedy to be taken with
respect to the member of the board, committee or commission who
§ 40-17 MEETINGS § 40-17
36:61
§ 40-18. Judicial review of findings and determinations.
The findings and determinations of the Town Board made in accordance
with this Article VI may be subject to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction, upon application by the member of the board, committee or
commission who is the subject of the complaint, in accordance with the
provisions of applicable law.
§ 40-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this Article VI are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of Irondequoit to seek cumulative remedies.
is the subject of the complaint, which may include, but not be
limited to, removal from office, suspension from office for a period
of time, censure or other disciplinary and/or remedial action as the
Town Board shall determine to be necessary or appropriate.
(5) If the Town Board determines, as hereinbefore provided, that
removal from office is the appropriate remedy, such removal shall
be deemed to take effect immediately, the office previously
occupied by the member of the board or commission so removed
shall be deemed to be vacant and such vacancy may be filled by the
Town Board in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
Any member of a board or commission removed from office as
provided in this Article VI shall not be eligible to fill the vacancy in
office created by such removal.
(6) If the Town Board determines, as hereinbefore provided, that
suspension from office for a period of time is the appropriate
remedy, such suspension for such period shall be deemed to take
effect immediately; provided, however, that the position occupied
by the suspended member of the board or commission shall not be
deemed to be vacant.
(7) The Town Board shall, within 10 days after the date it makes its
written findings, cause a true, accurate and complete copy of the
same to be filed with the Town Clerk and given by personal delivery
or by first-class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the member
of the board, committee or commission who is the subject of the
complaint. The decision of the Town Board shall be deemed final
upon the filing of its findings with the Town Clerk as herein
provided.
§ 40-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 40-19
36:62
ARTICLE VII
Residency Requirements for Director of Department of Community
Development
[Adopted 6-18-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 40-20. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Chapter 365 of the
Laws of 1976 which added a new Subparagraph (3) to Paragraph d of
Subdivision 1 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or
changed, authorizing the Town of Irondequoit to adopt a local law which
amends or supersedes any provision of Town Law § 23, as amended or
changed, and Public Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, in relation to
the property, affairs or government of the Town of Irondequoit or in relation
to any of the other enumerated subject matters in such § 10, unless there is
a state legislative restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 40-21. Purpose.
In order to permit the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit greater
latitude in selecting a qualified individual for the position of Director of the
Department of Community Development, it is necessary that prospective
applicants not be limited to residents of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 40-22. Director of the Department of Community Development to
be county resident.
Town Law § 23, as amended or changed, and Public Officers Law § 3,
as amended or changed, are hereby amended and superseded in their
application to the Town of Irondequoit as follows: provisions of Public
Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, and Town Law § 23, as amended
or changed, requiring a person to be a resident of the political subdivision
or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall be chosen
or which his or her official functions are required to be exercised, shall not
prevent a person from holding the position of Director of the Department
of Community Development of the Town of Irondequoit, provided that such
person resides within Monroe County, New York.
§ 40-20 MEETINGS § 40-22
36:63

ARTICLE VIII
Residency Requirements for Director of Department of Recreation
[Adopted 6-18-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 40-23. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Chapter 365 of the
Laws of 1976 which added a new Subparagraph (3) to Paragraph d of
Subdivision 1 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, as amended or
changed, authorizing the Town of Irondequoit to adopt a local law which
amends or supersedes any provision of Town Law § 23, as amended or
changed, and Public Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, in relation to
the property, affairs or government of the Town of Irondequoit or in relation
to any of the other enumerated subject matters in such § 10, unless there is
a state legislative restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 40-24. Purpose.
In order to permit the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit greater
latitude in selecting a qualified individual for the position of Director of the
Department of Recreation, it is necessary that prospective applicants not be
limited to residents of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 40-25. Director of the Department of Recreation to be county
resident.
Town Law § 23, as amended or changed, and Public Officers Law § 3,
as amended or changed, are hereby amended and superseded in their
application to the Town of Irondequoit as follows: provisions of Public
Officers Law § 3, as amended or changed, and Town Law § 23, as amended
or changed, requiring a person to be a resident of the political subdivision
or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall be chosen
or which his or her official functions are required to be exercised, shall not
prevent a person from holding the position of Director of the Department
of Recreation of the Town of Irondequoit, provided that such person resides
within Monroe County, New York.
§ 40-23 MEETINGS § 40-25
36:65
Chapter 44
RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 44-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Irondequoit
Recreation Law."
§ 44-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Irondequoit Department of Recreation.
DIRECTOR OF RECREATION — The Town officer who is the chief executive
officer of the Department.
§ 44-3. Establishment; Director.
§ 44-4. Organization.
The Department of Recreation shall have such officers and employees as
may be authorized by the Town Board to carry out the functions of the
Department. The Director of Recreation may, with the approval of the
Town Board, establish, consolidate or abolish any divisions to carry out the
functions of the Department.
§ 44-5. Powers and duties.
The Department of Recreation shall, under the direction of the Director of
Recreation, have the following powers and duties, subject to the approval of
the Town Board:
A. There shall be in the Town of Irondequoit a Department of Recreation.
The chief executive officer and administrative head of the Department
shall be the Director of Recreation, who shall be appointed by the Town
Board for the term fixed by law at such salary as may from time to time
be fixed by the Town Board. The Director of Recreation shall be
appointed on the basis of his or her experience and qualifications for
the duties of such office and such additional standards as may be
required by the Town Board.
B. Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Director of
Recreation shall execute and file with the Town Clerk an official
undertaking, if the same is required by the Town Board, in such sum as
prescribed by the Town Board and in such form as approved by the
Town Attorney.
A. Recreation: to administer, manage and supervise the planning,
coordination, development and arrangement of recreational programs
§ 40-25 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 44-5
36:66
§ 44-6. Special improvement districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project, subject
to approval by the Town Board.
§ 44-7. Powers of supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, or any other powers
which may be lawfully exercised by said Supervisor.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Chapter 46
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 20.
and projects for and on behalf of the residents of the Town of
Irondequoit, as authorized by the Town Board.
B. Community services: to administer, manage and supervise programs,
plans and projects which aid, assist and service the special needs of the
youth, the aged and the handicapped.
C. Other responsibilities: to perform such other duties and function that
are prescribed to be performed by the Department in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful direction of the
Supervisor; however, the Director of Recreation may delegate any of
the powers or direct any of the duties to be performed by any of his or
her subordinates.
§ 44-5 MEETINGS § 44-7
36:67

ARTICLE I
Alternate Members
[Adopted 5-15-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 46-1. Title; applicability.
§ 46-2. Declaration of policy.
It is sometimes difficult to maintain a quorum on the Town Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Appeals because members are ill, on extended
vacation, have an unavoidable absence, or find they have a conflict of
interest situation on a specific matter before such a Board. In such
instances, official business cannot be conducted, which may delay or
impede adherence to required time lines. The use of alternate members
in such instances is hereby authorized pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
§ 46-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this article:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Town Board when
a regular member is unable to participate on a matter before the respective
Board, as provided herein.
MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Town Board to serve on the
Town Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the
provisions of the local law or ordinance which first established such Board.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Irondequoit
established by the Town Board, pursuant to the provisions of § 271 of the
Town Law.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town
of Irondequoit established by the Town Board, pursuant to the provisions of
§ 267 of the Town Law.
§ 46-4. Authorization; effect.
A. The title of this article is "Appointment of Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Appeals alternate members."
B. This article shall apply to the appointment, terms, functions and powers
of alternate members appointed to serve on the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals in the Town of Irondequoit.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit hereby enacts this article to
provide a process for appointing "alternate" members of the Planning
Board and the Zoning Board of Appeals. These individuals would serve
when members are absent or unable to participate on an application or
matter before the respective Board.
§ 46-1 MEETINGS § 46-4
36:69
§ 46-5. Supersession of Town Law.
B. The Town Board or other duly authorized appointing authority shall
appoint alternate members for a term of three years, which term shall
end on December 31 of the third year after the date of their
appointment.
C. The Chairpersons of the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Appeals may designate an alternate to substitute for a member when
such member is unable to participate on an application or matter before
the board. When so designated, the alternate member shall have the
same powers and responsibilities of such member of the Board. Such
designation shall be entered into the minutes of the initial Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the substitution is
made.
D. All provisions of state law relating to Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Appeals member eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility
of office and service on other boards, as well as any provisions of a local
law/local ordinance relating to training, continuing education,
compensation and attendance, shall also apply to alternate members.
A. This article is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 10 of the
New York State Municipal Home Rule Law and § 10 of the New York
State Statute of Local Governments. It is the intent of the Town Board,
pursuant to § 10 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law, to
supersede any inconsistencies between this article and § 271 of the
Town Law relating to the appointment of alternate members to Town
Planning Boards and § 267 of Town Law relating to the appointment of
alternate members to Town Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. This article shall be deemed to supersede and repeal any other local
laws to the extent therein is inconsistent herewith. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to be a waiver or restriction upon any rights and powers
available to the Town of Irondequoit to further regulate the subject
matter of this article.
§ 46-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 46-5
36:70
Chapter 48
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 53.
§ 46-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 46-5
48:71

ARTICLE I
Jurisdiction
[Adopted 5-11-1989 as Ord. No. 89-1]
§ 48-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Police Jurisdiction Agreements with the
City of Rochester."
§ 48-2. Purpose.
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Genesee
River fishing access site located at the northerly terminus of St. Paul
Boulevard ("the DEC fishing site") is located within the political boundaries
of the City of Rochester. Culver Road from the boundary line between
the Town of Irondequoit and the City of Rochester (which line is 150 feet
north of Norton Street) to Hoffman Road is also located within the political
boundaries of the City of Rochester. Both the DEC fishing site and said
section of Culver Road are surrounded by the political boundaries of the
Town of Irondequoit, thereby creating the public perception that such areas
are within the political boundaries of the Town of Irondequoit. Because
of such perception, the Irondequoit Police Department is contacted by the
public for police enforcement for criminal and traffic matters in these areas.
The Town of Irondequoit and the City of Rochester desire to clarify the
municipal/legal responsibility for these areas and to that end will enter
into a municipal cooperation relative to the police jurisdiction for the DEC
fishing site and have entered into a municipal cooperation agreement dated
December 29, 1988, for said portion of Culver Road. These agreements will
and do provide that the Irondequoit Police Department will have full police
jurisdiction of these areas for all criminal matters, offenses, petty offenses
and violations of all motor vehicle traffic matters.
§ 48-3. DEC fishing site.
All law enforcement officers of the Town of Irondequoit shall have authority
to enforce violations of all offenses and petty offenses committed on the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Genesee River
fishing access site located at the northerly terminus of St. Paul Boulevard
situate within the political boundaries of the City of Rochester pursuant
to Environmental Conservation Law § 71-0907, as amended or changed;
Criminal Procedure Law §§ 1.20, Subdivision 34(d), 20.50, Subdivision 2,
120.50, 140.10 and 150.20, as amended or changed; and a municipal
cooperation agreement between the Town of Irondequoit and the City of
Rochester pursuant to Article 5-G of the General Municipal Law, as
amended or changed.
§ 48-4. Culver Road.
All law enforcement officers of the Town of Irondequoit shall have the
authority to enforce violations of all offenses and petty offenses committed
§ 48-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 48-4
48:73
on Culver Road from a point 150 feet north of Norton Street to Hoffman
Road, which section of Culver Road is situate within the political boundaries
of the City of Rochester pursuant to Criminal Procedure Law §§ 1.20,
Subdivision 34(d), 20.50, Subdivision 2, 120.50, 140.10 and 150.20, as
amended or changed; and a municipal cooperation agreement between
the Town of Irondequoit and the City of Rochester dated December 29,
1988, pursuant to Article 5-G of the General Municipal Law, as amended or
changed.
§ 48-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 48-4
48:74
ARTICLE II
Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 8-19-1997]
§ 48-5. Commencement date; appointment by Town Board.
Commencing September 1, 1997, the Town of Irondequoit may appoint
temporary police officers (special policemen) from time to time as the Town
Board may determine their services necessary, and such special policemen
shall be known as "auxiliary policemen."
§ 48-6. Powers and duties; authority of Chief of Police.
Such auxiliary police shall have all the power and authority conferred upon
constables by the general laws of the State of New York and such additional
powers, not inconsistent with law, as shall be conferred upon them by
the Town Board from time to time. It is the expressed intention of the
Town Board that such police officers shall have the same power, authority,
functions and duties as currently conferred on the Monroe County Civil
Defense Auxiliary Police. Once appointed by the Town Board, such police
officers shall be under the command and direction of the Chief of Police or
his designee.
§ 48-7. Service of auxiliary police.
Such auxiliary police shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board.
§ 48-8. Compensation.
Such auxiliary police shall be volunteers and serve without compensation.
§ 48-9. Uniforms and equipment.
The town shall purchase uniforms and equipment that are necessary for
such auxiliary police to carry out their duties as established by the Town
Board.
§ 48-10. Establishment of requirements and regulations.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall establish, with the approval of the
Town Board, the standards, qualification, training, all rules and regulations,
ranks and determinations of ranks for such police officers.
§ 48-11. Appointment of current auxiliary policemen.
All present members of the Irondequoit auxiliary police are hereby
appointed auxiliary police officers of the Town of Irondequoit subject to the
foregoing.
§ 48-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 48-12
48:75
§ 48-12. Exemption under Civil Service Law.
In the event that the New York State Civil Service Commission determines
that such police officers as appointed by this article are not members of
an exempt class pursuant to Civil Service Law § 41, then the appointment
of such police officers shall be terminated effective within 30 days after
notification of said determination to the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 48-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 48-12
48:76
Chapter 51
PROCUREMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment policy — See Ch. 28.
§ 51-1. Compliance with state law; sealed bidding; exceptions to
sealed bidding.
A. The Town of Irondequoit has adopted the policies and procedures
described herein, to comply with General Municipal Law (GML), §§ 103
and 104-b. Section 104-b was enacted in 1992 and required
municipalities to further define how procurements were made in
accordance with § 103.
B. Public sealed bidding is required for the initial purchase of an item or
group of similar items costing more than $20,000, or if it is reasonably
anticipated purchasing in excess of $20,000 during the fiscal year for
an item or group of similar items. Sealed bids are also required for a
public works (labor and materials) or services contract where the cost
exceeds $35,000 annually. A "public works contract" is defined as an
improvement to a public facility in which the majority of the costs are
labor. Any questions concerning whether items should be publicly bid
should be addressed to the attorneys for the Town.
C. Exceptions to sealed bidding would include:
(1) Purchases from New York State contracts and contracts let by
counties, cities, and towns within New York State.
(2) Purchases of prison-made goods under Correction Law §§ 184 and
186, as amended or changed.
(3) Purchases of products from preferred sources (State Finance Law
§ 162, as amended or changed).
(4) Emergency purchases as defined by General Municipal Law § 103,
as amended or changed.
(5) Purchases from a sole source.
(6) Professional services.
(7) True leases.
D. All legal requirements must be complied with, including, but not limited
to, General Municipal Law §§ 103 and 104-b, State Highway Law §§ 142
and 284, the State Finance Law and the Town Law, as amended or
changed.
§ 48-12 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-2
48:77
§ 51-2. Procurement of goods and services not requiring
competitive bidding; objectives.
Goods and services which are not required by law to be procured by the
Town pursuant to competitive bidding must be procured in a manner so
as to assure the prudent and economical use of public moneys in the
best interests of the taxpayers of the Town, to facilitate the acquisition
of goods and services of maximum quality at the lowest possible cost
under the circumstances and to guard against favoritism, improvidence,
extravagance, fraud and corruption. To further these objectives, the
governing board of the Town, by resolution, shall adopt internal policies and
procedures governing all procurements of goods and services which are not
required to be made pursuant to the competitive bidding requirements of
§ 103 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, or of any other
general, special or local law.
§ 51-3. Purchasing code of ethics.
The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit shall require adherence to the
following:
§ 51-4. Developing and implementing policies and procedures;
analysis of proposed procurement.
A. To consider first the interests of the Town of Irondequoit and the
improvement of its government.
B. To endeavor to obtain the greatest value for every dollar expended.
C. To strive for knowledge of municipal equipment and supplies in order to
recommend items that may either reduce cost or increase efficiency.
D. To insist on and expect honesty in sales representation whether offered
verbally or in writing, through advertising or in a sample of a product
submitted.
A. Section 104-b of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed,
requires that the policies and procedures prescribe procedures for
determining whether a procurement is subject to competitive bidding,
and if it is not, documenting how the decision is reached. See
"Documenting Contract Awards for Non-Bid Procurement."12
B. The initial determination of whether competitive bidding is required
includes the following procedures:
(1) The Supervisor or Department Head seeking the procurement shall
determine whether it is expected that the political subdivision will
spend in excess of the competitive bidding thresholds for the same
or similar items or services (e.g., checking budgetary
appropriations and/or prior years' expenditures) over the course of
12.Editor's Note: See §§ 51-7 and 51-8.
§ 51-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-4
48:78
§ 51-5. Competitive bidding categories; exceptions to bidding
requirements.
the fiscal year. The Supervisor and Department Heads shall meet
periodically to ensure the objectives of this statute are met.
(2) The Supervisor or Department Head seeking the procurement shall
determine, as necessary or appropriate:
(a) Whether an item is available under New York State contracts
and contracts let by counties, cities, and towns within New
York State.
(b) In the case of an emergency, whether the statutory criteria (see
General Municipal Law § 103, Subdivision 4, as amended or
changed) are met.
(c) In the case of a lease, whether a document is a true lease and
not an installment purchase contract.
(d) In the case of a sole source, whether an item is required in the
public interest, has no reasonable equivalent and is in fact
available only from one source.
(e) In the case of a combination of professional services and a
purchase, for analyzing whether the professional service is the
predominant part of the transaction and is inextricably
integrated with the purchase.
A. Categories of procurements. This list identifies whether these
categories are subject to the competitive bidding requirements of § 103
of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, or the local
policies required by § 104-b.
Subject to Bidding
(§ 103)
Local Policies
(§ 104-b)
Purchase and
Public Work
Contracts:
Purchase contract,
above $20,000
X
Purchase contract,
below $20,000
X
Contract for public
work, above $35,000
X
Contract for public
work, below $35,000
X
§ 51-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-5
48:79
Subject to Bidding
(§ 103)
Local Policies
(§ 104-b)
Procurements
Excepted From Both
§§ 103 and 104-b:
Preferred sources
(State Finance Law,
§ 162)
X
Correctional
institutions
(Correction Law,
§§ 184 and 186)
X
State contract
(General Municipal
Law § 104)
X
County contract
(General Municipal
Law § 103,
Subdivision 3)
X
Procurements
Excepted from
§ 103:
Emergencies (General
Municipal Law § 103,
Subdivision 4)
X
Sole source (e.g.,
patented or monopoly
item)
X
Professional services X
True leases X
Insurance X
Secondhand
equipment from
another government
(General Municipal
Law § 103,
Subdivision 6)
X
Certain municipal
hospital purchases
(General Municipal
Law § 103,
Subdivision 8)
X
§ 51-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-5
48:80
B. Exceptions to competitive bidding requirements. The following is a
description of the various exceptions to the requirements of General
Municipal Law § 103:
(1) Preferred sources. Under State Finance Law § 162, as amended or
changed, all suitable products and services, as determined and
approved by the New York State Office of General Services, shall be
procured by any political subdivision in accordance with applicable
specifications of the political subdivision from qualified charitable
nonprofit agencies for the blind, qualified nonprofit agencies for
other severely handicapped, qualified special employment
programs for the mentally ill or veterans' workshops, which have
been approved by the Commissioner of Social Services, Education
or Mental Health, as the case may be, and which are organized
under the laws of New York State, and are manufacturing such
products or performing such services within the state, whenever
the products are available at a price determined by the Office of
General Services. Competitive bidding requirements are not
applicable to these purchases.
(2) Goods made in correctional institutions.
(a) Under Correction Law § 184, as amended or changed, the
Commissioner of Correctional Services is required to cause to
be manufactured by inmates in state correctional institutions
items as are required by the state and political subdivisions,
and to furnish these items at prices as shall be fixed and
determined, upon requisition. That section provides: "No
article so manufactured . . . shall be purchased from any other
source . . . unless the commissioner . . . shall certify that the
same cannot be furnished upon such requisition, and no claim
therefor shall be audited or paid without such certificate." See
also Correction Law § 186, as amended or changed.
(b) Since the Legislature has provided a purchasing requirement
for articles manufactured in correctional institutions which is
contrary to § 103 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or
changed, said section has no application to such purchases.
Under the Correction Law, a town may apply to the
Department of Correctional Services for a waiver which would
allow the town to make the purchase from other sources
pursuant to normal competitive bidding requirements. In
addition, a town may appeal the purchase price on the basis
that it unreasonably exceeds fair market price (Correction Law
§ 186, as amended or changed). For further information on this
program, political subdivisions may contact the Department of
Correctional Services, Division of Correctional Industries.
(3) State contracts. Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104, as
amended or changed, political subdivisions and districts therein
are authorized to make purchases, in excess of $500, of materials,
§ 51-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-5
48:81
equipment and supplies (except printed material) through the New
York State Office of General Services (OGS), subject to rules
established by OGS (see State Finance Law § 163). Section 104 of
the General Municipal Law provides that purchases by the town
through OGS are excepted from competitive bidding requirements.
A town may purchase numerous items at the same prices and
under the same terms and conditions as the state. Under § 104 of
the General Municipal Law, all purchases are subject to audit and
inspection by the political subdivision and the political subdivision
must accept sole responsibility for payment to the vendor. No
official may make a purchase through the OGS when bids have
already been received unless the purchase may be made upon the
same terms, conditions and specifications, but at a lower price,
through OGS.
(4) County, city, and town contracts. Pursuant to General Municipal
Law § 103, Subdivisions 3 and 16, as amended or changed,
purchases through any county, city, or town in New York State are
exempted from the competitive bidding requirements of General
Municipal Law, § 103 as amended or changed. As with purchases
through OGS, all purchases are subject to audit and inspection by
the Town, and the Town must accept sole responsibility for
payment to the vendor. No local official may make a purchase
through a county, city, or town when bids have already been
received unless the purchase may be made upon the same terms,
conditions and specifications, but at a lower price, through that
county, city, or town.
(5) Limitations on state, county, city, and town contracts.
(a) The exception for state, county, city, or town contract
purchases applies only when purchases are made from the
current state, county, city, or town vendor or in certain cases, a
listed agent or distributor, whose contract has been extended
to political subdivisions. Thus, the Town may not, as an
exception to bidding requirements, purchase from a vendor
other than a vendor holding a current state, county, city, or
town contract that has been extended to political subdivisions,
even if the purchase is equal to or below the state or county
price. For example, if a quote or bid were less than the state or
county contract price, the Town cannot simply accept that
lower price without going through the normal bid or quotation
process.
(b) Purchases from vendors holding state, county, city, or town
contracts may not be made upon terms and conditions which
materially or substantially vary from the state, county, city, or
town contract. Also, these exceptions relate to both purchase
contracts and contracts for public work.
§ 51-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-5
48:82
(c) Notwithstanding anything contrary under General Municipal
Law § 103(16), the exception from public bidding shall apply
only to New York State contracts and contracts let by towns,
cities, and counties in New York State.
(6) True leases.
(a) The courts have held that "true lease" agreements are neither
purchases nor contracts for public work and, thus, are not
subject to bidding under General Municipal Law § 103, as
amended or changed. Competitive bidding requirements may
not be avoided by simply casting an agreement, which is truly a
purchase or contract for public work, as a lease or rental.
(b) Although no one factor is determinative, the following factors
are to be considered when determining whether an agreement
is a true lease or an installment purchase contract:
[1] Transaction is a device intended to circumvent the
competitive bidding statutes;
[2] Intent to transfer title to Town, present or not;
[3] Town assumes indicia of ownership (i.e., risk of loss,
maintenance, repairs, insurance);
[4] Principle and interest component present in payment;
[5] Useful life of property involved;
[6] Acquisition of equity by Town during term of this
agreement;
[7] Fair market rental value;
[8] Value of option to purchase at end of the agreement; and/
or
[9] Total cost of payments in comparison to fair market value
of property at inception of contract.
(7) Insurance. The courts have held that insurance coverage is not
subject to formal competitive bidding.
(8) Emergencies.
(a) An exception to the competitive bidding requirements exists
for emergency situations (General Municipal Law § 103,
Subdivision 4, as amended or changed). The following are
three basic statutory criteria to be met in order to fall within
this exception:
[1] The situation arises out of an accident or other unforeseen
occurrence or condition.
§ 51-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-5
48:83
[2] The circumstances affect public buildings, public property
or the life, health, safety or property of the Town's
residents.
[3] The situation requires immediate action which cannot
await competitive bidding.
(b) Generally, there must be a present, immediate and existing
condition which is creating an imminent threat or danger and
which requires such immediate action that a further delay to
comply with competitive bidding requirements would be so
detrimental to the public interest that it overcomes the strong
public policy in favor of bidding. Because the emergency must
result from an accident or unforeseen occurrence, it is doubtful
the Town may invoke the emergency exception in a situation
which is the result of inaction or dilatory behavior on the part
of local officials and which, therefore, could have been
foreseen in time to advertise for bids. Even when the Town
Board passes a resolution that a public emergency exists, the
public interest dictates that purchases are made at the lowest
possible costs, seeking competition by informal solicitation of
quotes or otherwise, to the extent practicable under the
circumstances.
(9) Sole source.
(a) Competitive bidding is not required under § 103 of the General
Municipal Law, as amended or changed, in those limited
situations when a town, in the public interest, requires
particular goods or services which uniquely serve the public
interest, for which there is no substantial equivalent and which
are, in fact, available from only one good source (see gen. 1986
Opns St Comp No. 86-25, p. 41). Thus, for example, if the Town,
acting in good faith and without intent to arbitrarily inhibit or
restrict competition, determines that a particular patented
item is required in the public interest and it is further
determined that such item is available only from one source so
that no possibility of competition exists, competitive bidding
may not be required for the procurement of the item.
(b) In making these determinations, the Town should document,
among other things, the unique benefits of the item as
compared to other items available in the marketplace, that no
other item provides substantially equivalent or similar
benefits; and that, considering the benefits received, the cost
of the item is reasonable when compared to other products or
services in the marketplace. In addition, the Town should
document that, as matter of fact, there is no possibility of
competition for the procurement.
(10) Professional services.
§ 51-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-5
48:84
§ 51-6. Determination of procedure; documentation whether a
procurement is subject to competitive bidding.
(a) The courts have held that professional services are not
contracts for public work, as that phrase is used in the bidding
statutes, and, therefore, are not subject to competitive bidding
procedures. The determination of whether the professional
service exception is applicable in given situations must be
made on a case-by-case basis, examining the particular
services to be acquired.
(b) Generally, professional services involve specialized expertise,
use of professional judgment and/or a high degree of creativity.
Also, the services generally are to be performed by particular
designated individuals. Finally, the courts have noted that
professional service contracts often involve a relationship of
personal trust and confidence. Among the services which have
been held to be exempt from competitive bidding under this
exception are those of an engineer, architect, land surveyor,
attorney, physician and insurance broker.
(c) Generally, if the situation warrants a solicitation of costs, an
effective method would be a request for proposal (RFP). The
extent of the RFP would be decided on a case-by-case basis.
(11) Secondhand equipment from other governments. There is a
statutory exception to competitive bidding requirements which
permits the purchases of surplus and secondhand supplies,
materials or equipment without competitive bidding from the
federal or state government or from any other political or public
benefit corporation within the state (General Municipal Law, § 103,
Subdivision 6). However, purchases of used items from any other
source (e.g., private sources like auctions or going-out-of-business
sales) are not exempt from bidding requirements.
A. Analysis of proposed procurements. There must be a determination as
to whether a proposed procurement is subject to competitive bidding,
and if not, documenting how the decision is reached. Three initial
questions must be addressed: Is the proposed procurement a purchase
contract or a contract for public work? If it is either, is the amount
above the applicable threshold in § 103 of the General Municipal Law as
amended or changed? If so, do any exceptions apply? If it is not, what
type of procurement is it?
B. In general, purchase contracts involve the acquisition of commodities,
materials, supplies, or equipment, while contracts for public work
involve services, labor or construction. Each procurement must be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis to determine which kind of purchase it
would be. If it would involve a substantial amount of service, to the
extent that the service provided to the Town is the focal point and the
acquisition of goods is incidental, then it would be considered a
§ 51-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-6
48:85
§ 51-7. Documentation required for purchase orders and contract
awards for non-bid procurements.
contract for public work. Conversely, if the service or labor is only
minimal or incidental to the acquisition of goods, it would be considered
a purchase contract.
C. For example, a contract for interior painting of a building involves both
material (paint) and labor (painting). In most instances, the labor
component of the contract will be predominant, making it a contract for
public work. In contrast, replacing a boiler furnace, while involving
both equipment (the boiler) and labor, will, in most instances, consist
primarily of a charge for the equipment, making it a purchase contract.
D. In documenting whether a proposed procurement is below the bidding
limits, records should include evidence of a written or verbal quotes
(telephone logs, etc.) to substantiate that the price of the item or
service would not exceed the bidding limits. In addition, since similar
procurements to be made in a fiscal year must be considered in the
aggregate for purposes of determining whether a particular item must
be bid, the responsible individual could document the amount expended
in previous years and that the monetary thresholds are not anticipated
to be exceeded in the current year, and therefore, bidding would not be
required. In this process, the amount anticipated to be spent in the
current year should be documented because the amount involved may
affect the method of competition to be sought. Documentation should
also explain how it was determined that the procurement was either a
purchase or a public works contract.
A. Verbal quotations. A telephone log or other record should provide, at a
minimum, the date, the item or service desired, the price quoted and
the name of the vendor's representative.
B. Written quotations. Vendors should provide, at a minimum, the date, a
description of the item or details of the service to be provided, the price
quoted, name of contract and signature. Quotes from websites are also
acceptable, provided that the relevant webpages are printed and kept
in Town files similar to written quotes provided by other vendors.
C. Procurements subject to § 104-b of the General Municipal Law are
listed in the following chart with policies and procedures:
Dollar Limits
1 Or More
Verbal Quotes
3 Or More
Verbal Quotes
Written Quotes
3 Or More
Purchase
Contracts
Below $20,000
Under $500 X
$500 - $999 X
§ 51-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-7
48:86
§ 51-8. Documentation of particular non-bid procurements.
Dollar Limits
1 Or More
Verbal Quotes
3 Or More
Verbal Quotes
Written Quotes
3 Or More
$1,000 -
$19,999
X
Contract for
Public Work
Below $35,000
Under $1,000 X
$1,000 - $4,999 X
$5,000 -
$34,999
X
D. Price documentation. Copies of the verbal quotation record or the
written quotation (with the above information) must be attached to
each purchase order as it is processed for ordering. Purchase orders
without this information will be returned to the ordering department. A
sample of the Town of Irondequoit Quotation Log is attached.13
A. In each of these situations, the following documentation should be
maintained to show that the procurement is in the best interest of the
local government and how that determination was made. Following are
suggested acceptable methods of documentation:
(1) Emergencies: Documentation should include a telephone log of
verbal quotes.
(2) True leases: Documentation should include written quotes, costbenefit
analysis of leasing versus purchasing, etc. Requests for
proposals may be used for obtaining true leases.
(3) Secondhand equipment from other governments: Documentation
should include market price comparisons (verbal or written quotes)
and name of government.
(4) Requests for proposals (hereinafter referred to as RFP): A request
for proposal and evaluation of proposals should consider quality of
service as well as price. Quality can be judged by factors such as
experience, staffing, ability to respond within the time constraints
established by the Town and suitability for the needs of the Town.
The award should be the most advantageous to the Town from all
perspectives, not only cost, but normally would include
negotiations of cost.
(a) A well-planned solicitation effort is needed to identify a
sufficient number of qualified firms. To locate qualified firms,
13.Editor's Note: Said log is on file in the Town offices.
§ 51-7 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-8
48:87
§ 51-9. Public bid instructions.
one might advertise in trade journals, check listings of
professionals, talk to other local officials, etc. Although many
firms may be active in a given locality, not all are likely to have
the specialized knowledge and experience needed to perform
a satisfactory service. A good solicitation effort helps to ensure
that these qualified firms are aware of the government's needs
and procurement procedures and are thereby able to
participate in the proposal process.
(b) A well-planned solicitation effort helps to encourage qualified
firms to respond to RFP's. Preparing a response to an RFP can
be costly. Qualified firms may be unwilling to go to the trouble
and expense of preparing a proposal if critical details of the
engagement or the method used to select (i.e., quality versus
price) are not made clear during the process.
(c) A well-planned solicitation effort can result in reduced costs
through increased competition. Of course, if not properly
managed, competition can produce unsatisfactory results. A
government may obtain a poor-quality service, for example, if
only cost factors are considered in the selection of a firm.
However, if a sufficient pool of qualified firms is identified
through a sound solicitation effort, governments can enjoy the
economic benefits of competition without sacrificing quality.
B. Depending on services obtained and specific circumstances,
procedures will necessarily vary. The specific steps to be followed
should be approved by the governing board. The documentation
maintained would include how firms were identified for solicitation, the
RFP, the criteria for evaluating proposals, the proposals for services
received from the various firms and any other relevant information.
C. Since there is no requirement in § 104-b of the General Municipal Law,
as amended or changed, on the frequency of solicitation, periodic
solicitation can be made at reasonable intervals. For example, a
professional could be selected with the option reserved by the local
government of extending the contract in succeeding years before
initiating another RFP process.
D. The following "Policy and Procedure for Securing Professional Services
for the Town of Irondequoit"14 is intended to provide guidance in
preparation of requests for proposals and the administration of the RFP
process.
A. The Town of Irondequoit operates in a decentralized purchasing
environment. Therefore, when a public bid is required it is coordinated
14.Editor's Note: See § 51-10.
§ 51-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-9
48:88
§ 51-10. Policy and procedure for securing professional services.
This policy and procedure shall be used by the Town of Irondequoit in the
procurement of professional services, including accounting/auditing, legal,
engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, planning, survey and
other like services; however, selection of expert witnesses and appraisers
shall be subject to the approval of the appropriate department head and
Supervisor.
by the department generating the greatest need for the items/services.
That responsibility includes these procedures to be followed:
(1) Present items/services to Economy Task Force to determine any
needs from other departments.
(2) Obtain bid number from Town Clerk's office.
(3) Coordinate legal advertisement with Town Clerk.
(4) Prepare and distribute specifications to vendors and file a copy
with the Town Clerk's office. Bid specifications must include the
three attachments (bid proposal sheet, noncollusion certificate and
terms and conditions) filled out as necessary.
(5) Coordinate bid opening time with Town Clerk's office and ensure
that representative from department attends bid opening.
(6) Open bids, review and prepare recommendation for Town Board.
(7) Implement Town Board decision with all necessary followup
administration.
(8) Contact legal counsel for the Town at any point during the process
for all necessary legal advice.
B. The above represents the normal bidding process. If the situation
merits a departure from these procedures it should be addressed
accordingly at that time by the Economy Task Force.
A. When professional services are required by the Town, the Town Board
shall be notified, and the Supervisor and Comptroller, together with the
head of the department that requires said professional service, shall
prepare a scope of services for the project or need of the Town that
requires such professional services.
B. At least three firms shall be solicited by the Town for consideration as
providers of the professional service. Factors to be considered in
determining which firms to solicit will be:
(1) The disciplines required by the project.
(2) The experience of the firm on a particular type of project and any
unique requirements of the project.
§ 51-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-10
48:89
(3) The quality of performance of the firm on previous work done for
the Town.
(4) The experience record of the firm on a particular type of project.
(5) Location of office and staff who will perform the work.
(6) Any other pertinent considerations as may be identified.
C. The Selection Committee shall consist of five voting members:
(1) The Town Supervisor.
(2) The Town Comptroller.
(3) The Town Attorney.
(4) The head of the department requiring the service.
(5) A Town Board liaison.
D. The Selection Committee shall determine by majority vote who will
write the request for proposal document.
E. Requests for proposals.
(1) A formal proposal on the descriptive scope of the project or
services sought shall be requested of the firms identified. The
solicitation of proposals will include the scope of the project or
services sought and a proposed schedule for completion or terms of
said professional relationship.
(2) The response to the proposal shall include discussion on the
proposed approach to the project or services required, any special
aspects of the project, schedule, staffing, projected budgets (if
applicable), any other information pertinent to executing the
project or services and a proposed fee schedule for such services.
F. Proposals shall be formally evaluated and ranked as to order of
preference by the Selection Committee. Interviews with each of the
firms submitting proposals shall be held prior to ranking, provided that
if more than three firms submit proposals, the Selection Committee
may provide a preliminary assessment of all proposals and elect to
interview no less than the top three firms. An evaluation memorandum
shall be prepared documenting the results of the evaluation and
reasons for the selected ranking.
G. When the ranking is completed, negotiations shall be held with the topranked
firm to establish detailed scope of such professional services, a
fair and reasonable fee for such professional services, and other terms
and conditions of the professional service agreement as may be
necessary given the nature of the project or services sought. In the
event that negotiations are not successful, the second-ranked firm shall
be invited to engage in a similar negotiation with the Committee; and
§ 51-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 51-10
48:90
§ 51-11. Alteration of policy.
A provision of the purchasing policies and provisions may be changed
by memorandum attached as an addition or deletion to the appropriate
provision by the Comptroller subject to the approval of the Town Board and
shall be added to the appendix herein.15
similarly the third-ranked firm shall be so engaged in a negotiation if an
agreement cannot be negotiated with the second.
H. In the event that the Selection Committee cannot recommend any of the
firms, the entire process as described above shall be reinitiated.
I. When negotiations are complete, the Selection Committee shall present
the scope of the professional services to be performed and the proposed
fee to the Town Board for approval.
J. Whenever practical, this process shall be used simultaneously when
more than one project of a similar type exists for which professional
services are required.
K. This procedure need not apply to services with an estimated cost of less
than $5,000. In such cases, the department proposing to utilize such
professional service shall review the qualifications of firms capable of
performing such professional service, negotiate the scope of such
professional service and the project work to be performed and establish
fees for such professional service.
L. The complete ranking sheet used by the Selection Committee shall be
made available for review in the office of the Town Clerk after the Town
Board has approved the contract with the consultant.
M. Upon completion of the professional services, the user department and
the Comptroller shall prepare an evaluation of the professional services
with particular attention to outstanding or unsatisfactory performance.
This evaluation shall be reviewed with the professional service provider,
modified by the professional service provider's input, if appropriate,
and submitted to and retained by the Selection Committee for its
information and consideration in making future determinations and
selections.
N. This procedure is considered fair and effective in ensuring quality
services at a fair, reasonable and controlled cost both to the Town of
Irondequoit and the professional service provider the Town retains.
15.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 51-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-11
48:91
Chapter 53
PUBLIC SAFETY, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48. Dog control — See Ch. 79, Art. I.
§ 53-1. Establishment; title.
There is hereby established in the Town of Irondequoit, pursuant to the
provisions of the Suburban Town Law16 and Municipal Home Rule Law of
the State of New York, a department which shall be known and may be cited
as the "Town of Irondequoit Public Safety Department."
§ 53-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The town officer who is the chief executive officer of
said Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Irondequoit Department of Public Safety.
§ 53-3. Administration.
There shall be in the Town of Irondequoit a Department of Public Safety.
The chief executive officer and administrative head of the Department shall
be the Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Town Board for the
term fixed by law at such salary as may from time to time be fixed by the
Town Board. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the Chief of Police
shall have charge of the administration of the Department.
§ 53-4. Organization.
A. There shall be within the Department of Public Safety the following
divisions:
(1) Administrative.
(2) Police.
(3) Animal and Dog Control.17
(4) Civil Defense.
16.Editor's Note: See Article 3-A of the Town Law.
17.Editor's Note: Former § 114.22D, Traffic Control and Maintenance, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-21-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996.
§ 51-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 53-4
53:92
§ 53-5. Powers and duties.
(5) Such other further divisions as may from time to time hereinafter
be deemed necessary and established as hereinafter provided.
B. Each of said divisions shall be supervised by an administrative officer
who shall be in charge of such division.
A. Generally. The powers and duties of the divisions shall be under the
administration, direction and control of the Chief of Police, and each of
the divisions shall be supervised by a division head. The Chief of Police
shall be in charge of the Administrative Division; the Chief of Police
shall also be in charge of the Police Division and shall have all the
powers and duties conferred upon him or her by law; the Animal
Control Officer shall be in charge of the Animal and Dog Control
Division; and the Civil Defense Coordinator shall be in charge of the
Civil Defense Division. [Amended 5-21-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]18
B. Administrative Division. The Administrative Division shall have charge
of and be responsible for the general administration of
intradepartmental matters, including office and shop management and
budget coordination; purchasing control; cost studies and analysis; and
supervision of personnel matters assigned by the Chief of Police or the
Town Board.
C. Police Division. The Police Division shall have charge of and be
responsible for the general safety and welfare of the town and its
people, protect property, peace and good order as provided under
criminal, civil, motor vehicle, local or other duties and responsibilities
prescribed by law.
D. Animal and Dog Control Division. The Animal and Dog Control Division
shall have charge of and be responsible for the enforcement of any
provision of the State Agriculture and Markets Law, Public Health Law
and local laws or ordinances pertaining to matters of dogs and
animals.19
E. Civil Defense Division. The Civil Defense Coordinator shall have charge
of and be responsible for local natural and man-made disaster
preparedness coordination, which shall include the preparation and
maintenance of a local disaster plan, any organizational arrangements
and response capability required to execute the provisions of the
disaster plan.
F. Other powers and duties. The Chief of Police, acting by and through any
of said existing or hereafter named divisions, shall be empowered to
perform such other duties and functions that are prescribed to be
performed by him or her in any law, ordinance or resolution of the Town
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
19.Editor's Note: Former ~ 114.23E, Traffic Control Maintenance Division, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-21-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996.
§ 53-4 PUBLIC SAFETY, DEPARTMENT OF § 53-5
53:93
§ 53-6. Special improvement districts.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project, subject
to approval by the Town Board.
§ 53-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in ~~ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, or any other powers
which may be lawfully exercised by said Supervisor.
§ 53-8. Powers of Board of Police Commissioners.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate, transfer or
diminish any power of the Board of Police Commissioners or the Town Board
acting as the Board of Police Commissioners.
Chapter 56
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 56-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Irondequoit Department of
Public Works," pursuant to the provisions of the Suburban Town Law20 and
Municipal Home Rule Law of New York State.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways as chief executive officer of the Department of Public Works and
may be referred to by either title.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Irondequoit Department of Public Works.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Deputy to the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, a designated
officer of the Department to aid and assist the Commissioner of Public
Board or lawful directive of the Supervisor; however, the Chief of Police
may delegate any of his or her powers to or direct any of his or her
duties to be performed to a head of a division.
20.Editor's Note: See Article 3-A of the Town Law.
§ 53-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 56-2
56:94
Works/Superintendent of Highways in planning and coordinating projects
and policies of the Department of Public Works.
§ 56-3. Creation of offices.
§ 56-4. Establishment. [Amended 7-18-1995 by L.L. No. 12-1995]
A. There is hereby created the Office of the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe
County, New York.
B. There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Commissioner of Public
Works of the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe County, New York.
C. The Town Board may, from time to time, establish, consolidate or
abolish any divisions, operating groups, bureaus or other service units
in the Department and assign or transfer any powers, duties or
functions of the Department to or form any division therein or to any
other department and may reorganize, transfer or assign any officers or
employees in each division from one to another. The Town Board may
also appoint such additional assistants to the Commissioner as it may
find necessary for efficient operation of said Department and prescribe
the titles, powers and duties of each. Said assistants shall have the
power to act generally for and in place of his or her principal, and the
office of such assistants shall be in the exempt class of civil service
system.
A. There shall be in the Town of Irondequoit a Department of Public
Works. The chief executive officer and administrative head of such
department shall be the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways, who shall be appointed by the Town Board and who shall
hold office until the first day of January next succeeding the first
biannual town election, held after his or her appointment, and,
thereafter, shall hold office for the term of two years and until his or her
successor shall have qualified; provided, however, that the appointee to
such office shall be removable at the pleasure of the Town Board unless
otherwise provided by local law, at such salary as may from time to time
be fixed by said Town Board. The Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall be appointed on the basis of his or
her administrative experience and qualifications for the duties of such
office and such additional standards as may be required by the Town
Board and shall be in the unclassified service of the civil service system.
B. The Commissioner shall have charge of and be responsible for the
general administration of department matters, including office
management; budget coordination and purchasing control; cost studies
and analysis; maintenance and landscaping of town highways; refuse
collection and disposal; yard debris collection and disposal;
maintenance of the Town Hall, Public Safety Building and town
libraries; and such other matters as listed below or as may, from time to
time, be assigned by the Town Board. The Commissioner shall also:
§ 56-2 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 56-4
56:95
(1) Ascertain that all town ordinances and town and state codes, rules
or regulations that pertain to the Public Works Department are
complied with and implemented where necessary.
(2) Establish and maintain close liaison and cooperation with the State
and County Departments of Public Works.
(3) Formulate programs for the various special districts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, etc., that will efficiently meet the needs of the
people in the special district.
(4) See that all town equipment and facilities are adequately
maintained.
(5) Review specifications for supplies, new equipment and repairs
before the specifications are submitted for competitive bidding.
(6) Tabulate and account for all public works expenditures and
compare with the budget; submit a monthly report to the Town
Supervisor.
(7) Periodically inspect all town facilities and report to the Town Board
any findings that require action.
(8) Ensure that all public works projects under contract to private
individuals and projects being performed by town personnel are
adequately inspected.
(9) Answer questions, investigate complaints and process suggestions
relating to the public works, received either directly from the
public or assigned by the Supervisor, and report to the Supervisor
as to how the matter was disposed of and monthly supply the Town
Board a tabulation of complaints by category.
(10) Establish a six-year capital expenditures program for each
department within the public works organization and submit it
annually to the Town Supervisor when directed.
(11) Submit to the Town Supervisor annually, when directed, an
operating budget for the Department and each special district for
the ensuing calendar year.
(12) Recommend to the Town Board any new ordinances or revisions to
existing ones that will improve the operation or efficiency of the
Public Works Department or in any way favorably affect the general
welfare of the town and its residents.
(13) Administer town personnel policies affecting Department of Public
Works employees and write job classifications and rate employee's
performance and implementation of task assignment by functions
to a specific department or section.
§ 56-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 56-4
56:96
(14) Establish personnel training procedures and ensure that there will
be manpower available and trained when vacancies occur or during
an absence.
(15) Maintain an inventory of all town equipment by department.
(16) Establish procedures for determining the operating and
maintenance costs on all major equipment items and make
economic comparisons when requested by the Supervisor or the
Town Board.
C. The Deputy to the Commissioner of Public Works shall assist the
Commissioner in planning, directing and administering the Department
of Public Works and such other related duties as may be assigned to him
or her by the Commissioner or the Town Board.
(1) In the event that the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways is a professional engineer duly licensed by the State of
New York as such, then the Town Board may, by resolution, confer
upon such Commissioner, for all or part of his or her term of office,
the duties and power of a Town Engineer; provided, however, that
the Town Board may at any time revoke such delegation of duties
and powers.
(2) The secretary to the Commissioner shall be a management,
confidential employee and shall be in the exempt class of the civil
service system.
(3) All employees of the Department of Public Works shall be appointed
by the Town Board and shall hold the position to which appointed at
the pleasure of the Town Board; provided, however, that any
employee in the classified civil service may be removed only for
cause. "Employee" as used in this section of this chapter shall not
include the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commissioner may
be subject to the limitations contained in § 140, General powers
and duties of town superintendent, of the New York State Highway
Law, as amended or changed, and may appoint within the
budgetary appropriations therefor such persons as may be
necessary for maintenance of town highways, bridges and removal
of obstructions caused by snow, but, § 56-23 of this chapter
notwithstanding, such employees shall not be transferred by the
Commissioner to any other division or office of the Department
unless their appointment has been confirmed by the Town
Supervisor.
(4) Before entering upon the duties of their respective office, the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways and
the Deputy to the Commissioner of Public Works shall execute and
file an official undertaking, if the same is required by the Town
Board, in such sum as prescribed by the Town Board and in such
form as approved by the Town Attorney.
§ 56-4 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 56-5
56:97
§ 56-5. Powers and duties.
A. Generally. The Commissioner shall supervise and direct the activities of
the Deputy to the Commissioner, the Town Engineer and the
maintenance staff. This supervision shall primarily take the form of
coordination and effecting and implementing the policies of the Town
Board. Upon resolution of the Town Board, he or she may also assume
all duties and responsibilities of the Highway Superintendent.
[Amended 7-18-1995 by L.L. No. 12-1995]
B. The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways shall
have charge of and be responsible for the supervision, construction,
repair, maintenance and cleaning of all highways, streets, culverts,
bridges, parking facilities, stormwater drainage systems under the
jurisdiction of the town, streetlighting, trees within the highway rightof-
way, sanitary sewers, sanitary pumping stations, sanitary force
mains, town treatment plants and other facilities for the collection,
conveyance and disposal of all wastewater within and operated by the
town and the Consolidated Sanitary Sewer District within the town, the
Town Hall, Public Safety Building, Operations Center and town libraries
and other duties as may be assigned to the Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways by the Town Board or the
Supervisor. [Amended 7-18-1995 by L.L. No. 12-1995]
C. Other powers and duties.
(1) The Commissioner shall be empowered to perform such other
duties and functions that are prescribed to be performed by him or
her in any law, ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful
directive of the Supervisor.
(2) Furthermore, the Commissioner is hereby authorized and
empowered, subject to the prior approval of the Town Board, to
retain and employ private engineers, architects and consultants or
firms practicing such profession for the purpose of:
(a) Preparing designs, plans and estimates of structures or
projects of any type and character;
(b) Rendering assistance and advice in connection with any
project, whether defined or proposed and under the
supervision of the Department of Public Works; and
(c) Performing such other and necessary services as the
Commissioner may deem necessary in the administration of
the Department.
D. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the authority, pursuant to
Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law, as amended or changed, and
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 4(a), as amended or
changed, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by him or her
directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal
§ 56-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 56-5
56:98
§ 56-6. Special improvement districts.
All the costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purpose of such district or project.
§ 56-7. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in §§ 29, 52 and 125 of the Town
Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, or any other powers
which may be lawfully exercised by said Supervisor.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 69
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
§ 69-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 69-2. Declaration of policy.
court in connection with his or her alleged commission of a designated
offense of any ordinance, local law or provision of this Municipal Code
that the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways is
required to authorize to enforce.
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Irondequoit to
maintain a reasonable degree of purity of its air resources, consistent
with the public health, welfare and comfort of the residents of this
Town, the business and industrial development of the Town and the
protection of property and other resources and to that end to require
the use of all available practical and reasonable methods for preventing
and controlling air pollution in the Town.
B. The necessity for legislative intervention by the enactment of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared as a matter of legislative
determination, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effect its
purposes.
§ 56-5 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 69-2
56:99
§ 69-3. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to safeguard the air resources of
the Town of Irondequoit from pollution by:
§ 69-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Any particulate matter or any gas or any
combination thereof, other than water vapor or natural air.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants in quantities, of characteristics and of a duration which are
injurious or tend to be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to business
or property or which interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life,
property, health, repose, safety or welfare of persons.
ATMOSPHERE — Open air existing in all space outside of buildings, stacks
or exterior ducts.
CONTROL APPARATUS — Any device which has the function of controlling
a process, fuel-burning equipment or refuse-burning equipment or
incinerator and thus reducing the creation of or the emission of air
contaminants to the atmosphere, or both.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The department
formulated by, but not limited to, the Office of the Fire Marshal, the Office
of the Building Inspector, and the Division of Planning and Zoning, headed
by the Director.
EMISSION — The discharge of an air contaminant into the atmosphere of
the Town.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of a local law, ordinance or parts thereof for
which he or she is so designated.
EQUIPMENT — Any device capable of causing the emission of an air
contaminant into the atmosphere, and any stack, conduit, flue, duct, vent or
device connected or attached thereto or serving the equipment.
FLUE-FED INCINERATOR — An incinerator served by a vertical charging
flue.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge the emergency
powers of the Town or any of its departments, boards or agencies.
A. Controlling or abating air pollution existing when this chapter is
enacted; and
B. Preventing new air pollution under a program which is consistent with
the above-stated declaration of policy.
§ 69-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 69-4
56:100
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stack, structure, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus,
other than a motor vehicle, used to bum fuel or other combustible material.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from the distribution, preparation and serving
of foods.
GAS — A formless fluid which occupies space and which can be changed
to a liquid or solid only by increased pressure with decreased or controlled
temperature or by decreased temperature with increased or controlled
pressure.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Equipment propelled by an internal combustion
engine in or upon which a person or material may be transported on the
ground.
MULTIPLE-CHAMBER DESIGN — Any incinerator consisting of two or
more chambers to separate the charging chute from the flue for carrying
the products of combustion to the atmosphere by employing adequate
design parameters necessary for maximum combustion of the material to be
burned.
OPEN FIRE — Any fire or smoldering from which the products of
combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere and are not directed
thereto through a stack, chimney, flue or other device.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Any liquid (other than water) or any solid which
is so finely divided as to be capable of becoming windblown or of being
suspended in air or other gas or vapor.
PORTABLE EQUIPMENT — Any equipment, as defined herein, capable of
being moved from place to place for temporary operation.
REFUSE-BURNING EQUIPMENT OR INCINERATOR — Equipment
designed to burn garbage, rubbish and other wastes.
RESIDUAL FUEL OIL — The current definition of fuel oil grades Nos. 5 and
6 as classified by the American Society for Testing and Materials, and any
fuel oil which contains a combination of either grade No. 5 or grade No. 6
with any other lighter grade of oil.
RUBBISH — Solid waste material, including but not limited to rags, ashes,
trees, yard trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, demolition
materials, tires and automotive parts.
STANDARD SMOKE CHART — The Ringelmann Chart for grading the
appearance, density or shade of smoke as published and described by
the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718. Any other
method for grading smoke which is approved by the Building Inspector as
the equivalent of the Ringelmann Chart may be substituted therefor.
TEPEE INCINERATOR — A truncated conical structure, with or without fire
grates, used or intended to be used as refuse-burning equipment.
TOXIC — The quality of a medium characterized by contamination by
pollutants, or a combination of pollutants, including disease-causing agents
§ 69-4 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 69-4
56:101
which, after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or
assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or
indirectly through food chains, will cause death, disease, behavioral
abnormalities, malfunctions in reproduction or physical deformations in
such organisms or their offspring.
VAPOR — Any material in a gaseous state which is formed from a substance
that is normally either liquid or solid at atmospheric temperature and
pressure.
WASTE — A flammable solid or liquid material resulting from construction
or any business, trade or industry operations, including but not limited to
the following materials: plastics, wood, cartons, paper and paper products,
chemicals, paints, greases, oils and other petroleum products.
§ 69-5. Enforcement officer.
The Department of Community Development and such other officials and
employees as designated by the Town Board shall enforce this chapter and
in the performance of his or her powers and duties shall:
§ 69-6. Open fires.
Except for open fires used for preparing food for human beings, campfires
or fires for other recreational purposes, provided that such fires do not
create a nuisance, no person shall burn or cause or permit to be burned
in the open any matter, including but not limited to trash, rubbish, leaves,
garbage, grass, refuse, trees, automobiles, rubber, railroad ties, materials
resulting from the demolition, wrecking or construction of buildings,
materials for salvage purposes or other wastes so as to cause the emission
of an air contaminant into the atmosphere of the Town.
A. Conduct air sampling tests.
B. Conduct studies and make determinations of the sources of air
pollution.
C. Process and investigate complaints regarding air pollution.
D. Conduct an informational program with respect to the causes and
effects of air pollution.
E. Undertake an educational program for public and private operators of
combustion chambers, refuse-burning equipment or incinerators and
fuel-burning equipment for the purpose of abating and eliminating the
pollution of the air.
F. Cooperate with all state, local, regional and federal agencies concerned
with the control of air pollution and air contamination.
G. Take such other actions as may be deemed desirable and necessary in
preserving a healthful atmosphere in the Town.
§ 69-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 69-7
56:102
§ 69-7. Operation of equipment or process.
No equipment or process shall be operated except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ 69-8. Testing of equipment and fuel.
§ 69-9. Control apparatus.
§ 69-10. Sealing of equipment.
A. If there is reasonable cause to believe that any equipment or fuel is in
violation of this chapter or of any applicable laws, rules and regulations,
the Enforcement Officer may order the owner or lessee of the
equipment or fuel or his or her agent to conduct and complete within a
specified period of time such tests as he or she deems necessary or
desirable to determine whether the equipment or fuel is in violation
thereof and to submit the test results to the Enforcement Officer within
10 days after the tests have been completed.
B. Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the
Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee. If any part of the test is
conducted at a place other than the site where the equipment or fuel is
located, that part of the test shall be certified by a responsible
laboratory. The entire test results shall be reviewed and certified by a
professional engineer licensed under § 7202 of the Education Law, as
amended or changed.
C. The owner or lessee or his or her agent shall notify the Enforcement
Officer of the time and place of a test at least five days before the
commencement of a test. Reasonable facilities shall be made available
for representatives of the Enforcement Officer to witness the test.
A. The Enforcement Officer may order the installation of any control
apparatus to serve any equipment which causes or is maintained or
operated so as to cause a violation of this chapter and any applicable
laws, rules and regulations.
B. The Enforcement Officer may order the cleaning, repair, replacement or
alteration of any equipment or control apparatus which causes or is
maintained or operated so as to cause a violation of this chapter and of
any of the applicable laws, rules and regulations.
A. The Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized representative
may seal any equipment which:
(1) Emits an air contaminant of a kind or in an amount which is toxic;
(2) Causes or is maintained or operated so as to cause within three
consecutive months two or more violations of this chapter and of
any applicable laws, rules and regulations; or
§ 69-7 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 69-10
56:103
§ 69-11. Inspections; samples.
§ 69-12. Airborne particulate prohibited.
(3) Causes or is maintained or operated so as to cause a violation of
this chapter if, following such violation, an order of the
Enforcement Officer issued pursuant to § 69-9B is not complied
with in the period of time specified in the order.
B. No person shall tamper with or remove the seal of any equipment.
C. The seal may be removed from equipment only upon receipt of written
notice from the Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized
representative stating that the equipment has been corrected and that
it may be used or operated.
A. The Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized representative
may inspect at any reasonable time:
(1) Any equipment, control apparatus, fuel, matter or thing which
affects or may affect the emission of air contaminant, including but
not limited to the premises where the equipment, control apparatus
or fuel is used or where the fuel is purchased, sold or offered for
sale in the Town.
(2) Any record relating to the use of equipment or control apparatus
which affects or may affect the emission of air contaminant or
relating to the use of fuel or the distribution, storage or
transportation of fuel for use in the Town.
B. No person shall refuse entry or access to the Enforcement Officer or his
or her duly authorized representative who requests entry for the
aforementioned purposes set forth in Subsection A hereof, nor shall any
person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such inspection.
A. No person shall cause or permit particulate matter to be handled,
transported or stored in a manner which allows or may allow such
matter to become airborne unless used with reasonable precaution for
the purpose for which it is intended.
B. No person shall cause or permit a building or its appurtenances or a
road to be constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking
such precautions as may be required by the Enforcement Officer to
prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
C. No person, being the owner or having control thereof, shall cause or
permit open areas located within the boundaries of any real property in
the Town to be maintained without taking reasonable precaution to
prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
§ 69-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 69-13
56:104
§ 69-13. Internal combustion engine emissions.
No person shall cause or permit the emission of a visible air contaminant
from the internal combustion engine of:
§ 69-14. Air contaminant density.
§ 69-15. Emission of air contaminants prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit the emission of an air contaminant which
causes or may cause detriment to the health, safety, welfare or comfort of
any person or causes or may cause damage to property or business.
§ 69-16. Concealment or masking of emissions prohibited.
A. Portable or stationary equipment for longer than 30 consecutive
seconds;
B. A motor vehicle while the vehicle is stationary for longer than three
minutes; or
C. A motor vehicle after the vehicle has moved more than 500 yards from a
place where the vehicle was stationary.
A. No person shall cause or permit the emission of an air contaminant if
such emission continues for longer than three minutes in the aggregate
in any sixty-minute period having:
(1) A density which appears as dark or darker than that designated as
No. 1 on the standard smoke chart; or
(2) An opacity which obscures vision to a degree equal to or greater
than smoke of No. 1 density on the standard smoke chart.
B. The density or opacity of an air contaminant shall be measured at the
point of its emission except:
(1) When the point of emission cannot be readily observed, it may be
measured at an observable point on the plume nearest the point of
emission; or
(2) In the case of an air contaminant emitted from a source outside of
the Town, it shall be measured after the plume crosses the
jurisdictional boundary of the Town.
A. No person shall cause or permit the installation or use of any device or
use of any means which, without resulting in a reduction in the total
amount of air contaminant emitted, conceals an emission of air
contaminant which would otherwise violate any applicable law, rule or
regulation.
B. No person shall cause or permit the installation or use of any device or
use of any means designed to mask the emission of an air contaminant
§ 69-13 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 69-16
56:105
§ 69-17. Improper use of equipment or control apparatus
prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit the use of equipment or control apparatus
for a purpose or in a manner for which it is not designed.
§ 69-18. Use of appropriate control apparatus required.
§ 69-19. Operation of refuse-burning equipment or incinerators.
No person, other than a municipal corporation, shall cause or permit the
operation of refuse-burning equipment or incinerators at any time other
than between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of the same day, except with the
approval of the Enforcement Officer.
§ 69-20. Operation of motor vehicles.
No person shall cause or permit the engine of a motor vehicle, other
than a legally authorized emergency vehicle, to idle for longer than three
consecutive minutes while:
§ 69-21. Maintenance of equipment and control apparatus.
Equipment and control apparatus shall be maintained in good operating
condition by regular inspection and cleaning and by promptly making
repairs.
§ 69-22. Fuel-burning equipment.
which causes or may cause detriment to the health, safety or welfare of
any person.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, no person shall cause or
permit the use of equipment which is fitted with control apparatus
(other than experimental control apparatus) unless the control
apparatus is used.
B. If equipment is fitted with control apparatus and is designed to use
more than one kind of fuel, the equipment shall not be used unless the
control apparatus is appropriate for the particular fuel used.
A. Parking, as defined in § 129 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended
or changed;
B. Standing, as defined in § 145 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended
or changed; or
C. Stopping, as defined in § 147 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended
or changed, unless the engine is being used to operate a loading,
unloading or processing device.
§ 69-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 69-22
56:106
§ 69-23. Service of notice; order or decision.
§ 69-24. Variances.
A. No person shall cause or permit the use of a kind or grade of fuel in fuelburning
equipment which is not designed to burn that kind or grade of
fuel.
B. No person shall cause or permit the burning of garbage, rubbish or
other wastes in fuel-burning equipment unless the equipment is
designed to burn such material.
A. Service of any notice, order or decision, other than upon the
Department of Community Development, shall be made as follows:
(1) By mailing a copy of such notice, order or decision in a postpaid
envelope directed to the person affected thereby at his or her
address; or
(2) By leaving a copy of such notice, order or decision with said person
or his or her agent.
B. Service of any notice shall be made upon the Department of Community
Development as follows:
(1) By mailing the notice in a postpaid envelope directed to the
Enforcement Officer, Board or Department; or
(2) By leaving the notice at the office of the enforcement officer
designated for this purpose.
A. The Town Board may grant a variance from the provisions of this
chapter or any order or decision rendered by the Enforcement Officer
pursuant thereto and suspend the enforcement thereof as to any person
who shall show in the case of such person and of the activity which such
person then operates that a compliance by such person would
constitute an undue hardship on such person or present practical
difficulties for such person and would be out of proportion to the
benefits to be obtained thereby; provided, however, that such variance
shall not be granted where the person applying therefor is causing air
pollution which constitutes a health hazard, and provided, further, that
any variance so granted shall not be so construed as to relieve such
person from any liability imposed by any other law or ordinance for the
commission or maintenance of a nuisance.
B. Any variance granted hereunder shall be granted for such period of
time, not exceeding one year, as shall be specified by the Town Board at
the time of granting it, but any variance may be continued from year to
year. Any variance which shall be granted by the Town Board may be
granted on the condition that the person who shall receive it shall make
reports to the Town Board periodically, as the Town Board shall specify,
as to the progress which such person shall have made toward
§ 69-22 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 69-24
56:107
§ 69-25. Confidentiality of records.
Any information relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture
or production obtained in the course of any inspection or investigation or
submitted to the Enforcement Officer shall be kept confidential, except for
the use and purposes of the Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 69-26. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 73
AMBULANCE SERVICES
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AMBULANCE — Any licensee-owned or -operated specially equipped
vehicle which, for compensation, is used to transport the sick or injured.
AMBULANCE OPERATOR or OPERATOR — Any person who, for
compensation, is engaged in the business of furnishing ambulance service
for the transportation of sick or injured persons and who has obtained a
license pursuant to this chapter.
EMERGENCY CALL — A call for a prompt response to furnish ambulance
service as a result of injury or sickness to a person or persons which
requires immediate medical or surgical treatment in a hospital or other
emergency medical treatment facility.
SUPERVISOR — The Supervisor of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 73-2. Approval required.
No person shall engage in the business of ambulance service operator
from one point to another within the Town of Irondequoit without first
obtaining approval as herein provided from the Town Board of the Town of
Irondequoit.
complying with the provisions of this chapter or with any order or
decision rendered by the Enforcement Officer pursuant thereto.
A. Any person who shall violate or fails to perform any duty imposed by the
provisions of this chapter or any order made or decision rendered by
the Department of Community Development pursuant to this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class B violation as provided in § 1-16.
B. The provisions of Subdivision A hereof shall not be construed to exempt
such person from any other action, prosecution or penalty provided by
this chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance.
§ 69-24 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 73-3
73:108
§ 73-3. Approval application; fee.
§ 73-4. Penalties for offenses.22
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in § 1-16B, and shall be enforced by the Police
Department.
A. 21Application for such approval hereunder shall be made at the office of
the Town Clerk, which application shall contain such information as the
Town Board may require from time to time and shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(1) If the applicant is an individual, the name and address of the
applicant.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the business name of the
partnership and the name and address of each partner, whether
said partner is active or inactive.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of all
officers, stockholders, directors and any other financially
interested party for whom stock is held beneficially.
(4) The place from which it is intended or desired to engage in the
business of ambulance service operator, giving a description of the
premises, as well as the location thereof, and the place where
ambulances will be garaged. The application must show that an
office and garage is maintained at a location which will permit
prompt and continuous ambulance service.
(5) The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate; a
description of the kind, make, type, year, size, model, New York
State registration number, motor number, chassis number and
gross weight of the vehicles and the color scheme to be used in said
business.
(6) Such other information as the Town Board shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether the terms of this
chapter have been or will be complied with.
B. The annual license fee for an ambulance service operator shall be set in
accordance with § 1-18.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 73-3 AMBULANCE SERVICES § 73-4
73:109
Chapter 76
AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 88. Games of chance — See Ch. 146.
§ 73-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 73-4
76:110
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 76-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Amusement Center
and Device Ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 76-2. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any premises open to the public and existing
for the primary purpose of offering three (3) or more amusement devices
for use by customers or patrons thereof, including but not limited to any
drinking and/or dining establishments, motion picture hall, billiard or pool
room, amusement park, bowling center or miniature golf establishment.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device controlled or operated by insertion of
a coin or similar article into a slot or similar opening for the purpose or
use as a game, contest or amusement. This includes but it is not limited to
pinball machines, pool tables and video or electronic devices. It does not
include jukeboxes.
PERSON — Includes any individual, any business enterprise such as a
corporation, partnership, association, trust or firm, and any trustee or
receiver.
§ 76-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any amusement device owned and operated
solely for the entertainment of the owner and not for private gain.
§ 76-1 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-3
76:111

ARTICLE II
Amusement Centers
§ 76-4. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate an amusement center with three or
more gaming devices within the Town of Irondequoit without first having
obtained an amusement center and device license.
§ 76-5. License application procedure; inspections; license
requirements.
§ 76-6. Prohibited locations.
No amusement center and device license shall be issued for an amusement
center located within 200 feet of a public or private elementary or
secondary school, measurements to be made in a straight line between the
two closest points on the property lines of the school and the amusement
center.
A. An application for an amusement center and device license shall be
made to the Town Clerk.
B. Upon receipt of an application for an amusement center license and
after approval for compliance with Chapter 235, Zoning, Town code
enforcement officials shall cause an inspection of the premises to be
made to determine whether the applicant is complying with the laws
and ordinances which they are charged with enforcing. Town code
enforcement officials and members of their staff shall have the right to
enter upon any premises for which an amusement center license is
sought for the purpose of making such an inspection during normal
business hours. Further inspections of the premises may be made after
a license has been issued to ensure compliance with laws and
ordinances relating to amusement centers.
C. Upon receipt of the application for the amusement center and device
license, the Chief of Police and/or the Fire Marshal shall cause an
inspection to be made of the premises to determine whether public
safety problems exist on the premises, and the Chief of Police and/or
the Fire Marshal shall cause an investigation to be made into the
background of the owner and the operator of the center. The Chief of
Police and/or the Fire Marshal and his or her representatives shall have
the right to enter upon such premises for the purpose of making such
inspections during normal business hours. Further inspections of the
premises may be made after a license has been issued to ensure
compliance with laws and ordinances relating to amusement centers.
D. Except as provided in New York Correction Law Article 23-A, as
amended or changed, no amusement center license shall be issued to
any person who has pled guilty to or has been convicted of any felony.
§ 76-4 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-7
76:113
§ 76-7. Rules of operation.
The Town of Irondequoit may promulgate rules and regulations to govern
the operation of amusement centers and gaming devices so as to provide for
the orderly operation of the centers and to ensure the public health, safety
and general welfare and the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood
where the centers and devices are located.
§ 76-8. License application information.
The required information to be stated in the application for an amusement
center and device license shall include:
§ 76-9. Affixing of license to vehicle.
In all cases where said trade or occupation is carried on in connection with
the use of a vehicle, said license shall be attached to a conspicuous place on
each vehicle used therewith.
§ 76-10. Operation; posting of license.
A. The date and place of birth of the applicant.
B. His or her residence.
C. The nature of the business in sufficient detail to disclose the nature
thereof.
D. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any
misdemeanor or any felony in any court of competent jurisdiction.
E. If a vehicle is to be used, the applicant must provide license plate
number, make and model of vehicle, and whether the applicant is the
owner of the vehicle (if not, then provide the name of the owner).
F. Whether the applicant is an individual, co-partnership or corporation
and date and state of incorporation.
G. Length of time a license is desired.
H. Any further information as required by the Town Clerk.
A. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall comply with all provisions of federal, state and local laws and
ordinances relating to the conduct of business and use and
maintenance of the premises.
B. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall comply with all the notices, orders, decisions and rules and
regulations made by the Town of Irondequoit governing the occupation
and use of said premises.
§ 76-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 76-10
76:114
§ 76-11. Term and nontransferability of license.
Amusement center licenses shall continue in force for the term specified
therein, but in no event longer than the 31st day of December following the
date said license is issued. Such license shall not be transferable.
C. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall cause the amusement center and device license to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the amusement center.
D. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall not permit at any time a greater number of persons on the
premises than the capacity approved by the Town of Irondequoit.
E. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall maintain good order on the premises at all times. The lack of good
order on the premises shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Fighting and rowdy behavior.
(2) Illegal or excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages or drugrelated
material.
(3) Gambling.
F. The owner and operator of any amusement center and gaming device
shall not allow the amusement center to be opened or operated unless it
is under the control and supervision of a person not less than twentyone
(21) years of age who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance
with all the regulations of this chapter.
G. Hours.
(1) Except for public amusement for drinking and/or dining
establishments, motion-picture theaters, billiard or pool rooms,
bowling centers, or theatrical performances, the owner and
operator of any amusement center shall not open or operate to the
public such amusement center later than 12:00 midnight nor
earlier than 9:00 a.m. on each and every day of the week, except on
Saturday, when he or she may not open or operate such amusement
center later than 1:00 a.m. the following Sunday, and the license
shall be issued upon the express condition that the operator thereof
shall abide by the hours of operation as herein provided.
(2) For single-day exceptions to operate earlier than 9:00 a.m.,
separate application must be made to the Town Clerk at least 10
days prior to the requested date. Application must be approved by
both the Town Clerk and the Chief of Police. No more than three
single-day exceptions will be granted in one calendar year.
§ 76-10 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-11
76:115

ARTICLE III
Amusement Devices
§ 76-12. License required.
No owner or lessee of three or more amusement devices shall offer or
present for operation in an amusement center within the Town of
Irondequoit any amusement device without first having obtained an annual
license for each such device from the Town Clerk.
§ 76-13. License application procedure; inspections; license
requirements.
§ 76-14. Tags for amusement devices.
The Town Clerk shall issue to the owner, lessee or operator thereof a license
or tag for each amusement device, which shall be kept on file with the
operator of said amusement devices and contain the following information:
A. An application for an amusement center and device license shall be
made to the Town Clerk on forms prescribed by the Town Board.
B. Upon receipt of an application for an amusement center and device
license, the Chief of Police and/or Fire Marshal shall cause an
inspection of the amusement device to be made to determine whether
public safety problems exist, and the Chief of Police and/or the Fire
Marshal and his or her representatives shall have the right to enter
upon any premises where an amusement device is to be located for the
purpose of making such an inspection during normal business hours.
Further inspections of the premises may he made after a license has
been issued to ensure compliance with the laws and ordinances relating
to amusement devices.
C. Amusement devices may be added by the owner or operator of the
device upon written notice of the device name and serial number to the
Town Clerk and payment of a device fee.
D. No license shall be issued for an amusement device which is not
permitted under state law or which does not function safely and
properly.
E. Except as provided in the New York Correction Law Article 23-A, as
amended or changed, no license shall be issued for an amusement
device if the owner thereof or the applicant thereof has pled guilty to or
been convicted of any felony.
A. The name of the owner, lessee or operator of the amusement devices.
B. The name and serial number of such amusement devices.
§ 76-12 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-14
76:117
§ 76-15. Term and nontransferability of license.
An amusement center and device license shall continue in force for the term
specified therein, but in no event longer than the 31st day of December
following the date said license is issued. The license may be transferred
from one amusement device to another amusement device upon 10 days'
written notification to the Town Clerk, but not more than one amusement
device shall be operated under one license.
§ 76-16. Operation.
C. The name of the owner, lessee or operator of the amusement center
where said device is located and the number of licenses issued to said
amusement center.
A. No cash awards shall be offered or given in any contest, tournament,
league or individual play on any amusement device.
B. The licensee of any amusement device in an amusement center shall
comply with all provisions of federal, state and local laws and
ordinances pertaining to such device.
C. The Town of Irondequoit may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations to govern the operation and control of amusement devices
in amusement centers to provide for the orderly operation of
amusement centers and to ensure the public health, safety and general
welfare and the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood where the
centers are located.
§ 76-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 76-16
76:118
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 76-17. License fees.
§ 76-18. Denial of license.
§ 76-19. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Clerk in the denial of an
application for a license, as provided in this chapter, shall have the right
to appeal to the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of
has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Town Board shall set a
time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be mailed to the applicant at his or her last known address at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The granting, refusal or
revocation of a license by the Town Board shall be subject to review by
certiorari.
§ 76-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class B violation punishable under the provisions of § 1-16. The imposition
of all penalties for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation
or permit it to continue. The application of the above penalty or penalties
or the prosecution for a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not
A. Schedule. There shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the time an
application is filed for any license under this chapter a fee or fees as set
forth in accordance with § 1-18.
B. Refund. In case a license is not granted, 1/2 of the license fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. No other refunds shall be granted.
C. Quarterly fees for an amusement center and device license shall be paid
on a yearly basis and are to be paid at the time of application.
A. The Town Clerk or Chief of Police may deny or revoke a license or deny
the renewal of a license to any applicant who has been convicted of a
crime or who does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any
rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter or who makes a
material misrepresentation on the license application. The Town Clerk
shall give a written notification to an applicant of the reasons for the
denial or revocation of a license.
B. The Chief of Police shall have the power to investigate and inquire into
licensees and applicants under this chapter and to require and enforce
by subpoena the attendance of witnesses at such investigations.
§ 76-17 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-20
76:119
be held to prevent the enforced removal of conditions prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 76-20 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 76-20
76:120
Chapter 79
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 53.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 76-20 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 76-20
76:121

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 10-4-1979 by L.L. No. 6-1979; amended in its entirety
11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 3-201023]
§ 79-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Town of Irondequoit and to contribute to the public welfare,
safety and good order of its people by enforcing certain regulations and
restrictions on the activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and
privileges of the owners of dogs and rights and privileges of other citizens
of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person or persons appointed by the Town
of Irondequoit for the purpose of enforcing this article, and for the purpose
of this article such an Animal Control Officer is deemed to be a peace officer.
AT LARGE — An unleashed dog off the premises of the owner.
DOG — A member of the species Canis familiaris.
LEASHED or UNDER LEASH — That the dog is equipped with a collar or
harness to which is attached a leash not exceeding eight feet in length, both
collar or harness and the leash to be of sufficient strength to restrain the
dog, and which leash shall be held by a person having the ability to control
and restrain the dog by means of the collar or harness and the leash.
OWNER — Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody
or control of a dog. Dogs owned by minors under 18 years of age shall be
deemed to be in the custody and control of parents or other head of the
household where the minor resides.
SERVICE DOG — A dog trained as a guide, hearing, war, working search,
detection, police work or therapy dog within the meaning of the Agriculture
and Markets Law and actually in use for such purpose.
§ 79-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all dogs within the Town of
Irondequoit, including service dogs.
§ 79-4. Regulations and restrictions.
23.Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 79-1 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 79-4
76:123
§ 79-5. License required; exemptions; identification tag; license
fees.
A. Leashing. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to be at large in
the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe County, New York. Every dog outside
the property limits of the owner shall be restrained.
B. Prohibited in certain places. No owner shall permit his or her dog,
whether leashed or unleashed, to be in any restaurant, grocery or
commercial establishment which sells food for human consumption or
in any cemetery. This subsection shall not apply to a service dog when
otherwise permitted by New York State law.
C. Dangerous dog. No person shall keep or suffer to be kept a dog which
has attacked any person peaceably conducting himself or herself in any
place where such person may lawfully be or which has attacked, chased
or worried or killed any domestic animal, as regulated in Article 7,
§ 123, of the Agriculture and Markets Law, as amended or changed, or
any cat or other dog while such animal is in any place where it may
lawfully be.
D. Damage by dog. No owner of a dog shall permit or suffer such dog to
damage or destroy property of any kind.
E. Habitually barking dog. No person shall keep, suffer or permit to be
kept on the premises occupied by such person any dog which by its
continual barking, howling or whining or other frequent or longcontinued
noises shall unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of
any person.
F. Unsanitary premises. No owner of a dog shall permit the premises,
structures or enclosure in which such dog is kept to be unclean or
unsanitary.
A. License required. All dogs within the Town four months of age or older,
unless otherwise exempted, shall be licensed by the Town. The
following dogs are exempt from the licensing requirements of this
article:
(1) Dogs harbored within the Town which are owned by a resident of
the State of New York, and licensed by another jurisdiction within
the state, for a period not to exceed 30 days;
(2) Dogs harbored within the Town which are owned by a nonresident
of the State of New York, and licensed by a jurisdiction outside of
the state, for a period not to exceed 30 days; and
(3) Dogs held at a shelter pursuant to an agreement with a county, city,
town, village, or duly incorporated society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, humane society, or dog protective association.
B. Applications for dog licenses.
§ 79-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 79-5
76:124
(1) The owner of each dog required to be licensed shall obtain,
complete, and return to the Town Clerk a dog license application,
together with the applicable fees and surcharges.
(2) The dog license application shall be on a form provided by the Town
Clerk and shall state the name, sex, actual or approximate age,
breed, color, and other identification marks of the dog; the name,
address, telephone number, and e-mail address (if any) of the
owner; together with any additional information deemed
appropriate by the Town Clerk.
(3) The dog license application shall be accompanied by proof that the
dog has been vaccinated against rabies or a statement from a
licensed veterinarian that such vaccination would endanger the
dog's life, in which case vaccination shall not be required.
(4) In the case of a neutered or spayed dog, the application shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or
an affidavit signed by the owner, showing that the dog has been
neutered or spayed; provided, however, that such certificate or
affidavit shall not be required if the same is already on file with the
Town. In lieu of the foregoing certificate or affidavit, the application
may be accompanied by a statement by a licensed veterinarian
that, by reason of old age or other reason, the life of the dog would
be endangered by neutering or spaying, in which case the license
fee for such dog shall be the same as for a spayed or neutered dog.
C. Issuance of dog license and identification tag.
(1) Upon validation by the Town Clerk, the application for a dog license
shall become a license for the dog or dogs described therein. Each
license shall be valid for a period of one year, shall expire on the
last day of the last month of its term and shall be nontransferable.
(2) Upon the first issuance of a dog license, the Town Clerk shall issue
an identification number for each such dog and shall provide the
owner with a tag for each such dog with such identification number.
The identification tag must include the name of the Town, "New
York State," Town contact information (including telephone
number), and any other information deemed appropriate by the
Town Clerk.
(3) In the event that an identification tag is lost, the Town Clerk, upon
request of the owner and payment of a fee set by the Town Board,
shall issue a replacement identification tag.
D. Identification tag required to be worn. The identification tag issued by
the Town Clerk shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times,
provided that a dog participating in a dog show is exempt from such
requirement during such participation.
E. Annual fees for dog licenses.
§ 79-5 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 79-5
76:125
§ 79-6. Enforcement; Animal Control Officer.
The Town Board shall appoint an Animal Control Officer or Officers as
needed pursuant to § 113 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, as amended
or changed. It shall be the duty of such Animal Control Officer or Officers,
as well as of all peace officers with the Town of Irondequoit, to enforce
the appropriate provisions of this article as well as of the Agriculture and
Markets Law with respect to dogs in the Town of Irondequoit. The Animal
Control Officer or Officers, police officer or any other peace officer of the
Town of Irondequoit shall seize any dog which is found to be in violation
of any provision of this article, as well as any dog or dogs otherwise
required to be seized under and by virtue of the Agriculture and Markets
Law. All complaints concerning alleged violations of this article shall be
referred to the Animal Control Officer or Officers. All such complaints shall
be investigated, and it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
or Officers in the appropriate case to proceed with civil or criminal
enforcement of this article or any other provision of law pertaining thereto.
§ 79-7. Redemption of seized dogs.
(1) The annual fee for a dog license shall be $9 for neutered males and
spayed females, or such other amount as the Town Board may, from
time to time, establish by resolution.
(2) The annual fee for a dog license shall be $18 for unneutered males
and unspayed females, or such other amount as the Town Board
may, from time to time, establish by resolution.
(3) Exempted from payment of the license fees are applications for a
dog license for any service dog. Each copy of any license for such
dogs shall be conspicuously marked "Guide Dog," "Hearing Dog,"
"War Dog," "Working Search Dog," "Detection Dog," "Police Work
Dog," "Therapy Dog," or "Service Dog," as may be appropriate, by
the Town Clerk.
F. Assessment of surcharge. In addition to the annual license fees
established by the Town Board, each applicant for a dog license shall
pay a surcharge to the extent required by the State of New York. The
amount of such surcharge shall be $1 in the case of a neutered or
spayed dog or $3 in the case of an unneutered or unspayed dog, or such
other amounts as the State of New York may, from time to time,
establish.
A. Care of seized dog. Every dog seized shall be properly fed and cared for
at the expense of said Town until disposition thereof is made as herein
provided. The redemption of a seized dog shall be in conformance with
and pursuant to the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Notice to owner. In the event that the dog seized bears a license tag, the
Animal Control Officer or Officers shall ascertain the owner of the dog
and shall give notice by mail or personally serving such owner or
§ 79-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 79-7
76:126
§ 79-8. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be deemed a Class B violation, punishable
as provided in § 1-16. Each separate offense shall constitute a separate
additional violation. The provisions hereof are in addition to the regulations,
restrictions, requirements and penalties contained in Article 7 of the
Agricultural and Markets Law, as amended or changed.
§ 79-9. through § 79-10. (Reserved)
member of his or her family at least 18 years of age with a notice, in
writing, stating that the dog has been seized and that the dog will be
destroyed unless redeemed within the period hereinafter provided.
C. Holding period. Dogs must be held for this period:
(1) Unlicensed dog: five days.
(2) Licensed dog: seven days if the owner was personally notified; nine
days if notified by mail.
D. The owner of a seized dog may redeem it within the period indicated in
Subsection C upon payment of a fee as from time to time may be set by
the Town Board for each day the dog is sheltered, plus fees set by the
Town Board for the first, second and third seizures within a twelvemonth
period. The fee schedule, as set by the Town Board, shall be on
file in the Town Clerk's office.
E. Forfeiture. If a dog so seized is not redeemed within the time
hereinbefore set forth, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog, and
the dog shall be offered for adoption by the Town or destroyed.
§ 79-7 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 79-9
76:127

ARTICLE II
Cat Control
[Adopted 4-25-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 79-11. Purpose.
Cats in the Town of Irondequoit have in some instances been allowed to
roam free on property of others and are causing annoyance and damage
to the persons and properties of others; therefore, the Town Board of the
Town of Irondequoit enacts the following article to protect the health, safety
and property of others from annoyance and damage caused by cats and
to establish the responsibility and liability of cat owners arising from the
conduct of their pets.
§ 79-12. Title.
The title of this article shall be the "Cat Control Law of the Town of
Irondequoit."
§ 79-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
CONTROL OFFICER — The person authorized by the Town Board, by
resolution, to enforce the provisions of this article. The Control Officer shall
have all the powers of a constable or other peace officer in the execution of
the provisions of this article, including the service of a summons, the issuing
and serving of an appearance ticket and the service and execution of any
other order of process, notwithstanding any provision of the Uniform Justice
Court Act.
OWNER — Any person who is an owner of a cat or any person who keeps,
harbors or feeds a cat. The owner need not be a resident of the Town of
Irondequoit, but for a violation to occur, the cat must be in the town limits
of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 79-14. Restricted acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any cat to
permit or allow such cat in the Town of Irondequoit to:
A. Be vicious or to spray or to defecate in such a way as to cause
annoyance to any person other than the owner or person harboring
such cat.
B. Cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a nuisance upon
the premises of a person other than the owner or person harboring such
cat.
C. Remain in the Town of Irondequoit unless vaccinated currently against
feline rabies.
§ 79-11 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 79-15
76:129
§ 79-15. Judicial jurisdiction.
Any Town Justice of the Town of Irondequoit shall have jurisdiction to
hear all actions and proceedings hereunder and of all prosecutions for the
violations of this article.
§ 79-16. Complaints.
All complaints concerning alleged violations of this article shall be
communicated to the Town of Irondequoit Animal Control Officer or Deputy
Animal Control Officer. All such complaints shall be investigated, and it
shall be the duty of the Town of Irondequoit Animal Control Officer or
Deputy Animal Control Officer, in the appropriate case, to proceed with civil
or criminal enforcement of the article or any provision of law pertaining
hereto.
§ 79-17. Appearance tickets.
The Animal Control Officer or Deputy Control Officer, having reasonable
cause to believe that a person has violated this article, shall issue and serve
upon such person an appearance ticket for such violation. The appearance
ticket shall be in the form as prescribed by the resolution of the Town of
Irondequoit in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 79-18. Enforcement; seizure of cats at large.
It shall be the duty of the Town of Irondequoit Animal Control Officer or the
Deputy Animal Control Officer to enforce the provisions of this article and to
seize all cats found at large in violation of the article or which are ordered
seized by a Town Justice.
§ 79-19. Notification and redemption procedures; fees.
A. For any cat seized pursuant to this article, the following notification and
redemption procedures shall be followed:
(1) Unidentified cats shall be held for a period of five days from the day
of seizure, during which time the owner may redeem the cat.
(2) For identified cats, the owner shall be notified personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the facts of the seizure
and the redemption procedure. If notification is made personally,
the cat shall be held for seven days after the day of notice. If
notification is made by mail, the cat shall be held for a period of
nine days. The owner may redeem the cat during the foregoing
time periods.
B. In either of the above cases, the owner must produce proof of current
vaccination against feline rabies and pay seizure and impoundment fees
in order to redeem the cat. The seizure and impoundment fees shall be
as set, from time to time, by the Town Board.
§ 79-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 79-20
76:130
§ 79-20. Failure to redeem.
If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the cat, and the
cat shall be sold or destroyed by the Town of Irondequoit Animal Control
Officer. In the case of sale, the purchaser must pay all accrued charges and
have said cat vaccinated against feline rabies if proof of vaccination does
not already exist. The Animal Control Officer who destroys or has destroyed
a cat shall make a written report of such destruction and disposition to the
Town Clerk, who shall keep a record thereof.
§ 79-21. Authorization.
The Town of Irondequoit Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to pick
up unwanted cats that are owned by residents who are financially unable to
properly care for their cats, including the cost of vaccination against feline
rabies, when such owner requests the Town to dispose of these cats, in
accordance with the following rules:
§ 79-22. Limitation of pickup; discontinuance.
The Town of Irondequoit reserves the right to pick up those unwanted cats
as space is available and to discontinue the service by resolution of the
Town Board, if necessary.
§ 79-23. Penalties for offenses.
The first violation of this chapter and article shall be punishable by a fine of
$50, a second violation shall be punishable by a fine of $150 and third and
any subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine of $250.
§ 79-24. Severability; repealer.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this local law
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder
of this local law shall be deemed valid and effective. Any ordinance or part
thereof in conflict herewith is hereby repealed.
A. The owner of the cat must execute a form relinquishing all claim of
ownership to the cat and agreeing to its disposition according to the law
and absolving the Town of Irondequoit and the Town of Irondequoit
Animal Control Officer of any liability.
B. The owner of the cat is responsible to pay all costs related to the
disposition of the cat.
§ 79-20 AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES § 79-24
76:131
Chapter 88
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 76.
Games of chance — See Ch. 146.
Special events — See Ch. 194.
§ 88-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, upon obtaining the
required license, to conduct the game of bingo within the territorial limits
of the Town of Irondequoit, subject to the provisions of this chapter, Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, and Article
19-B of the Executive Law, as amended or changed.
§ 88-2. Sunday games.
Any game of bingo conducted within the town pursuant to a license issued
in accordance with this chapter and the applicable statutes may be operated
by authorized organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known
as "Sunday."
Chapter 91
BOATS AND BOATING
§ 91-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance for the Regulation of Vessels
on Irondequoit Bay."
§ 91-2. Authority.
In accordance with Subdivision 17 of § 130 of the Town Law, as amended or
changed, these regulations are hereby adopted for that part of Irondequoit
Bay located within the Town of Irondequoit and within 1,500 feet from the
shore.
§ 91-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VESSEL — The same meaning as defined in the Navigation Law.
§ 91-4. Rules of operation.
§ 79-24 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 91-4
88:132
§ 91-5. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 93
BOW HUNT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
Firearms — See Ch. 132.
Pursuant to the authority of Town Code § 132-6D, the Town Board adopts
the following regulations to be implemented by the Irondequoit Police
Department as follows:
§ 93-1. Creation and management of Bow Hunt Program.
A. Every vessel shall be operated in a careful and prudent manner, in such
a way as not to unreasonably interfere with or endanger any other
vessel or person, but in no event shall a vessel be operated at a speed
exceeding 20 miles per hour unless such vessel is being operated for
the purpose of enabling a person engaged in water-skiing to be towed,
in which case no such vessel shall be operated at a speed exceeding 35
miles per hour.
B. No vessel shall be operated within 200 feet of the shore, a dock, pier,
raft or float or an anchored or moored vessel in a manner or at a speed
that causes a wake that unreasonably interferes with or endangers such
dock, pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored vessel, but in no event
at a speed exceeding five miles per hour, unless for the purpose of
enabling a person engaged in water-skiing to take off or land.
A. Any person who operates a vessel in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable to the same extent
as a violation of § 45 of the Navigation Law, as amended or changed.24
A. The Town of Irondequoit Bow Hunt Program (the "Program") will be
governed by the following regulations.
B. The Town has identified certain areas as having a high concentration of
deer, which pose a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare through
increased automobile-deer accidents and property damage.
C. With the cooperation, support, and assistance of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (the DEC), the Town
implements this program for managing the deer population in an effort
to minimize the above-mentioned hazards.
24.Editor's Note: Former Sections 3 and 5, which immediately followed this section and
required filing copies of the ordinance, was repealed 3-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997. The
statutory authority for such sections was repealed by L. 1993, c. 605.
§ 91-4 BINGO § 93-1
88:133
§ 93-2. Requirements to participate in program.
D. The Town Board delegates authority to oversee the program and
implement these regulations to the Town of Irondequoit Police
Department (the IPD).
E. Hunters acknowledge that the purpose of the program is to control the
deer population in the Town, and not for pleasure or sporting purposes,
nor for commercial purposes or financial gain.
F. Hunters acknowledge that participation in the program is a privilege
and not a right.
G. The IPD or the Town Board may cancel or suspend the program at any
point during any given year if it deems that either the purpose of the
program has been satisfied, or that doing so furthers the public health,
safety, and welfare of the Town.
H. The IPD shall maintain a list of properties approved for the bowhunt.
The IPD shall post such list on the Town's website prior to the
commencement of the program each year and provide it upon request.
The IPD shall update this list annually.
I. Prior to the commencement of the program each year, the Town shall
make information about the program available, and post information
about the program on the Town website.
J. There shall be a Deer Management Program Board (the DMPB),
comprised of the Town Supervisor, or his or her designee; a Town
resident, who cannot be a hunter in the program and who shall be
selected by the Town Board from a pool of applications submitted by
interested residents; and the Chairperson of the Town Conservation
Board, or his or her designee. The Town resident and designees, if any,
shall serve without compensation for terms of one year. The DMPB shall
review all appeals pursuant to §§ 93-2N, 93-3U, and 93-4D of these
regulations and render a decision no later than 30 days after said
review is completed.25
A. Hunters must comply with the following requirements in order to
qualify for the program.
B. Hunters must be 18 years old or older on or before the first day of the
program each year.
C. Hunters must possess a current and valid New York State hunting
license, issued by the DEC. Only hunters who possess a current and
valid New York State hunting license may participate in the program.
25.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding consultation with a licensed biologist to
assess the size of the deer population, which immediately followed, was repealed
8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018.
§ 93-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 93-2
88:134
D. Hunters must possess a current and valid New York State bowhunter
education certificate, issued by the DEC. Only those hunters with a
current and valid New York State bowhunter education certificate may
participate in the program.
E. Hunters must possess a current and valid deer management permit
(DMP), issued by the DEC, for Wildlife Management Unit (WMU) 8C, as
that unit is defined by the DEC. Only those hunters with a current and
valid DMP may participate in the program.
F. Hunters must complete and pass a proficiency course (the "course")
developed and overseen and approved by IPD bow hunt officers and/or
their designees [the IPD Officer(s)]. Prior to taking the course, hunters
must have a current and valid New York State hunting license and a
current and valid New York State bowhunter education certificate.
G. Hunters must show proficiency with either a compound bow, recurve
bow, or long (stick) bow to pass the course. For each hunter, proficiency
will be determined based on the following:
(1) Hunters must complete and pass the course with the same bow or
type of bow that the hunter will use during the program.
(2) Arrows used during the course will be equipped with field
(practice) points.
(3) The course will consist of three simulated foam deer targets, which
will be placed, in the discretion of the IPD Officer(s), at varying
distances and elevations.
(4) Hunters must address each target with two arrows, and the hunter
will need to accurately shoot into the marked vital area of the
simulated deer target.
(5) Hunters must successfully strike the marked vital area with at least
five of the six shots to qualify for the program.
(6) Use of range finding devices are not permitted during the course.
H. IPD officer(s) will hold one course each year to test the proficiency of
first- and second-year hunters. The date on which the course will be
held will be determined by the IPD officer(s), in their discretion. This
date will be the only date on which the course will be held for any given
year. It is the responsibility of the hunter to attend, complete, and pass
the course. The hunter shall have only one chance to pass the course in
each year. Failure to do so will result in the hunter being ineligible to
participate in the program for that year. No exceptions are permitted
for a hunter who is unable to attend the course.
I. New hunters who qualify for the program must walk all permitted
Town-owned hunting sites with IPD officer(s) (the "site walk") prior to
the new hunter's first season. The site walk will take place one time per
year. The date on which the site walk will be held will be determined by
§ 93-2 BINGO § 93-2
88:135
§ 93-3. Regulations governing hunters while hunting pursuant to
program.
the IPD officer(s), in their discretion. It is the responsibility of the new
hunter to attend the site walk. A new hunter's failure to attend the site
walks will bar participation in the program for that year. No exceptions
are permitted for a new hunter who is unable to attend the site walk.
J. A hunter must be able to take part in the program each of the years the
hunter qualifies.
K. Hunters must pass the course for the first two consecutive years.
Thereafter, they do not need to participate in the course as long as they
participate in the program each year. However, a hunter who does not
have a current and valid New York State hunting license, a current and
valid New York State bowhunter education certificate, and a current
and valid DMP for WMU 8C will not be allowed to participate in the
program.
L. Hunters who qualify for the program also must obtain an annual
Irondequoit discharge permit for each year they choose to participate
in the program.
M. At no time shall the total number of hunters participating in the
program exceed 30 on a given day. A waiting list of prospective hunters
will be maintained by the IPD officer(s).
N. The IPD officer(s), may, at any time, deny or revoke a hunter's ability to
participate in the program for failure to comply with these regulations.
If the IPD officer(s) denies or revokes a hunter's ability to participate in
the program, the hunter may appeal that decision to the DMPB within
30 days of the IPD officer(s)' decision. On the appeal, the hunter and the
IPD officer(s) may present any evidence to the DMPB. If the hunter or
the IPD officer(s) wish to do so, they may also personally appear before
the DMPB to present their evidence. Only after the DMPB renders its
decision may a hunter seek judicial intervention.
O. By voluntarily participating in the program, each hunter acknowledges
and agrees to be bound by these requirements.
A. The dates of the program will be scheduled by the IPD officer(s), in their
discretion, but only from Monday to Friday in any given week. Unless
IPD officer(s) state otherwise, hunters may hunt pursuant to the
program only from sunrise until 12:00 p.m. on any scheduled day.
Hunting will not be allowed on days in which any school located in the
Town is not in session.
B. Hunters must notify the IPD officer(s) at least 48 hours in advance of
the day on which they plan to hunt. Hunters can notify the IPD officer(s)
by phone, at (585) 370-2637, or in person.
§ 93-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 93-3
88:136
C. Hunters who choose not to hunt during their scheduled time must
notify the IPD officer(s) at least 24 hours in advance of cancelling their
scheduled hunt time, so that a replacement hunter can be found.
Hunters who fail to show up or cancel their scheduled hunting times for
three consecutive scheduled hunting times will be removed from the
program. Hunters can switch their scheduled hunting times with other
hunters, and the act of switching shall not count as failure to show up or
cancel a scheduled hunting time. Hunters must obtain approval from
the IPD officer(s) prior to switching scheduled hunting times.
D. Hunters must notify the owner of the property on which they plan to
hunt at least 48 hours in advance of the day on which they plan to hunt.
Hunters must familiarize themselves with the property on which they
plan to hunt and the property boundary lines, prior to hunting. Hunters
must notify the property owner in advance of familiarizing themselves
with the property.
E. Hunters are not required to take an antlerless deer first. However, the
next deer taken by the hunter must be an antlerless deer.
F. Hunters shall remain on their designated hunting property for any
given hunt, unless they are making a reasonable search to retrieve a
wounded or dead deer. A hunter who kills or injures any deer while
hunting shall make a reasonable search to retrieve the deer and take it
into his or her possession.
G. It shall be the hunter's responsibility to immediately notify any property
owner other than the specific property owner who previously
authorized the hunt of the fact that an injured or dead deer is located on
his or her property. It shall also be the hunter's responsibility to
immediately notify the IPD officer(s) of this situation.
H. It shall be the hunter's responsibility to obtain permission of any
property owner upon which an injured or dead deer is located prior to
engaging in a reasonable search and retrieval of the deer.
I. In the event that a hunter cannot obtain the permission of a property
owner, for any reason, to conduct a reasonable search and retrieval of
an injured or dead deer, the hunter shall immediately notify the IPD
officer(s). The IPD officer(s) must then accompany the hunter to
retrieve the wounded or dead deer.
J. Nothing in these regulations authorizes an act of trespass.
K. It shall be the responsibility of the hunter to transport the harvested
deer to the Woodcraft Lodge. A hunter may only field dress a deer at the
Woodcraft Lodge.
L. Hunters shall use best efforts to cover a harvested deer with a tarp or
otherwise shield the general public's view and view from neighboring
properties of the harvested deer.
§ 93-3 BINGO § 93-3
88:137
§ 93-4. Permission and waiver from property owner.
M. Hunters shall not discharge any archery device from across any public
or private street, sidewalk, road, highway, or playground.
N. Hunters shall not discharge any archery device at such an angle or
distance that the arrow lands on public or private property other than
the property on which the hunt has been expressly authorized.
O. A hunter shall not discharge any archery device at such an angle or
distance that the arrow might land within 50 feet of any street.
P. All hunting shall be conducted at least 150 feet from any dwelling,
building, structure or designated bus stop. The minimum distance from
dwellings and structures shall not apply to: (1) the owner or lessee of
the dwelling or structure; (2) members of the owner's or lessee's
immediate family actually residing therein; nor (3) a hunter acting with
the consent of the owner or lessee of the dwelling or structure.
Q. A hunter shall be located in such a way as to direct arrows towards the
interior of the property so as to prevent any arrow from landing any
closer than 50 feet from any property line. This restriction shall not
apply to any property line located behind the hunter, nor any property
line between contiguous properties on which the hunter is allowed to
hunt pursuant to these regulations.
R. No person shall possess, consume, or be under the influence of alcohol
or any other controlled substance while engaged in hunting activities
within the Town.
S. Hunters must follow all lawful commands given to them by any IPD
officer(s).
T. Hunters are solely liable for any negligent and/or criminal acts they
commit while participating in the program.
U. Any violation of the foregoing regulations, or any federal, state, county,
and/or Town codes, local laws, regulations or laws, may cause
immediate suspension or revocation of a hunter's ability to participate
in the program. Such determination shall be based on the
preponderance of the evidence including witness reports or other
investigations. Such a determination is an administrative
determination. If the IPD suspends or revokes a hunter's ability to
participate in the program under this section, the hunter may appeal
the decision to the DMPB, pursuant to § 93-2N.
A. A property owner must give permission by signing the waiver and
release of liability form provided by the Town in order for hunting to
occur on his or her property.
B. At any given time, there shall be no more than two hunters on a
qualifying private property.
§ 93-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 93-4
88:138
Chapter 94
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Trees — See Ch. 214.
§ 94-1. Intent; purpose.
C. Property can only qualify for the program if hunters can satisfy § 93-3M
through Q while hunting on the property. The IPD officer(s) will have
final authority to determine if a property can qualify for the program. If
the IPD officer(s) determines that a property is deemed not to qualify
for the program, the property owner may appeal the decision to the
DMPB within 30 days of the IPD officer(s)' decision, pursuant to
§ 93-2N.
D. If (i) for reasons unique to the neighborhood or property and (ii)
creating a safety concern for people in that particular neighborhood, a
neighbor within 500 feet of the qualified property's boundary line in any
direction may request that such property not be included in the
program. Such request shall be made in writing to the IPD officer(s),
and explain why such property should not be included in the program.
The IPD officer(s) will have final authority to determine if a property
can qualify for the program. The IPD officer(s) shall inform the
neighbor(s) who made the request of their decision within 15 days of
receiving the request. Any party aggrieved by the IPD officer(s)'
determination whether to include a property can be appealed to the
DMPB within 30 days of the IPD officer(s)' decision, pursuant to
§ 93-2N. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit when a neighbor
within 500 feet of a qualified property may request the IPD officer(s)
that such property not be included in the program. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, subsequent requests to the IPD officer(s) regarding the same
qualified property shall not be considered unless the requester provides
new or previously unknown information about the qualified property.
E. By voluntarily participating in the program, each property owner(s)
acknowledges and agrees to these regulations.
A. Policy. To protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of
the residents of the Town of Irondequoit, it is hereby declared to be the
policy of the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit to provide for the
proper use of land and to prevent unhealthful, hazardous or dangerous
conditions to subsist on account of the accumulation of brush, grass,
rubbish or weeds or the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds and to
§ 93-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 94-1
94:139
§ 94-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Property that has been developed and includes,
but is not limited to, structures, parking, driveways and lighting that has
been placed on said property.
MAINTENANCE/MAINTAIN — To cut, trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish
or weeds (this shall include but not be limited to golden nematode and
ragweed) or to spray with herbicides, cut, trim, remove or destroy
poisonous shrubs or weeds upon lands on a regular basis so as to prevent
excessive overgrowth, maintain safe conditions and uniform appearance.
Established lawn areas must be cut and maintained on a regular basis so
that groundcover does not exceed six inches in height.
OWNER — Any person, individual or group of persons or individuals, firms,
partnerships, corporations, both business or membership, religious or
charitable or otherwise, any association or other unit or entity owning real
property.
§ 94-3. Regulations.
protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the
residents of the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Purpose of the adoption of this chapter. The Town Board seeks to
remove danger to health, life and property by requiring owners of lands
to cut, trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds or to spray with
herbicides; to cut, trim, remove or destroy poisonous shrubs or weeds;
and, upon default therein, to cause the same to be done and assess the
costs against the real property on which such brush, grass, rubbish,
shrubs or weeds are found or, upon default therein, permit any
authorized enforcement officer as hereinafter prescribed to issue an
appearance ticket as authorized under local law pursuant to Article 150
of the Criminal Procedure Law, as amended or changed.
A. Improved residential property. Each owner of an improved residential
building lot must maintain said lot in its entirety.
B. Unimproved residential property.
(1) Each owner of an unimproved residential building lot within a
subdivision, upon which 50% or more of the building lots are
developed, must maintain said individual lot in its entirety.
(2) Each owner of an unimproved residential building lot within a
subdivision, upon which less than 50% of the building lots are
developed, must maintain such lot within 50 feet from the public
right-of- way and within 20 feet from the rear and side lot lines on
which any contiguous property has been improved.
§ 94-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 94-3
94:140
§ 94-4. Exemptions.
Designated Environmental Protection Overlay Districts (EPOD),
conservation easements and forever wild lands as prescribed under the
Environmental Conservation Law shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 94-5. Authority to serve notice.
The Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector
may from time to time require notice to be served upon owners, as
hereinafter provided, to remedy any of the foregoing conditions which may
exist upon the land, pursuant to the authority vested in the Town Board
under § 64, Subdivision 5-a, and § 130, Subdivision 5, of the Town Law of
the State of New York, as amended or changed.
§ 94-6. Owner to remove upon notice.
Any owner of real property in the Town of Irondequoit, except within
the property lines of any lands or highway easements owned by another
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, shall be required
to cut, trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, or to spray with
herbicides or to cut, trim, remove or destroy poisonous shrubs or weeds,
upon their lands when ordered to do so by the Town Board, Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal
or Code Compliance Inspector. Compliance is required within seven days of
receipt of notice.
§ 94-7. Form of notice.
Whenever the Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance
Inspector requires the owners of land to cut, trim or remove brush, grass,
rubbish or weeds or to spray with herbicides, cut, trim, remove or destroy
poisonous shrubs or weeds upon their lands, the notice shall specify the
place, manner and time (not less than seven days from the receipt of said
notice) within which such work shall be completed. The notice shall be
(3) Each owner of an unimproved residential building lot less than 2.5
acres in size, not within a subdivision, must maintain said
individual lot in its entirety.
(4) Each owner of an unimproved residential building lot 2.5 acres in
size or more, not within a subdivision, must maintain such lot
within 50 feet from the public right-of-way and within 20 feet from
the rear and side lot lines on which any contiguous property has
been improved.
C. Commercial and industrial property. Each owner of a commercial or
industrial building lot must maintain said lot in its entirety.
§ 94-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 94-7
94:141
served upon such owner or owners by registered or certified mail addressed
to his or her or their last known address. The Town Board, Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal
or Code Compliance Inspector may require personal service in the case of a
resident if so desired.
§ 94-8. Failure to comply; work done by Town; costs.
Whenever a notice or notices referred to in § 94-5 hereof has been or
have been served upon such owner or owners of the respective lots or
parcels of land to cut, trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds or
to spray with herbicides, cut, trim, remove or destroy poisonous shrubs or
weeds and such owner or owners shall neglect or fail to comply with the
requirements of such notice or notices within the time provided therein, the
Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways,
Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector shall
authorize the work to be done. The cost thereof shall be paid out of the
general Town funds to be appropriated by the Town Board for such
purposes. The Commissioner of Public Works, Building Inspector, Fire
Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector may issue an appearance ticket
subscribed by him or her, directing the owner or owners to appear in a
designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection
with this alleged commission of a designated offense of this chapter.
§ 94-9. Reimbursement for costs; costs to constitute lien.
Should the Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector
authorize the work to be done, then the department authorizing the work
shall be reimbursed for the cost, including out-of-pocket administrative
expense of the work performed or services rendered by direction of the
Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways,
Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector, as
hereinabove provided, by assessment and levy upon the lots or parcels of
land wherein such work was performed or such services rendered, and the
expenses so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on the real property
on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and
shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as other Town
charges.
§ 94-10. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class B violation,
punishable as provided in § 1-16.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within seven days
pursuant to § 94-6.
§ 94-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 94-10
94:142
Chapter 98
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Community
Development — See Ch. 18.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Community residence facilities — See Ch.
117.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Flood damage protection — See Ch. 136.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Plumbing — See Ch. 171.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 173.
Rental properties — See Ch. 177.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Trees — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 94-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 94-10
94:143

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 98-1. Title; legislative intent.
§ 98-2. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe County, New
York, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing building
construction and conditions hazardous to life and property from fire,
explosion or other cause, the regulations and standards as set forth in the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (henceforth
referred to as the "Uniform Code").
§ 98-3. Definitions.
A. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Irondequoit Building
Construction and Fire Prevention Code."
B. It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of all laws, codes, ordinances,
regulations and orders applicable to:
(1) The location, design, construction, alteration, repair, equipment,
maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings,
structures and appurtenances located in the Town.
(2) Fire prevention and firesafety regulations consistent with
nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a
reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire,
explosions or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings,
structures and premises.
A. All technical terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set in the
Uniform Code, latest edition, and/or the Energy Code, latest edition,
and/or the applicable generally accepted standards contained in said
Uniform Code or Energy Code or other generally accepted standard,
including but not limited to the National Fire Codes of the National Fire
Protection Association.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: Article II, Terminology, § 1-14. Definitions.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Town officer appointed by the Town
Board to be in charge of the office of the Building Inspector of the
Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New York
designated by the Town Board to enforce jointly with the Fire Marshal
Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and Chapter
235, Zoning, and such other similar and related ordinances and local
laws as may be determined by the Town Board.
§ 98-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-3
94:145
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Includes Building Inspector, Fire
Marshal, and Director of Community Development.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The department
formulated by, but not limited to, the Office of the Fire Marshal, the
Office of the Building Inspector, the Division of Planning and Zoning,
headed by the Director.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE — The Department of State of the State of
New York.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The Town officer who
is chief executive officer of the Department of Community Development
of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New
York.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of a local law, ordinance or parts thereof
for which he or she is so designated.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any of the fire companies under contract to
render services in the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and
State of New York.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Town officer appointed by the Town Board to be
in charge of the Office of the Fire Marshal of the Town of Irondequoit
in the County of Monroe and State of New York, designated by the
Town Board to enforce jointly with the Building Inspector Chapter 98,
Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and such other similar and
related ordinances and local laws as may be determined by the Town
Board.
SECRETARY OF STATE — The Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from
time to time, including the Building Code of New York State, the
Residential Code of New York State, the Fire Code of New York State,
the Plumbing Code of New York State, the Mechanical Code of New
York State, the Fuel Gas Code of New York State, and the Property
Maintenance Code of New York State. "Uniform Code" shall also
include the New York State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 98-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-3
94:146
ARTICLE II
Enforcement
§ 98-4. Enforcement officers.
A. The Uniform Code and this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Director of Community Development, the Fire Marshal and the
Building Inspector:
(1) The Fire Marshal shall enforce the Fire Code of New York State. In
addition, the Fire Marshal shall also enforce jointly with the
Building Inspector those provisions of the Uniform Code dealing
with building construction related to fire prevention and firesafety.
(2) The Building Inspector shall enforce all other provisions of the
Uniform Code not specifically delegated to the Fire Marshal and
shall jointly enforce with the Fire Marshal those provisions of the
Uniform Code dealing with building construction related to fire
prevention and firesafety.
B. Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector.
(1) The Office of the Fire Marshal shall be headed by a Town official
designated as the Fire Marshal, who shall be appointed by the
Town Board, on the basis of examination to determine his or her
qualifications. The Fire Marshal may be assisted by one or more
Deputy or Assistant Fire Marshals, who shall have the power to act
generally for and on behalf of the Fire Marshal. Additionally, the
Fire Marshal may be assisted by one or more other employees as
may be deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the office.
The Fire Marshal may also be identified as the "authority having
jurisdiction," the "code official," or the "Code Enforcement Official"
when laws, codes, ordinances, rules, or regulations make such
references consistent with the scope and intended duties of the
Fire Marshal.
(2) The Office of the Building Inspector shall be headed by a Town
official designated as the Building Inspector and who shall perform
the duties of the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may be
assisted by one or more Deputy or Assistant Building Inspectors,
who shall have the power to act generally for and on behalf of the
Building Inspector. Additionally, the Building Inspector may be
assisted by one or more other employees as may be deemed
necessary to carry out the functions of the office.
C. The Fire Marshal may be assisted by the Chiefs of the Fire Departments
located and established within the limits of the Town of Irondequoit.
Each of the Fire Chiefs and their duly authorized assistants shall have
the authority to make fire prevention inspections under the Uniform
Code within the area or areas served by their respective fire districts. A
§ 98-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-4
94:147
§ 98-5. Powers and duties of Fire Marshal and the Building
Inspector.
copy of any inspection report or other report of other official action
shall be filed with the Fire Marshal.
D. The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit may appoint a temporary
Fire Marshal or Building Inspector in the event that such officer
becomes unable to perform his or her duties due to illness or disability
and such temporary technical investigators, inspectors or consultants
as may be necessary upon request of the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation or except as herein otherwise provided, the Building
Inspector shall administer and enforce all the provisions of laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the location,
design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment,
maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings,
structures and appurtenances thereof.
B. The Fire Marshal shall administer and enforce all laws, codes,
ordinances, regulations and orders applicable to life safety, fire
prevention and firesafety. The Fire Marshal shall also prescribe
regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the
safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from
hazardous conditions of fire arising from the use or occupancy of
buildings and from the storage of hazardous substances, materials and
devices. The Fire Marshal shall perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections, including but not necessarily limited to:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection B(1) or (2) above, and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection B(1) or (2) above, shall be performed at
least once every 36 months.
(4) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections may also be
performed at any time upon the request of the property owner, or
his agent; upon receipt of a written statement or other information
giving reason to believe that conditions or activities failing to
comply with the Uniform Code exist.
§ 98-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-5
94:148
C. The Building Inspector shall receive and review permit applications,
together with applicable drawings and other documents as may be
required, and shall issue permits for the construction, installation,
alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings, structures or
portions or accessories thereof and for equipment, plumbing, electrical
and other appurtenances thereof. He or she shall inspect the premises
for which such applications have been received or such permits have
been issued for the purpose of assuring compliance with all applicable
laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. The Building Inspector
shall issue certificates of occupancy for the purpose of certifying that
the work has been completed in conformance with all requirements
inherent in the issuance of the permit thereof.
D. The Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector shall issue appropriate
notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction or demolition and to assure
compliance with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
E. The Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector may require the
performance of field or laboratory tests by qualified persons, service
bureaus, agencies or accredited and authoritative testing laboratories
whenever he or she may deem it necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, codes, ordinances,
standards, specifications, rules and regulations.
F. The Fire Marshal may assist, where practicable, in the investigation of
the cause and origin of any fire occurring in the Town which is of a
suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons or by
which property has been substantially destroyed.
G. The Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector shall be notified as soon as
practicable of all working fires which involve structural damage which
threatens the continued occupancy of the premises or where such fire
causes the death or serious injury of any person.
H. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector shall be authorized to
recommend qualifications, training programs and criteria for the
certification of inspectors should it be deemed necessary or
appropriate.
I. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector shall keep official records
of all transactions and activities of the office, including records of all
applications received, all permits and certificates issued, fees charged
and collected, inspections conducted and notices and orders issued.
J. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector may adopt policies and
procedures for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
the Uniform Code. Such policies and procedures shall not conflict with
the Uniform Code or this chapter.
§ 98-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-5
94:149
§ 98-6. Preexisting structures.
§ 98-7. Delegation of authority.
The Fire Marshal may, in his or her sole discretion, delegate fire inspection
authority to personnel employed by any large integrated industrial concern
or other authorized agency which, in his or her sole opinion, maintains
adequate fire-protection and fire-prevention services. The Fire Marshal
shall investigate, at any time or interval that he or she may deem necessary,
to determine that the firesafety standards so maintained are substantially
equivalent to the modified provisions of this chapter.
§ 98-8. Appeals.
K. The Fire Marshal and/or the Building Inspector shall investigate
complaints which allege or assert the existence of conditions or
activities which fail to comply with the Uniform Code. The process for
responding to such complaints shall include any of the following steps
as may be appropriate.
(1) Performing an inspection of the conditions or activities alleged and
documenting the results of said inspection;
(2) Providing the property owner and/or other persons who may be
responsible for the violation with notice of the violation and
opportunity to correct same;
(3) Issuing a stop-work order; and/or
(4) Performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been
corrected and preparing a report to document same.
L. The Fire Marshal shall serve within the emergency operation plan of
the Town of Irondequoit, assisting and serving as liaison with other
emergency services within the Town.
A. The provisions of the Uniform Code relating to maintenance,
housekeeping and behavior regulations so as to protect life and
property against the hazards of fire, explosion and the release of toxic
gases arising from the storage, handling or use of combustible or
hazardous substances, materials or devices shall apply equally to new
and existing buildings and conditions.
B. Where this chapter may apply to situations lawfully existing prior to the
effective date of the Uniform Code and/or this chapter, the Fire Marshal
and the Building Inspector shall have the authority to permit the
continuance of those conditions not in strict compliance with the terms
of this chapter where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard
to life or property.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is
§ 98-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-8
94:150
claimed that the provisions of the Uniform Code do not apply or that
the intent and meaning of the Uniform Code have been misconstrued
or misinterpreted, the person affected may appeal from the decision
of the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector to the Board of Review,
established under the applicable provisions of the New York State
Executive Law § 381, as amended or changed.
B. The procedures set forth in the New York State Executive Law referred
to above for appeals shall not prohibit the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector from immediately removing a hazard or ordering the
immediate closing of the building or premises until a violation of the law
has been corrected when such hazard or existence of such violation
constitutes, in the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector, a distinct hazard to life or public safety.
§ 98-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-8
94:151

ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 98-9. Permit required.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion
or installation therein of any building or structure or change in nature
the occupancy of any building or structure without first obtaining an
appropriate permit from the Building Inspector, except that no permit
shall be required for the performance of repairs which are not
structural in nature and do not entail plumbing, electrical, heating,
ventilation systems or components, or fire-detection, fire-prevention or
fire-suppression systems.
B. All applications for a permit required by this chapter shall be made to
the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector in such form and detail as
they shall prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by
such plans, drawings, models or samples as may be required by the Fire
Marshal or the Building Inspector.
C. Permits shall be issued by the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector
pursuant to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code as the same hereafter may be amended from time to time and as
hereafter may be provided.
D. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein
and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Fire Marshal, the
Building Inspector or any official of the Department of Community
Development.
E. Permits and certificates as may be required by § 98-30 shall be obtained
from the Fire Marshal.
(1) No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other body shall
commence or engage in any of the activities set forth in this
chapter without first obtaining a permit authorizing such activity
from the Fire Marshal.
(2) A Fire Marshal permit shall constitute permission to maintain,
store, or handle materials or to conduct processes or to install
equipment used in connection with activities which produce
conditions hazardous to life or property. Such permit shall not take
the place of any license required by law. It shall not be transferable,
and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a
new permit.
(3) Before a Fire Marshal permit may be issued, the Fire Marshal or
his assistants may inspect and approved the receptacles, vehicles,
buildings, or storage places to be used. In cases where laws or
regulations enforceable by departments other than the Fire
§ 98-9 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-9
94:153
§ 98-10. Application.
Marshal are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all
departments concerned.
F. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the following
categories, but the exemption from the requirement for a building
permit shall not in any way be deemed to authorize work in violation of
the Uniform Code or such zoning requirements as may still apply:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings which are used for
storage, playhouses, pet shelters, or similar uses, provided that the
gross floor area does not in any case exceed 30 square feet.
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with one- or two-family dwellings.
(3) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery.
(4) Installation of window awnings supported by the exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling, provided that said awnings are
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for
same.
(5) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height.
G. Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting or similar finish work.
(1) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling appliances, provided that said appliances are
installed and used in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications for same.
(2) Replacement of any equipment, provided that the replacement
does not alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with
the equipment's original specifications.
(3) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve the removal or
cutting away of any load-bearing or other structural component;
the removal or modification of any required means of egress; the
enlargement, alteration, replacement, or relocation of any building
system; or the removal from service of all or a part of any fireprotection
system for any period of time. Repairs, when required by
the Code Enforcement Official in extenuating circumstances,
including but not limited to the repair of fire or flood damage, shall
require a building permit.
A. Application for a permit shall be made to the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector as appropriate on forms available in the office of the
Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector. Applications for any permit shall
§ 98-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-10
94:154
§ 98-11. Issuance or denial; inspections.
provide such information and documents as may be required in the
discretion of the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector and procedures
or rules or regulations and as otherwise may be required by this
chapter or other applicable codes, rules, regulations or ordinances of
the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee or the
agent of either or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in
connection with the proposed work. When such application is made by a
person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by a letter signed
by the owner that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and
that the applicant is authorized to make such application on his or her
behalf.
C. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans
and specifications bearing the signature of the person responsible for
the drawings and, where required by § 7302 of Article 147 of the
Education Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, the
seal of a licensed architect or a licensed professional engineer. Such
plans and specifications shall be in sufficient detail as to verify, to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal, how the
proposed work will meet the applicable requirements of the Uniform
Code, including, but not limited to, a description of the proposed work;
the street address and Tax Map number of the premises where the work
is to be done; the occupancy classification of any affected building or
structure per the Uniform Code; and where applicable, a statement of
special inspections prepared in accordance with the requirements of
the Uniform Code. A minimum of three sets of such plans and
specifications shall be submitted with the application. If approved, and
upon issuance of a building permit, one set of such plans and
specifications shall be retained by the Building Inspector, and one set
shall be stamped or otherwise marked as accepted, and returned to the
applicant, to be kept on the work site so as to be available for reference
by the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal.
D. In all cases where there is to be installation of new plumbing or
alteration of existing plumbing, a plumbing permit must be obtained by
a plumber licensed by the Town of Irondequoit.
E. Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications may
be filed at any time prior to completion of the work and shall be filed
before the affected portion of the work is commenced. Such
amendments shall likewise be subject to approval of the Fire Marshal
and/or the Building Inspector, as applicable.
A. The Fire Marshal and/or the Building Inspector shall review or cause to
be reviewed applications for permits, together with the plans,
specifications and documents filed therewith.
§ 98-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-11
94:155
B. Upon the payment of the required fee and upon satisfactory proof being
given that the applicant is in compliance with the applicable provisions,
rules and regulations of this chapter, a permit may be issued by and
bear the name and signature of the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector, as may be appropriate. Fees collected shall be as specified on
the building permit fee schedule, plumbing permit fee schedule or other
fee schedule as approved by Town Board resolution.
C. Any permit granted hereunder shall be limited only to the activity
authorized on said permit, and its continued validity shall be subject to
the conditions set forth on said permit.
D. Any permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable, and any
changes in the activity, size, extent or type of operation, location,
ownership or use shall require a new permit.
E. Permits shall continue until revoked as provided for herein or for a
period of time designated at the time of issuance, but in no event longer
than one year. No more than two ninety-day extensions of the permit
time period may be granted, provided that satisfactory reason can be
shown for failure to start or complete the work activity authorized
within the required time period.
F. Any application for or acceptance of any permit issued or requested
pursuant to this chapter constitutes agreement and consent by the
person making or accepting the permit to allow the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector to enter the premises at any reasonable time to
conduct inspections of the premises as required by this chapter. Refusal
to allow the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector to conduct said
inspection of the premises and their records constitute sufficient
justification for revocation or suspension of said permits. In addition,
should the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector deem it necessary,
application may be made to any court of competent jurisdiction to
obtain a warrant authorizing an inspection of the premises in question.
G. Required inspections. Work shall remain accessible and exposed until
inspected and accepted by the Building Inspector or other authorized
inspector. The permit holder shall notify the Building Inspector when
any work described below is ready for inspection. Inspections and tests
of the following will be made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a permit.
(2) Footings and foundation.
(3) Preparation for concrete slab.
(4) Framing.
(5) All building systems, including, for example, electrical, plumbing,
fuel gas and HVAC, including underground and rough-in.
(6) Fire-resistant construction.
§ 98-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-11
94:156
§ 98-12. Consolidated permits.
When more than one permit is required by the Fire Marshal for the same
property or premises, a single permit may be issued listing all materials
or operations covered. Revocation or suspension, as set forth herein, of
a portion or portions of such consolidated permit for specific hazardous
material or operations may, at the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal, be
sufficient cause to revoke or suspend the other permitted activities.
§ 98-13. Commencement and performance of work; posting of
permits.
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations.
(8) Solid-fuel-burning and fuel-gas-burning heating appliances,
chimneys, flues or gas vents.
(9) Energy Code compliance.
(10) Final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
(11) Such other inspections as may be deemed appropriate by the
inspector or as may be required by the Uniform Code.
H. After each inspection, the work or such portion thereof shall be noted
as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to
how the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code. Work found not in
compliance with any applicable provision of the Uniform Code shall
remain exposed until all such work shall have been brought into
compliance, reinspected, and found to be satisfactory.
A. The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the
applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and in accordance with all applicable laws,
codes, ordinances and regulations.
B. Upon request, the Building Inspector may issue a foundation permit
prior to the issuance of the entire building permit. Such foundation
permits shall be limited to occasional circumstances where time is of
the essence but where the issuance of the entire building permit would
be in conflict with established policy and procedures or rules and
regulations. Such foundation permits shall be limited to work below or
at grade only and shall be conditioned upon no further work proceeding
until complete construction drawings have been submitted and
approved.
C. A building permit shall become void if work does not commence within
six months after the date of its issuance.
D. Building permits shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the job
site at all times while work is in progress. Permits issued by the Fire
§ 98-11 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-13
94:157
§ 98-14. Revocation or suspension of permits.
§ 98-15. Stop-work orders.
Marshal shall be kept on the premises designated therein for so long
as the period of time as the permitted activity continues and shall at
all times be subject to inspection by the Fire Marshal. Such permits
issued by the Fire Marshal shall be valid for the period so stated on said
permit and may be renewed as required upon application therefor and
the payment of the applicable permit fee.
A. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector shall have the authority to
revoke permits issued by them in the following instances:
(1) Where it is found that there have been false statements or
representations as to the material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the granting of the permit was based.
(2) Where it is found that the permit was issued in conflict with the
requirements of any applicable law, code, ordinance, policy,
procedure, rule or regulation and, accordingly, should not have
been issued.
(3) Where the person to whom the permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop-work order duly issued by the Fire
Marshal or the Building Inspector.
B. In the event of a violation of this chapter, the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector may, in addition to the other penalties provided for
herein, suspend permits issued by him or her until such time as the
violation is corrected. Should the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector determine that the violation constitutes a distinct hazard to
life or public safety, he or she may order the premises closed
immediately until said violation is corrected.
A. Whenever the Director of Community Development, the Fire Marshal
and/or the Building Inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that
work on any building or structure is proceeding without a permit or is
otherwise in violation of the provisions of any applicable law, code,
ordinance or regulation or is not in conformity with any of the
provisions of the application, plans or specifications on the basis of
which a permit was issued or is being conducted in an unsafe and
dangerous manner, he or she shall notify either the owner of the
property or the owner's agent or the person, firm or corporation
performing the work to immediately suspend all work. In such instance,
any and all persons shall immediately suspend all related activities until
the stop-work order has been duly rescinded. Posting of a stop-work
order on the job site shall be deemed sufficient notice to suspend all
work.
§ 98-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-15
94:158
§ 98-16. Certificate of occupancy; temporary certificates of
occupancy.
B. Such stop-work order shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the
Department of Community Development and shall state the reason for
the stop-work order, together with the date of issuance. The stop-work
order shall bear the signature of the Code Enforcement Official or that
of an assistant and shall be prominently posted at the work site. The
stop-work order shall not be rescinded before the fee therefor, to be set
by the Town Board, shall have been paid. The stop-work order shall not
be taken down or removed except by any Code Enforcement Official
within the Department of Community Development.
A. No newly constructed building or addition shall be used or occupied in
whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy has been duly issued by
the Building Inspector.
B. When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been
fully completed in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations and is also in full accordance with the applicable plans and
specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the permit and is
also in full accordance with the final approved subdivision plan or
approved site plan and any and all conditions imposed by the Planning
Board, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy
upon the form provided by his or her office. In the event that it is found
that all proposed work has not been properly completed, the Building
Inspector shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy and shall
require the work be complete in conformity with all applicable laws,
codes, ordinances and regulations prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
C. The certificate of occupancy shall contain the following information:
(1) Building permit number.
(2) Date of issuance of building permit.
(3) Name of property owner and address and Tax Map number of the
property.
(4) If the certificate is not applicable to the entire structure, a
description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate
is issued.
(5) Use and occupancy classification of the structure per the Uniform
Code.
(6) The type of construction of the structure.
(7) The assembly area occupant load of the structure, if applicable.
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler
system is required.
§ 98-15 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-16
94:159
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit.
(10) The signature of the building inspector issuing the certificate and
the date of issuance.
D. The owner or his or her agent must submit to the Building Inspector a
tape location map or instrument survey map, as required by the
Building Inspector, showing the true location of the new building or
additions in reference to all the property lines and existing structures.
The owner or his or her agent shall also submit a written statement of
structural observations and/or a final report of special inspections, as
well as flood hazard certifications, as applicable.
E. Upon request, the Building Inspector may issue a temporary certificate
of occupancy for a building or structure or parts thereof before the
entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided
that the building or structure or such portion or portions as have been
completed may be occupied safely without endangering life or public
welfare. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall specify the
conditions that must be met before a regular certificate of occupancy
can be issued and shall specify an expiration date. The expiration date
may be extended at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
F. Temporary certificates of occupancy.
(1) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a site,
provided that all applicable laws, rules, ordinances and other
regulations of the Town of Irondequoit, together with the following,
are complied with:
(a) The temporary certificate of occupancy shall state a date upon
which it shall automatically become void.
(b) A list of all items remaining to be completed on the site shall be
set forth on the temporary certificate of occupancy, and a time
limit shall be stated by which date all items of work are to be
completed.
(c) A cost estimate of the remaining work shall be submitted by
the applicant's engineer or architect, which cost estimate may
be increased from time to time to cover increase in costs or
additional items and which cost estimate shall be subject to
approval by the Town Engineer.
(d) A certified check or letter of credit shall be submitted to the
Town in an amount equal to the cost estimate provided for
above.
(e) An agreement by the property owner and/or the applicant,
approved by the Town Attorney, giving the Town permission to
use the certified check or draw on the line of credit should the
§ 98-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-16
94:160
expiration date arrive and work remain to be completed shall
be required.
(2) The certified check or letter of credit shall be returned upon
issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy.
(3) If at any time after a temporary certificate of occupancy has been
issued a condition occurs which, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, renders the site unsafe or constitutes a danger to public
safety, the Building Inspector may immediately revoke the
temporary certificate of occupancy and order the property vacated.
(4) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the Town of
Irondequoit from pursuing any and all legal remedies it deems
necessary to enforce the applicable laws, rules and regulations of
the Town of Irondequoit and the State of New York.
G. In no event shall a conditional or temporary certificate of occupancy be
issued unless the Building Inspector determines that the building or
structure, or portion thereof covered by the certificate, may be
occupied safely; any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire-protection
equipment which has been installed is fully operational and meets all
applicable requirements, and all required means of egress from the
building or structure have been provided.
§ 98-16 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-16
94:161

ARTICLE IV
Standards
§ 98-17. Plumbing.
§ 98-18. Additional standards authorized.
While the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
makes reference to various subjects dealing with fire-protection and/or fireprevention
practices, it is hereby deemed necessary and appropriate to set
forth additional provisions for the Town of Irondequoit to enable the Fire
Marshal or the Building Inspector to effectively enforce the provisions of
the law. The specific areas of fire protection and/or fire prevention which
are the subject of these additional provisions are set forth herein, and each
subject is referenced to the applicable section of the Uniform Code where
such subject is addressed.
§ 98-19. Fire lane identification signs.
A. All plumbing work in the Town of Irondequoit shall be conducted in
accordance with Chapter 171, Plumbing, and the regulations of the
Uniform Code applicable to plumbing.
B. The administration and enforcement of all codes and ordinances
applicable to plumbing shall be in accordance with this chapter.
C. The licensing of plumbers shall be in accordance with Chapter 171,
Plumbing.
A. The fire lanes or access roads which are required by the Uniform Code
shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width for shopping centers, office
buildings, places of public assembly and other commercial buildings
and shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width in multiple residence
districts where such will conflict with the setback requirements of the
Irondequoit Zoning Ordinance.26 In the event of a conflict with such
setback and boundary line requirements, the location and width of said
fire lanes shall be determined by the Fire Marshal so as to provide
reasonable access to the building(s) for emergency vehicles. In all
cases, fire lanes shall be of such construction as determined by the Fire
Marshal and shall be located so as to be accessible to the nearest public
road or highway. The Fire Marshal shall approve the location, width,
layout and construction type of all fire lanes and access roads.
B. In those areas where new construction is being undertaken, suitable
access roads and temporary street signs in conformity with the Town of
Irondequoit specifications shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide continual access to fire department and other emergency
vehicles prior to the commencement of any aboveground construction.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 98-17 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-19
94:163
§ 98-20. Means of egress from buildings.27
Whenever any special security methods or security devices deemed
necessary by the owner or person generally in charge of the premises affect
the means of egress, such security method or security devices shall not
be installed or used without first obtaining the written consent of the Fire
Marshal.
§ 98-21. Fire-protection equipment; water supply.
C. Fire lanes shall be clearly designated by suitable, approved pole- or
building-mounted signs to be provided by the owners or occupants of
the premises. Failure to replace or repair damaged, rusted or faded
signs after written notice shall have been served upon the owner or
occupant shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. The signs required to be posted by this chapter for fire lane
identification shall have minimum dimensions of a width of 12 inches
and a height of 18 inches, with red legend and borders on a white
background. In addition, said signs shall also:
(1) Have arrows pointing in the direction of the area designated as a
fire lane;
(2) Be posted not more than 50 feet apart; and
(3) Be neither of a portable nor movable type except where otherwise
directed by the Fire Marshal.
A. The fire district officers shall work with the Fire Marshal on all
problems concerning hydrant locations and not with the developer.
B. The Town Board or the Planning Board, as the case may be, shall
approve only those plans that show the location of fire hydrants as
determined by the Fire Marshal in conformity with this chapter.
C. The Fire Marshal or the Town Engineer shall approve hydrant locations,
size of hydrants and water mains and may require the installation of the
same where deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal or the Town
Engineer.
D. Prohibition of obstruction or operation of fire hydrant by unauthorized
personnel.
(1) Hydrants shall not be obstructed in any manner. No person shall
cause any obstruction to be placed within 15 feet of any public or
private hydrant, except in the event of an emergency situation with
the approval of the Fire Marshal. No person shall intentionally
cause snow to be placed around any public or private hydrant so as
to unreasonably interfere with its use.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 98-19 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-21
94:164
(2) Hydrants and valves shall not be opened, closed, nor interfered
with in any manner by unauthorized persons. Privately owned
water mains and hydrants on property devoted to public use,
including but not limited to multiple-dwelling complexes, churches,
commercial buildings, schools, places of public assembly and
shopping centers, shall be regularly maintained and serviced. Such
maintenance and servicing shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or person generally in charge of the subject
premises and in accordance with generally accepted standards and
authorized by the water purveyor. Records of such maintenance
shall be kept on the premises so that the same are available for
examination by the Fire Marshal.
E. In areas serviced by the Monroe County Water Authority (MCWA), the
extension of water mains and installation of hydrants shall be in
accordance with MCWA's Rules for the Sale of Water and Collection of
Rents and Charges, latest edition, and this chapter.
F. Fire hydrants.
(1) The location of public or private hydrants shall not exceed the
maximum distance established by the Fire Marshal.
(a) Residential areas.
[1] Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum distance of 600 feet
apart on each street in either direction and located at
intersections whenever possible.
[2] Hydrants must be installed and flow-tested by the
applicable water purveyor before above-the-ground
construction is commenced. Water supply should reflect on
the specifications as contained in the latest edition of the
Fire Suppression Rating Schedule, as published by the
Insurance Services Office (ISO).
[3] Temporary exceptions may be made during construction,
by the Fire Marshal and the Town Engineer, after notifying
the affected fire district of such exception.
(b) Higher-density areas.
[1] Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum distance of 300 feet
apart and so located that all buildings can be reached by
comparatively short hose lays from more than one hydrant.
[2] Hydrants must be installed and flow-tested by the
applicable water purveyor before above-the-ground
construction is commenced. Water supply should reflect on
the specifications as contained in the latest edition of the
Fire Suppression Rating System, as published by the
Insurance Services Office (ISO).
§ 98-21 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-21
94:165
§ 98-22. Fire sprinkler systems.
All fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected, tested, maintained and
repaired as necessary in compliance with the applicable nationally
recognized standards referenced in this chapter or the Uniform Code. A
copy of the inspection, testing, maintenance and repair report shall be kept
on the premises so that the same is available for examination by the Fire
Marshal.
§ 98-23. Fire standpipe systems.
All fire standpipe system hose shall be inspected by the owner or person
generally in charge of the premises at least annually, and a written record
of such inspection shall be kept on the premises for examination by the Fire
Marshal.
§ 98-24. Fire Department connections.
Fire Department connections for the fire standpipe and fire sprinkler
system shall be maintained accessible to emergency use at all times. No
large shrubbery, fences or any other obstructions of any type shall be placed
in front or blocking of these connections.
§ 98-25. Fire alarm systems.
All fire alarm systems required by any applicable code shall be approved by
the Fire Marshal prior to the time of their installation. Required fire alarm
systems shall be inspected, tested, maintained and repaired in compliance
with the applicable reference standard of this chapter or the Uniform Code.
A copy of the inspection, testing, maintenance and repair report shall be
kept on the premises for examination by the Fire Marshal.
§ 98-26. Places of public assembly.
(2) In areas where new construction is being undertaken and public or
private water mains and hydrants do not exist, water mains and
hydrants shall be installed and be in proper operating condition
prior to the commencement of any aboveground construction.
Upon written application and for good cause shown, the Fire
Marshal may grant temporary exceptions to this requirement, the
length and extent of said temporary exception being subject to the
sole discretion of the Fire Marshal and subject to any conditions
the Fire Marshal may deem necessary. In the event that the terms
and conditions of said permission are not complied with, the Fire
Marshal, in his or her sole discretion, may revoke said permission.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other persons generally
in charge of the premises to knowingly permit occupancy of the
premises to exceed the occupancy limits established by the Town Board
or the Fire Marshal. Failure to prevent overcrowding shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 98-21 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-26
94:166
§ 98-27. Service stations and garages.
B. No person shall refuse to vacate any premises in which the occupancy
limits have been exceeded when directed to do so by the management
of the premises or any official authorized by the Town of Irondequoit or
the Fire Marshal to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Failure to so
vacate the premises shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Storage and handling of motor vehicle fuel.
(1) Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, oil or other liquid
that generate flammable vapors at normal temperatures shall be
limited to a maximum of 10,000 gallons per tank. The maximum
aggregate capacity of all tanks at any one site shall not exceed
20,000 gallons' total capacity. The Fire Marshal may increase the
maximum aggregate capacity requirements established in this
subsection if he or she finds that the public safety of a particular
area involved will not be jeopardized by such modification, and the
Fire Marshal may require such further conditions as he or she may
deem necessary in the interests of public safety in the granting of
said modification.
(2) The Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized representative may
order the owner or occupants of premises having above- or
underground liquid storage tanks to have such tanks or associated
piping tested by methods prescribed by the Fire Marshal when the
Fire Marshal has reasonable cause to believe that such tanks or
piping may contain a leak.
(3) Leaking tanks containing any flammable or combustible liquid or
any pump or piping used in connection therewith which may be
defective or in need of repair shall be replaced immediately, and it
shall be within the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal as to whether
the service station or facility must cease any or all operations while
such repairs or replacements are being made.
(4) No installation, alteration or replacement of underground or
aboveground tanks, pumps, piping and other equipment relating to
the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be permitted
without prior notification to the Fire Marshal, nor shall any
pressure test or other test for leaks be conducted without giving at
least 24 hours' prior notification to the Fire Marshal.
(5) No more than one gasoline tank truck shall be permitted to deliver
flammable or combustible liquids on the premises of a gasoline
service facility at any one time. Before making any deliveries to
underground tanks, the driver or other authorized person shall set
the brakes of the truck and shall turn off the engine of the vehicle.
Evertite or O.P.W. fill couplings or equivalent must be used when
unloading flammable liquids from the tank truck to the storage
tank. The driver shall remain at the point of delivery to prevent
§ 98-26 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-27
94:167
spillage and overflow. In the event of spillage or overflow, the Fire
Department must be notified immediately.
(6) All accidental spillage or leakage of flammable or combustible
liquids in quantities of two United States gallons or greater,
whether or not it may enter sewers, shall be immediately reported
to the Fire Department.
(7) A minimum of 50 pounds of stay-dry absorbent or its equivalent
must be kept on the premises at all times for flammable and
combustible liquid spills and should be used for this purpose
whenever possible instead of flushing with water. Contaminated
absorbent shall be disposed of in a safe and proper manner.
(8) The telephone number of the owner, lessee or station operator shall
be posted on the door in a conspicuous location so that proper
notification can be made in the event of an emergency.
(9) Accurate daily inventory records shall be maintained on
underground storage tanks, with each tank recorded separately.
The records shall be kept on the premises for inspection by the Fire
Marshal.
(10) Underground flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks
discontinued from service are to be removed from the site within
90 days. The method of removal shall be prescribed by the Fire
Marshal. Dispensing units servicing underground tanks shall be
removed immediately and all piping capped, and any electrical
supply line shall be discontinued at the panel box.
(11) The Fire Marshal or the Deputy Fire Marshal is hereby authorized
to seal a dispensing unit to prohibit the dispensing of flammable or
combustible liquids from such unit after one or more violations of
this code have been discovered.
(12) The dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids into the fuel
tank of a vehicle or into a container shall at all times be under the
control of a competent person.
(13) Protective barriers shall be installed at the end of each island to
provide protection for the dispensing units.
B. Self-service stations. "Self-service stations" shall mean that portion of
property where Class I liquids used as motor vehicle fuels are stored
and subsequently dispensed from fixed, approved dispensing
equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than
the service station attendant and may include facilities available for
sale of other retail products. Self-service stations, in addition to the
requirements set forth herein for the storage and handling of motor
vehicle fuel, shall also be subject to the following:
§ 98-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-27
94:168
(1) At the time of the application for a permit, the applicant shall
submit a full site plan or instrument survey of the property showing
all tank locations, island setbacks and such other and further
information that may be necessary to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Self-service pumps and nozzles shall be confined to service islands
with no more than three self-service dispensing units per island.
Approved dispensing devices, such as but not limited to coinoperated,
card-operated and remote preset types, shall be
permitted, provided that the dispensing of Class I liquids is under
the direct supervision of a qualified attendant whose duties and
qualifications are set forth in the standards and guidelines
established by the Fire Marshal. Self-service gasoline station
attendants shall be properly trained and physically fit to act in an
emergency.
(3) Equipment.
(a) All self-service gasoline-dispensing units shall be equipped
with the following:
[1] A control device which will permit the pump to operate
only when the dispensing nozzle is removed from its
bracket on the dispensing unit and the switch for this
dispensing unit is manually activated. Said control device
shall also stop the pump when the nozzle has been
returned to its bracket.
[2] A means of being kept locked or otherwise inoperable
when the station is not open for business.
(b) The area where said Class I liquids are actually dispensed shall
be equipped with all of the following:
[1] A traffic minor of sufficient size, closed circuit television,
or other approved method shall be located at each pump
island to give the attendant a clear and unobstructed view
of each island.
[2] A two-way communications system of the public-address
type to facilitate direct and individual communication
between the control room area and each pump island at all
times that the Class I liquids are being dispensed.
[3] An automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in
conformity with nationally recognized good practices and
standards and approved by the Fire Marshal. Said system
shall also be designed so as to be able to be activated from
a location remote from the pump island area, preferably in
the control room area, if said station is so equipped, and to
automatically terminate the electrical power to all service
§ 98-27 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-27
94:169
islands in the event of the system's operation. Where a
service station has one self-service island within 30 feet
of a full-service island, both self-service and full-service
islands shall be so equipped with automatic fireextinguishing
system as provided for herein.
[4] Signs conspicuously posted, setting forth the operating
instructions of the dispensing units and also incorporating
the following or equivalent wording:
Warning
1. It is unlawful to dispense gasoline into containers not
approved for such use.
2. No smoking.
3. Stop engine.
[5] A clearly visible numeral or letter at least six inches in
height, to be conspicuously posted on each island with a
smaller corresponding numeral or letter posted as near as
possible to the automatic fire-extinguishing system
controls.
[6] Pipe, post bumpers or equivalent (four-inch minimum
diameter) to protect each self-service island against
physical damage, to be in locations acceptable to the Fire
Marshal.
§ 98-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-27
94:170
ARTICLE V
Unsafe Buildings28
§ 98-28. Damaged buildings.
A. Whenever it is found that a building or structure or part thereof may be
an imminent danger to life, health, property or safety of the public or
the occupants as a result of fire, explosion or is so damaged, decayed or
dilapidated, the Fire Marshal or the Building inspector may require the
occupants of any such building or structure or any part thereof to
vacate the premises forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such
building or structure or part thereof until it is made safe. No person
shall enter premises which have been ordered vacated unless
authorized to perform inspections or repairs or to demolish and remove
such building or structure or part thereof.
B. The Chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for any
property within the Town shall promptly notify the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector of any fire, explosion, damaged, decayed or
dilapidated building, structure or part thereof (other major damage
involving any structural damage), or involving any fuel-burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent, or any faulty fire-protection device,
appliance or system.
C. In addition to the above-mentioned provision, the Fire Marshal shall
report to the Building Inspector the location of any building or structure
investigated by the Fire Marshal which has been damaged by fire,
explosion or other major damage for any action deemed appropriate by
the Building Inspector under Chapter 104, Buildings, Unsafe.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 104, Buildings, Unsafe.
§ 98-28 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-28
94:171

ARTICLE VI
Permit Fees
§ 98-29. Fire Marshal permits.
Permits and/or certificates as required by § 98-30 shall be obtained from the
Fire Marshal. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated
therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any official of the
Department of Community Development.
§ 98-30. Activities requiring permits; fees.
A. Fees for the issuance of permits and certificates shall be collected by
the Town Clerk, and checks and money orders may be made payable to
the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Operating permits shall be required for the operation and/or
maintenance of the following activities. Such permits shall be valid for
the period of time so stated on said permit, and the fees for such
permits shall be as set forth from time to time as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-18.
(1) Manufacturing, storing, or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3), or 2703.1.1(4) in the Fire Code and
incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1.
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling.
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies.
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more.
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit.
(6) To conduct any carnivals and fairs.
(7) Compressed gases: storage, use, or handling at normal
temperature and pressure (NTP) of compressed gases in excess of
the amounts listed in the Fire Code, with the exception of vehicles
equipped for and using compressed gas as a fuel for propelling the
vehicle.
(8) Covered mall buildings:
(a) The placement of retail fixtures and displays, concession
equipment, displays of highly combustible goods and similar
items in the mall.
§ 98-29 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-30
94:173
(b) The display of liquid- or gas-fired equipment in the mall.
(c) The use of open-flame or flame-producing equipment in the
mall.
(9) Cutting and welding operations.
(10) Exhibits and trade shows.
(11) The manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of
explosive, explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special
effects within the scope of Chapter 33 of the Fire Code.
(12) The use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material.
(13) The use or operation of fire hydrants and valves intended for firesuppression
purposes which are installed on water systems and
accessible to a fire apparatus road that is open to or generally used
by the public, with the exception of use or operation by authorized
persons.
(14) Flammable and combustible liquids:
(a) To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within
facilities of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement
shall not apply to the off-site transportation in pipelines
regulated by the Department of Transportation, nor does it
apply to piping systems.
(b) To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of five gallons
in a building or in excess of 10 gallons outside of a building,
except that a permit is not required for:
[1] Storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor
vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile
heating plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the
Fire Marshal, would cause an unsafe condition.
[2] Storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes, or similar
flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for
maintenance, painting, or similar purposes for a period of
not more than 30 days.
(c) To store, handle or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of
25 gallons in a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a
building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning
equipment.
(d) To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals,
wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and
similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are
produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used.
§ 98-30 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-30
94:174
(e) To manufacture, process, blend or refine flammable or
combustible liquids.
(15) Hazardous materials: to store, transport on site, dispense, use or
handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed in the
Fire Code.
(16) Hot-work operations, including but not limited to:
(a) Public exhibitions and demonstrations where hot work is
conducted.
(b) Use of portable hot-work equipment inside a structure, with
the exception of work that is conducted under a building
permit.
(c) Fixed-site hot work such as welding booths.
(d) Hot work conducted within a hazardous fire area.
(e) When approved, the Fire Marshal shall issue a permit to carry
out a hot-work program. This program allows approved
personnel to regulate their facility's hot-work operations. The
approved personnel shall be trained in the firesafety aspects
denoted in the Fire Code and shall be responsible for issuing
permits requiring compliance with the requirements found in
the Fire Code. These permits shall be issued only to approved
personnel for hot-work operations under their supervision.
(17) LP gas: storage and use of LP gas, with the exception of individual
containers with a water capacity of 500 gallons or less serving
occupancies in Group R-3.
(18) Open burning: for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire or fire
on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground,
with the exception of recreational fires as defined in the Fire Code.
Instructions and stipulations or the permit shall be adhered to.
(19) Open flames and candles: to remove paint with a torch, to use a
torch or open-flame device in a hazardous fire area, or to use open
flames or candles in connection with assembly areas, dining areas
of restaurants or drinking establishments.
(20) Private fire hydrants: for the removal from service, use or
operation of private fire hydrants, with the exception of private
industry with trained maintenance personnel, private fire brigade,
or fire departments, to maintain, test, and use private hydrants.
(21) Repair garages and service stations: operation of repair garages,
and automotive, marine and fleet service stations.
§ 98-30 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-30
94:175
(22) Spraying or dipping: to conduct a spraying or dipping operation
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or the application of
combustible powders regulated by the Fire Code.
(23) Battery systems: stationary lead-acid battery systems having an
electrolyte capacity of more than 50 gallons used for facility
standby power, emergency power or uninterrupted power supplies.
(24) Outdoor seating: to conduct and maintain outdoor seating
associated with a food service business or other seasonal business
for a period not more than six months.
(25) Multiple-residency dwellings (three dwelling units or more); R-2
Residential occupancies containing more than two dwelling units
where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature.
(26) Elevators: a moving platform or cage for carrying passengers or
freight from one level to another, as in a building.
(27) The following activities:
(a) Setting off or discharging explosives (per job, not to exceed a
one-year permit).
(b) Fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging (per building) for
commercial buildings and residential buildings.
(c) Motor vehicles in areas of public assembly.
(28) Automatic fire-suppression systems: any fire sprinkler system, fire
standpipe system, commercial cooking hood fire-suppression
system, canopy or fuel facility fire-suppression system or similar
device or system.
(29) Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment.
(30) Professional services: A business, firm, corporation or person
having special education, training, skills or requiring a certificate
or license to conduct any service, maintenance, inspections,
repairs, alterations, modifications or similar work on any listed and
required fire-protection system.
C. Construction permits shall be required for the following. The fees for
such permits shall be as set forth from time to time as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-18.
(1) Automatic fire-suppression systems: installation, modification,
alteration, or the removal of any fire sprinkler system, fire
standpipe system, commercial cooking hood fire-suppression
system, canopy or fuel facility fire suppression system or similar
device or system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this
code is not considered a modification and does not require a
permit.
§ 98-30 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-30
94:176
(2) Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment:
installation, modification, alteration or the removal of such a
system and related equipment. Maintenance performed in
accordance with this code is not considered a modification and
does not require a permit.
(3) Private fire hydrant(s), fire pumps and related equipment:
installation of, modification of or alteration to, and the removal of
fire pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey pumps, controllers, and
generators. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is
not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
(4) Installation, removal, alteration or repair of any tank, pump,
pipeline or vessel for the storage, use or dispensing of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(a) To repair or modify a pipeline for the transportation of
flammable or combustible liquids.
(b) To install, construct, or alter tank vehicles, equipment, tanks,
plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries,
distilleries, and similar facilities where flammable and
combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported,
stored, dispensed, or used.
(c) To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of
service, or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected
aboveground or aboveground flammable or combustible liquid
tank.
(d) To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground
storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means
other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally
used for dispensing purposes.
(e) To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or
combustible liquid tank to a material which poses a greater
hazard than that for which the tank was designed or
constructed.
(5) Hazardous materials: to install, repair damage to, abandon,
remove, place temporarily out of service, or close or substantially
modify a storage facility or other area regulated by Chapter 27 of
the Fire Code, when the hazardous materials in use or storage
exceed the amounts listed in said code, with the exceptions of
routine maintenance and for emergency repair work performed on
an emergency basis, for which an application for a permit shall be
made within two working days of commencement of work.
(6) LP gas: installation or modification to an LP gas system. Storage
and use of LP gas, with the exception of individual containers with
§ 98-30 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-30
94:177
§ 98-31. Department of Community Development; permits;
certificates; fees.
a water capacity of 500 gallons or less serving occupancies in
Group R-3.
(7) Spraying or dipping: installation or modification to a spray room,
dip tank or booth.
(8) Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies: to erect an
air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent having an
area in excess of 200 square feet or a canopy in excess of 400
square feet, with the following exceptions:
(a) Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
(b) Funeral tents and curtains or extensions attached thereto,
when used for funeral services.
(c) Fabric canopies and awnings open on all sides which comply
with all of the following: Individual canopies shall have a
maximum size of 700 square feet; the aggregate area of
multiple canopies placed side by side without a fire break
clearance of 12 feet shall not exceed 700 square feet total; and
a minimum clearance of 12 feet to structures and other tents
shall be maintained.
(9) Emergency and standby power systems: to install any emergency
and standby power system in accordance with laws, code, rules,
regulations, or recognized good standards.
(10) Solid-fuel-burning appliances, gas-vented appliances, chimney
relining, chimney reconstruction, flue installation and/or flue
reconstruction.
(11) Any roof repair or replacement using any form of heat-generating
equipment or process or application of roof coverings with the use
of an open-flame device.
D. The Fire Marshal may waive the fees for any buildings or installation
occupied or operated by the Town of Irondequoit or other division of
government.
A. The following permits and certificates shall be obtained from the
Department of Community Development. Fees for the issuance of
permits and certificates shall be collected by the Town Clerk, and
checks and money orders may be payable to the Town of Irondequoit.
The fees shall be set as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-18.
(1) New residential construction.
(a) Ranch.
§ 98-30 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-31
94:178
(b) Two-story.
(c) Raised ranch.
(d) Split level.
(e) Garage.
(f) Porch (open).
(g) Porch (screened).
(h) Porch (enclosed).
(i) Breezeway.
(j) All other structures.
(k) Balconies/decks.
(l) Greenhouses/solar.
(m) Fireplace.
(n) Prefab/stove.
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Commercial/industrial.
(6) Residential additions.
(a) One-story with crawl space.
(b) One-story with full basement.
(c) Two-story with crawl space.
(d) Two-story with full basement.
(e) Second story added or raised roof.
(f) Conversion to habitable space.
(g) Solar rooms/greenhouses.
(h) Porches (open).
(i) Porches (screened).
(j) Porches (enclosed).
(k) Breezeway.
§ 98-31 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-31
94:179
(l) Garage/carport.
(m) Addition to garage/carport.
(7) Residential remodeling.
(8) Interior.
(9) Auxiliary structures.
(a) Tool or garden sheds.
(b) Decks.
(c) Pool decks.
(d) Pool pump sheds (30 square feet limit).
(e) Cabanas.
(f) Detached greenhouses.
(g) Gazebos.
(h) Patio/deck roofs.
(i) Retaining walls. (NOTE: An engineer's certification of stability
of construction is required for the issuance of a permit for
retaining walls.)
(j) All other structures not specifically listed above.
(10) Fireplaces.
(a) Masonry.
(b) Prefab/zero clearance.
(c) Chimney or relining.
(11) Fencing.
(a) Residential.
(b) Nonresidential.
(c) Dumpster enclosures.
(12) Pools.
(a) Aboveground, residential.
(b) In-ground, residential.
(c) Commercial/public.
(13) Commercial remodeling.
§ 98-31 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-31
94:180
(14) Foundation.
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(15) Signs.
(a) Professional (residential).
(b) Commercial.
(c) Temporary signs (two weeks).
(16) Reinspections.
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(17) Delinquency charges. (NOTE: In cases where construction has
started without the issuance of a building permit or the consent of
an appropriate Town official, a delinquency charge will be imposed
at the Building Inspector's discretion.)
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(c) Removal of a stop-work order.
(18) Demolition. (NOTE: A certified check for $500, as a refundable
security deposit, is required at the time the permit is issued as well
as all appropriate documentation.)
(a) Residential structure.
(b) Accessory structure.
(c) Commercial.
(19) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) Single-family residential.
(b) Multiple residential.
(c) Commercial, industrial, institutional.
(20) Certificate of compliance.
(21) Permit security deposit. (NOTE: A permit security deposit is
required upon the issuance of all building permits requiring a
certificate of occupancy to ensure the proper inspections are
requested by the applicant. This deposit shall be refunded to the
applicant upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
§ 98-31 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-31
94:181
deposit may be waived where a valid financial guarantee is on file
with the Town for the project.)
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(22) Fuel storage tanks. (NOTE: Approval of the Planning Board is
needed for over 20,000 gallons aggregate capacity.)
(23) Copies of records or Code books.29
(24) Zoning Board application fee.
(a) Area variance (including parking).
[1] Residential.
[2] Commercial.
(b) Use variance.
[1] Residential.
[2] Commercial.
(c) Special use permits.
[1] Residential.
[2] Commercial.
(d) Zoning verification letters.
(e) Certificate of occupancy letter.
(f) Certificate of zoning compliance letter.
(25) Planning Board application.
(a) Mailing list fee.
(b) Lot cleanup security deposit.
(c) Floodplain certifications.
(d) Special use permit.
(e) Resubdivision fee.
(26) Town Board application fee.
(a) Special use permits.
(b) Sewer connection application.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Records, Art. I, Public Access.
§ 98-31 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-31
94:182
(c) Rezoning.
(27) Inspections of existing structures. Inspections pursuant to this
chapter and Chapter 235, Zoning, shall be made in accordance with
the following schedule:
(a) Building.
[1] Erosion control.
[2] Measuring foundation/footings: before pouring.
[3] Wall: before backfilling.
[4] Rough framing.
[5] Heating, ventilation and air conditioning.
[6] Insulation.
[7] Final.
(b) Plumbing.
[1] Rough: before enclosing.
[2] Final.
(c) Site work.
[1] Erosion control.
[2] Laterals: before backfilling.
[3] Waterlines: before back filling.
[4] Final.
(d) Electrical, in accordance with specifications of the agencies
licensed with the Town of Irondequoit to do such inspections.
(e) Solid-fuel appliances.
[1] Before enclosing.
[2] Final.
(28) Plumbing permits. (NOTE: Backflow prevention devices count as
fixtures.)
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(c) Laterals, storm and sanitary.
(d) Water service.
§ 98-31 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-31
94:183
(e) Renew water service inside of structure.
(f) Private catch basins/dry wells.
(g) Sewage ejector, single and double.
(h) Hot water heater over seventy-five-gallon capacity.
(i) Commercial- or industrial-type garbage disposal.
(j) Reinspections if work is not complete.
(k) Sewer connections, residential and commercial.
(29) Recreation fee for multifamily dwelling.
§ 98-31 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-31
94:184
ARTICLE VII
Electrical Inspections
§ 98-32. Authorization to make inspections; costs.
The chief inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of any
electrical inspection agency, designated and approved by the Town Board
(hereinafter referred to as "designated agency"), are hereby authorized and
deputized as agents of the Town to make inspections and reinspections of all
electrical installations hereinafter described and to approve or disapprove
the same. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of such inspections
and reinspections be a charge against the Town.
§ 98-33. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
§ 98-34. License required.
No person shall conduct electrical inspections pursuant to applicable codes
unless the person undertaking such inspections has obtained a license to
inspect from the Director of Community Development, hereinafter referred
to as "Director."
A. It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to report to the Building
Inspector all violations of or deviations from or omission of the
electrical provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and this Municipal Code. The Electrical Inspector shall
make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on
properties in the Town upon the written request of the Building
Inspector or other authorized official of the Town of Irondequoit or as
herein provided.
B. The Electrical Inspector is authorized to make inspections and
reinspections of electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and
equipment in and on properties within the Town where he or she deems
it necessary for the protection of life and property.
C. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to make
electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of
the Town of Irondequoit.
D. It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to furnish written
disapproval reports to the Building Inspector and other proper officials
of the Town and owners and/or lessees of property where defective
electrical installations, devices, appliances or equipment was found
upon inspection.
E. The Electrical Inspector shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and with this chapter, and he or she shall direct that a
copy of the certificate of compliance be sent to the Building Inspector.
§ 98-32 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-35
94:185
§ 98-35. Application for license.
§ 98-36. Issuance or denial of license.
The Director shall issue a license if, in his or her judgment, the agency
meets the standards for an electrical inspection agency and is competent to
conduct electrical inspections.
§ 98-37. Revocation and expiration of license.
§ 98-38. Financial guaranty.
A bond in the sum of $5,000 shall be executed by every agency engaging
in electrical inspections within the Town of Irondequoit and shall be filed
with the Director before such license shall be issued. Such bond shall be
conditioned that said licensee will comply with the laws, codes, ordinances,
A. Applications for licenses shall be made at the Department of
Community Development. Such applications shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Director and shall contain such information as the
Director may require from time to time.
B. Persons seeking a license must submit documentation and certify that
they meet the standards for an electrical inspection agency established
by the Director. The standard shall be filed in the office of the Director
and the Town Clerk.
A. The Director, at any time subsequent to the issuance of a license, if he
or she has reason to believe that any agency no longer meets the
standards for an electrical inspection agency or is no longer competent
to conduct electrical inspections, shall give such agency written notice
of the manner in which he or she believes such agency no longer meets
said standards or is no longer competent to conduct electrical
inspections. Said notice shall be served by personal service on said
agency or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
mailed to the address listed on such agency's application for a license.
Said notice shall also provide for the time and place of a hearing before
the Director, which hearing shall take place not less than 10 days nor
more than 20 days from the date of service of such notice. If, after the
hearing, the Director shall find that such agency no longer meets the
standards for an electrical inspection agency or is no longer competent
to conduct electrical inspections, he or she shall have the power to
suspend or revoke the license. The Director shall serve a written notice
of his or her decision, in the same manner as service of the notice of
hearing herein provided for, within 10 days from the date of the close of
said hearing.
B. All licenses, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on the last day of
December after the date of issuance, and application for a new license
shall be made in the same manner as for the original license by the last
day of November.
§ 98-35 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-38
94:186
rules and regulations of the State of New York, County of Monroe, and Town
of Irondequoit and all lawfully issued orders and standards of the Director
or of the Town Board, and that the Town of Irondequoit will be indemnified
and held harmless from any and all claims for damages or liabilities caused
by or arising out of any act or omission of the licensee, his or her agents
or employees or by his or her failure to comply with applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. Said bond shall be in such form and
contain such sureties as shall be approved by the Town Attorney.
§ 98-39. license fee.
The annual license fee shall be as set forth in accordance with Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-18.
§ 98-40. Standards and rules.
The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to adopt any
standards, procedures, rules, regulations and forms that are necessary for
effective administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 98-41. Schedule of rates.
The schedule of rates charged for inspection shall be filed with the Town
Clerk and the Building Inspector.
§ 98-42. Applicability.
A. Manufacturing, governmental and similar installations. The provisions
of this article shall not apply to the electrical installations in mines,
ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in
buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This article shall not apply
to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of
electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person,
firm or corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as its principal
business. It shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in
its entirety by the government of the United States or the State of New
York or any political subdivision thereof.
B. Electrical work by regularly employed electricians.
(1) This article shall not apply to proprietorships, partnerships,
corporations or associations regularly employing electricians for
the electrical work performed on property, owned or leased by said
employer, provided that said employer files a certificate as
described below with the Building Inspector on the first day of April
and the first day of October of each year.
§ 98-38 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-42
94:187
§ 98-43. Liability.
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of fire or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town or
any designated agency be deemed to have assumed any such liability by
reason of any inspection made pursuant to this article.
§ 98-44. Violations.
(2) Said certificate shall take the form as may be selected by the
employer and subject to the approval of the Building Inspector of
either of the following:
(a) A certificate stating that the electrical work performed on
property owned or leased by them complies with standards
acceptable to the insurance company carrying risk on the
premises involved. If said employer on occasion hires an
independent electrical contractor to perform work on said
property, in lieu of engaging its own employees to perform the
work, and said work meets the complete approval of the chief
electrician in charge of the work at said property, then said
work may be included within the scope of inspection and
approval as provided for in this subsection; or
(b) A certificate of compliance issued by a designated agency
which certifies that the electrical work performed on the
property owned or leased by the employer complies with the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter or repair electrical wiring
for light, heat or power in or on properties in the Town until an
application for inspection has been filed with a designated agency. The
agency shall forward to the Building Inspector, within 10 days, a record
of all such applications received by it.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by a designated agency. The agency shall forward to the Building
Inspector a record of all temporary certificates issued by it.
§ 98-42 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-44
94:188
ARTICLE VIII
Administration; Enforcement; Penalties
§ 98-45. Inspections.
§ 98-46. Recordkeeping and reporting.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his or her agent to notify
the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector when work is ready for each
required inspection. Specific requirements as to the advance time for
inspection requests and acceptable means of notification shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Fire Marshal or the Building
Inspector or in accordance with established policy, procedures, rules
and regulations.
B. Failure to request a required inspection may be cause for rejection of
the work and, where deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector, an order to expose the work for inspection.
C. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector may at all reasonable
hours enter any building or premises within the Town of Irondequoit for
the purpose of making an inspection or investigation to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Code.
D. Should entrance upon site to make an inspection required by this
chapter or the Uniform Code be denied or if permission cannot be
obtained to make such an inspection, application may be made for a
warrant to make such inspection to any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall keep permanent
official records of all transactions and activities conducted by all
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed, and approved or denied.
(2) All plans, specifications and other construction documents
approved.
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, stop-work orders,
and operating permits issued.
(4) All inspections and tests performed.
(5) All statements and reports received.
(6) All complaints received.
(7) All investigations conducted.
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by this
chapter.
(9) All fees charged and collected.
§ 98-45 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-46
94:189
§ 98-47. Offenses; compliance required.
§ 98-48. Violation orders.
B. All such records shall be public records, open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings and structures or appurtenances thereto shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
C. Program review and reporting.
(1) The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall annually submit
to the Town Board a written report and summary of all business
conducted, including a report and summary of all transactions and
activities described in Subsection A above and a report and
summary of all appeals and litigation pending or concluded.
(2) The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall annually submit
to the Secretary of State, on behalf of the Town, on a form
prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of the
Town relative to the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
(3) The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall, upon request of
the Department of State, provide to the Department of State, from
the records and related materials this Town is required to maintain,
such excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Town in connection
with the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code as
may be requested.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or the Uniform Code or to fail in any manner
to comply with any notice, directive or order of the Fire Marshal or the
Building Inspector or to construct, alter or use and occupy any building
or structure or part thereof in a manner not permitted by an approved
building permit, plumbing permit or certificate of occupancy.
B. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other firm owning,
operating, occupying or maintaining property or premises within the
scope of the Uniform Code or this chapter shall comply with all the
provisions of the Uniform Code, this chapter and all orders, notices,
rules, regulations or determinations issued in connection therewith.
A. Whenever it is found that there has been a violation of the Uniform
Code, this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, a violation order may be issued to the person, individual,
§ 98-46 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-48
94:190
§ 98-49. Appearance tickets; summons.
The Director of Community Development, Fire Marshal, and Building
Inspector shall have the authority, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure
Law, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by him or her directing
a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a
designated future time in connection with the alleged commission of the
designated violation of this chapter or any order made thereunder. The
Director of Community Development, Fire Marshal, and Building Inspector
shall also have the authority to issue a code violation summons where
it is found that there has been a violation of the Uniform Code. Said
code violation summons may be issued in the discretion of the Director of
Community Development, Fire Marshal, Building Inspector either in lieu of
the initial violation order or in those instances where the noted violations
have not been corrected within the time limit stated on a violation order
previously issued.
§ 98-50. Fire lane and parking violations.
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle in a designated fire lane
except to avoid conflict with other traffic or pedestrians or in obedience
to direction of a peace officer or stop sign, nor shall any person in any
manner obstruct any fire lane or means of access to a building or premises
or otherwise obstruct a source of water or other service necessary for firefighting
purposes.
partnership or corporation owning, operating or maintaining the
premises in which such violation has been noted.
B. Violation orders shall be in writing; shall identify the property or
premises; shall specify the violation or remedial action to be taken; and
shall provide that said violation must be corrected immediately.
C. Violation orders, stop-work orders and other orders or notices referred
to in this chapter shall be served on the owner or some one of the
owner's executors, legal representative, agents, lessees, any tenant or
other person occupying the premises or other person having a vested or
contingent interest in the premises, either personally or by certified
mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner or some
one of the owner's executors, legal representative, agents, lessees or
other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as
shown by the last preceding completed record of the Receiver of Taxes
or in the office of the County Clerk or County Register.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or a fully authorized assistant deems that
an obstruction to or on a fire lane or other means of access to a building
or premises or that an obstruction to a source of water or other service
necessary for fire-fighting purposes is such that it constitutes a distinct
hazard to life or public safety or is interfering with operation of the Fire
Department during an emergency, he or she may order the obstruction
immediately removed, and any costs incurred, including but not limited
§ 98-48 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-50
94:191
§ 98-51. Penalties for offenses.
to towing charges and storage fees, shall be the responsibility of the
owner of such obstruction.
B. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any vehicle or other obstruction
found standing, parked or left in a fire lane or found standing, parked or
tell within 15 feet of a fire hydrant will be ticketed for a "No Parking,
Fire Lane" violation or fire hydrant parking violation, as necessary, or
may be removed, towed away and/or stored by or at the direction of any
peace or law enforcement officer, Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire Marshal.
Any such removal, towing and storage, as herein provided, may be
performed by a private towing contractor, and any and all expenses
related thereto shall be at the full responsibility of the owner or person
entitled to possession of said vehicle or obstructing article.
A. Any person who shall willfully fail to comply with a written order of the
Director of Community Development, Fire Marshal, and Building
Inspector within the time fixed for compliance therewith and any owner,
builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, plumber,
construction superintendent or their agents or any other persons taking
part or assisting in the construction or use of any building who shall
violate any of the applicable provisions of this chapter or any lawful
order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Director of
Community Development, Fire Marshal, and Building Inspector made
thereunder or in addition to any other penalties provided for in this
chapter and any person who shall violate any of the provision of this
chapter, the Uniform Code, any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
to this chapter or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order
made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder shall
severally, for each and every such violation, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 per day of violation or imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a
reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that the
prohibited condition(s) or violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any such penalty shall not be held to
prohibit the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions by any
appropriate remedy, including immediate application for an injunction.
C. An action or proceeding in the name of the Town of Irondequoit, New
York, may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to
compel compliance with or restrain by jurisdiction the violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code, this chapter, rule or regulation adopted
pursuant to this chapter or a violation order or to vacate the occupancy
§ 98-50 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-51
94:192
§ 98-52. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold any Code Enforcement Official
of the Town of Irondequoit or the Town of Irondequoit responsible for any
damages to persons or property by reason of inspection or reinspection
authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect for any permits required
under this chapter, nor shall it be liable for any damage to persons or
property by reason of the Director of Community Development, Fire
Marshal or Building Inspector exercising his or her discretion as provided
by this chapter.
or building in the case of imminent danger to life or property. Such
remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 98-51 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-52
94:193
Chapter 104
BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES, VACANT AND UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
§ 98-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 98-52
94:194
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vacant and Unsafe Properties Law of
the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 104-2. Findings; purpose.
§ 104-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partly enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Includes the Building Inspector, Fire
Marshal, Director of Community Development, and any other designated
authority charged with the administration or enforcement of this code.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The department
formulated by, but not limited to, the Office of the Fire Marshal, the Office
A. Well-maintained properties play a significant role in defining
Irondequoit's quality of life and influencing property values. Therefore,
building conditions require vigilant oversight. The Town is compelled to
take all available measures to minimize potential negative impacts
associated with vacant and/or unsafe buildings.
B. The Town Board finds that vacant buildings, if not managed effectively,
can become unsightly and unsafe and have a negative effect on the
community. Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the
Town of Irondequoit. Buildings and structures may become unsafe by
reason of fire, explosion, or are so damaged, decayed or dilapidated, or
by the elements, age or general deterioration. Vacant and/or unsafe
buildings not properly secured at doorways and windows also serve as
an attractive nuisance for young children, who may be injured therein,
as well as a point of congregation by vagrants and transients. A vacant
or dilapidated building may also serve as a place of rodent infestation,
thereby creating a health menace to the community.
C. It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure the safety, health, protection
and general welfare of persons and property in the Town of Irondequoit
by addressing vacant and unsafe properties. This chapter establishes a
process for identifying and registering vacant buildings that sets forth
the responsibilities of owners and/or operators of vacant buildings and
expedites the rehabilitation of vacant buildings. This chapter also
describes the process and requirements by which unsafe buildings shall
be repaired or demolished and removed.
§ 104-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-3
94:195
of the Building Inspector, and the Division of Planning and Zoning, headed
by the Director of Community Development.
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Where it reasonably appears that a clear and
imminent danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property is
present. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, fire hazards, falling
or dilapidated buildings, or any part thereof, loss of significant water, heat
or ventilation, or a lack of sanitary conditions.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including, but not limited to, service
companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant, or
employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee
of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under a mortgage loan
agreement.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity shown to be the owner or owners
on the current assessment records; a mortgagee in possession, either by
commencement of a mortgage foreclosure action, or otherwise; assignee
of rents; receiver; executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, or other person,
firm or corporation in control of the premises, including any person, persons
or entity who has charge, care or control of a building and/or property,
including a tenant, operator or property maintenance company. Any such
owner shall have joint and several obligation for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
SECURED BY NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by means used in the
design and approved plans for the building.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time
to time, including, but not limited to, the Building Code of New York State,
the Residential Code of New York State, the Fire Code of New York State,
the Plumbing Code of New York State, the Mechanical Code of New York
State, the Fuel Gas Code of New York State, and the Property Maintenance
Code of New York State. "Uniform Code" shall also include the New York
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as currently in effect and as
hereafter amended from time to time.
UNSAFE BUILDING — Any building or structure that poses a threat to
the public's health, safety or welfare due to its deteriorated physical
condition(s), faulty or partial construction, lack of adequate doors and
windows, partial demolition or destruction, and/or insufficient maintenance.
VACANT — A building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if no person
or persons actually currently conducts a lawfully licensed business in any
part of the building or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as
the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s),
or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient basis. In determining whether a
building is vacant, a Code Enforcement Official may consider these factors,
among others:
Whether the building is substantially devoid of contents or the minimal
value of fixtures or personal property in the building;
A.
§ 104-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 104-3
94:196
B. Whether the building lacks required utility services;
C. Whether the building is subject to a foreclosure action;
D. The duration of vacancy; and/or
E. The presence or reoccurrence of code violations.
§ 104-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-3
94:197

ARTICLE II
Registration of Vacant Properties; Maintenance
§ 104-4. Vacant building registration.
A. The owner of a vacant building shall register with the Code
Enforcement Official the later of 1) 30 days after any building becomes
a vacant building, or 2) 10 days after being notified by a Code
Enforcement Official of the requirement to register. A Code
Enforcement Official may identify vacant buildings through a routine
inspection process, as well as through notification by public safety
agencies, residents, neighborhood associations and other community
groups. Notice will be served upon, or sent by mail, to the owner, any
property maintenance company, and the property address. Notice will
be deemed received upon personal delivery or three days in Monroe
County or five days outside Monroe County after service by first-class
mail. If notice is returned, then the mortgagee, if any, will be notified
and responsible for meeting the registration and maintenance
requirements pursuant to this chapter.
B. The registration shall be submitted on form(s) provided by the
Department of Community Development which shall include, at
minimum, pertinent information about said vacant property, such as:
(1) Legal address, tax ID number, and description of vacant property.
(2) Name(s) and contact information, including street address, for
owner(s), mortgagee and/or any property manager and/or property
maintenance company responsible for maintaining the vacant
property.
(3) Plan for vacant property described in § 104-4C below.
C. Vacant property plan. At the time a vacant property is registered, the
owner or mortgagee shall submit a vacant property plan on forms
provided by the Department of Community Development. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Length of time the owner or mortgagee expects the vacancy to
continue.
(2) Description of proposed rehabilitation or improvements to be made
to the property, if any, to make it suitable for the last use of record.
(3) A description of what measures will be taken to secure the property
and ensure any buildings or structures thereon do not become
unsafe and/or unsightly.
D. The owner will comply with all applicable laws and codes. The owner
will notify the Code Enforcement Official in writing of any changes in
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration within
30 days of the change.
§ 104-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-4
94:199
§ 104-5. Maintenance of vacant buildings and property.
E. The owner will keep the vacant building and the property secured, safe
and properly maintained as provided in § 104-5 of this article.
F. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Official of any transfer of
ownership within 15 days of transfer. The new owner will continue to
comply with the approved vacant building registration submitted by the
previous owner until any proposed changes are submitted and
approved by the Code Enforcement Official.
G. Vacant building registration fees.
(1) The owner(s) of a vacant building will pay an initial registration fee
set forth in the Town of Irondequoit fee schedule.
H. Exemptions. A vacant building that has suffered fire damage or damage
caused by extreme weather conditions or other event(s) will be exempt
from the registration requirement for a period of 90 days after the date
of the event, provided that the owner submits a request for exemption
in writing to the Director of Community Development. This request will
include the following information supplied by the owner:
(1) The street address of the vacant building.
(2) The reason for an exemption.
(3) The names and street addresses of the owner(s). A statement of
intent to repair and reoccupy the vacant building in an expedient
manner or the intent to demolish the vacant building.
A. The owner of a vacant building will take such steps and perform such
acts as may be required, from time to time, to ensure that the vacant
building and the property remain safe and secure and do not present a
hazard to adjoining properties or the public. Owners are responsible for
maintaining vacant buildings so that they do not become unsafe.
B. The owner shall protect and maintain a vacant building in conformance
with the Uniform Code and meet the following requirements:
(1) Exterior walls, including foundations, shall be maintained so that
water does not penetrate into basements, cellars, or other interior
areas. All exterior walls and foundations must be free of holes and
crevices.
(2) Exterior doors, windows, skylights and similar openings shall be
maintained secured and weathertight.
(3) Exterior stairs, porches, entrance platforms, fire escapes and the
railings thereon shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition.
(4) Roofs shall be maintained in a weathertight condition, secured by
normal means or with other materials that are visually compatible
§ 104-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 104-5
94:200
with the existing roofing material and not unsightly. Tarps are not
considered normal means or visually compatible.
(5) Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in good condition. Surfaces not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or
other suitable preservative. There shall not be excessive flaking,
peeling or chipping of any protective coating.
(6) The coverings for windows and doors with glass may not consist of
any substance sprayed onto the glass doors or windows. All
enclosures shall be properly fitted and be of such material and
surface that they are neither unsightly nor will materially detract
from the general appearance of the building or the neighborhood
and secured by normal means.
(7) The covering for broken doors and cracked or broken windows may
consist of replacement glass, plexiglas, boards, plywood or similar
materials finished and maintained in a manner recommended and
approved by the Code Enforcement Official. The materials will be
designed and of such color to blend in with the finish of the
building.
(8) Windows that are not cracked or broken may be covered with
interior blinds, curtains, shades, or decorative paper.
C. The owner will maintain the property as follows:
(1) There shall be no accumulation of garbage, refuse or debris.
(2) The property shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and rodent
harborage and infestation.
(3) Junk vehicles, equipment, materials or personal property shall not
be stored on the property.
(4) If the vacant building is to remain vacant for more than 30 days, all
fuel gas, water, and utilities shall be disconnected at the mains and
water pipes drained and winterized. Prior to such disconnections,
the vacant building shall be heated to avoid freezing pipes; fuel gas
pipe systems shall be maintained gastight, safe and operative
condition; and water pipes shall be maintained to avoid leaks and/
or breakage.
(5) Fuel tanks shall be maintained so as not to be a hazard or be
discontinued in a manner consistent with the Uniform Code.
(6) Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, in good repair and properly fenced and secured.
(7) Yards shall be trimmed and mowed, with the height of grass and
weeds being no more than six inches, and with all dead, damaged
§ 104-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-5
94:201
§ 104-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this Article II shall apply to all vacant properties in the
Town from the date the chapter takes effect. Owners of properties that are
vacant as of the time this chapter is enacted shall have 30 days from the
effective date to register.
§ 104-7. Penalties for offenses.
or diseased trees or shrubs, or any portion thereof, removed or
replaced.
A. Failure to register. Failure to register pursuant to this article shall be
considered a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment not to exceed 15
days, or both. Each week, such violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
B. Failure to maintain the property. Failure to maintain vacant property in
accordance with § 104-5 will result in Town-initiated repair and
maintenance in accordance with Article III of this chapter, with
associated fines and costs handled pursuant to § 104-14.
§ 104-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 104-7
94:202
ARTICLE III
Unsafe Buildings
§ 104-8. Investigation and report.
When in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Official or upon receipt of
information that a building is or may become dangerous or unsafe to the
general public; is open at the doorways and windows making it accessible
to and an object of attraction to minors under 18 years of age, as well
as to vagrants and other trespassers; is or may become a place of rodent
infestation; presents any other danger to the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the public; or is unfit for the purposes for which it may
lawfully be used, the Code Enforcement Official shall cause or make an
inspection thereof and report, in writing, to the Town Board his or her
findings and recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and
removal.
§ 104-9. Order to repair or remove.
The Town Board shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution
determine, if in its opinion the report so warrants, that such building
is unsafe and dangerous and order its repair, if the same can be safely
repaired, or its demolition and removal, and further order that a notice be
served upon the persons and in the manner provided herein.
§ 104-10. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the following:
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or
dangerous.
C. An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe
and secure or demolished and removed.
D. A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall
commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter, unless for good cause shown such
time shall be extended.
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Town Board in relation
to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be scheduled
not less than five business days from the date of service of the notice.
F. A statement that, in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the
order to make safe and/or secure or demolish and remove the building,
the Town Board is authorized to provide for its demolition and removal,
to make it safe and secure, to assess all expenses thereof against the
land on which it is located and to institute a special proceeding to
collect the costs of demolition or repairs, including legal expenses.
§ 104-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-11
94:203
§ 104-11. Service of notice.
The notice shall be served by personal service of a copy thereof upon the
owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee or any person having a vested
or contingent interest in such unsafe buildings as shown by the records of
the Receiver of Taxes (or Tax Collector) or of the County Clerk or, if no such
person can be reasonably found, by mailing such owner by registered mail
a copy of such notice directed to his or her last known address as shown
by the above records; by personal service of a copy of such notice upon any
adult person residing in or occupying said premises if such person can be
reasonably found; or by securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the
unsafe building.
§ 104-12. Filing of copy of order.
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of
the County Clerk of the County of Monroe.
§ 104-13. Refusal to comply; award of removal contract.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said order of the Town Board and after the hearing, the Town Board
shall provide for the repair or demolition and removal of such building or
structure either by Town employees or by contract. Except in emergency
as provided in § 104-15 hereof, any contract for repair or demolition and
removal of a building in excess of $5,000 shall be awarded through
competitive bidding.
§ 104-14. Assessment of expenses.
All expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the proceedings to
repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including
the cost of actually removing such building, shall be assessed against the
land on which such building is located and shall be levied and collected in
the same manner as provided in Article 15 of the Town Law, as amended or
changed, for the levy and collection of a special ad valorem levy. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit other remedies available to the Town
under applicable law.
§ 104-15. Emergency situations.
A. In emergency situations, the Code Enforcement Official is authorized to
cause such actions as to mitigate the imminent danger until the Town
Board may by resolution authorize the Code Enforcement Official to
immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building.
B. The expense of such repair or demolition shall be a charge against the
land on which it is located and shall be assessed and collected as
provided in § 104-14 hereof.
§ 104-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 104-15
94:204
C. When, after proper notification to the owner of record or his legal
representative, a vacant building is not secured on the first and lower
floors at the doors, windows and similar openings, the Code
Enforcement Official can order such building secured to remove the
accessibility to minors under 18 years of age, as well as to vagrants and
other trespassers. The expense of such repair or demolition shall be a
charge against the land on which it is located and shall be assessed and
collected.
§ 104-15 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-15
94:205

ARTICLE IV
Severability
§ 104-16. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or article of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
determination shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section or article thereof directly involved in the proceeding in which such
adjudication shall have been rendered.
§ 104-16 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 104-16
94:207
Chapter 110
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 214.
§ 110-1. Purpose.
Volume sales of Christmas trees during the season have a potential for
generating large amounts of additional traffic at and around the point of
sale. Improperly located and designed sales areas may create land use
conflicts, traffic congestion, noise and vehicle and traffic safety problems. It
is therefore the purpose of this chapter to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Irondequoit by instituting a system
of review and issuance of permits for volume sales of Christmas trees.
§ 110-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Christmas Tree Sales Law of the Town
of Irondequoit."
§ 110-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHRISTMAS TREE — Any cut evergreen tree customarily decorated and
used as an ornament during the Christmas season.
VOLUME SALES — Offering to sell to the public in quantities in excess of
25.
§ 110-4. Permit required for volume sales; restrictions.
Christmas tree sales by volume by individuals, businesses and nonprofit
groups shall only be permitted upon issuance of a permit by the Town
Building Inspector as follows:
A. No sale of Christmas trees shall be permitted in a residential use
district with the exception of sales by a nonprofit group or approval of a
permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Christmas tree sales are permitted in all commercial and industrial use
districts.
C. All existing garden shops or farm product markets, regardless of the
zoning district in which they are located, shall be exempt from the
permit requirements stated in this section.
§ 104-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 110-5
110:208
§ 110-5. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to sell Christmas trees as herein provided shall make
an application. in writing, to the Town Building Inspector and deliver it
to the Building Department. Such application shall contain the following
information:
§ 110-6. Issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of the application, the Building Inspector shall conduct an onsite
inspection and make his or her determination within a reasonable time.
If the application complies with all provisions of this chapter and all other
laws and provisions of this Municipal Code, the permit shall not be denied
except for good cause.
§ 110-7. Denial, revocation and suspension of permit; appeals.
The Building Inspector may, for a good cause, deny a permit or revoke and/
or suspend a permit granted hereunder. Applicants may appeal the decision
of the Building Inspector to the Zoning Board of Appeals. All such appeals
should be filed within 10 days after the Building Inspector's decision to
suspend, revoke or disapprove an application is served, in writing.
§ 110-8. Permit fees.30
The schedule of fees for issuance of permits and appeals under this chapter
shall be set forth as provided in § 1-18.
§ 110-9. Penalties for offenses.31
A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a Class
B violation punishable as provided in § 1-16.
Chapter 115
A. The name, address and age of the applicant.
B. The location or locations where the sale of Christmas trees is to be
conducted.
C. The source or sources from which the permittee intends to obtain his
supply of Christmas trees.
D. The date when the permittee intends to commence the sale of
Christmas trees.
E. Such other information as may be required by the Town Building
Inspector to determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior
statements required in this section.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 110-5 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 110-9
110:209
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM
§ 115-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Community Choice Aggregation Local
Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 115-2. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 115-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
A. It is the policy of both the Town of Irondequoit ("Municipality") and the
State of New York to reduce costs and provide price certainty for the
purpose of consumer protection and economic development, to expand
access and opportunities for consumers in retail energy markets, as
well as to promote the sustainability and resilience of energy systems
through the proliferation of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and
distributed energy resources (DER, as defined below). Among the
initiatives that may advance these objectives in New York is community
choice aggregation ("CCA"), a policy that empowers local governments
to determine the source of electricity and/or natural gas supply on
behalf of its residents and small businesses, reflecting local resources,
priorities, and challenges. Energy delivery remains the responsibility of
the distribution utility.
B. This chapter establishes the authority for the Town of Irondequoit, in
connection with the implementation of a CCA program, to acquire
utility data, to select, through competitive solicitation, energy
supplier(s) on behalf of participating consumers within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Town of Irondequoit, and to maximize
value for participating consumers through enhanced services related to
DER. The Municipality may choose to collaborate with other local
governments to form an intermunicipal program. As a result,
consumers will have the opportunity to lower and stabilize their energy
costs, to spur local clean energy innovation and investment, and to
reduce their environmental impact; thereby, fulfilling the purposes of
this chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose.
C. The Town of Irondequoit is authorized to implement this community
choice aggregation program pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New
York Municipal Home Rule Law; and consistent with State of New York
Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion
of the Commission to Enable community choice aggregation programs
(issued April 21, 2016), as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0224, to the extent that orders related to Case
No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Municipality.
§ 110-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 115-3
110:210
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information, including,
but not limited to, the number of consumers by service and rate class,
the aggregated peak demand (kW) (for electricity) by month for the past
12 months by service and rate class, and the aggregated energy (kWh)
for electricity or volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12
months by service and rate class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — Town of Irondequoit or a third-party CCA
Administrator, duly authorized to request aggregated and customer-specific
data, competitively solicit suppliers for the aggregated demand for
electricity and/or natural gas on behalf of default consumers, and to offer
participating consumers additional opportunities to participate or enroll
in programs or projects related to distribued energy resources. The CCA
Administrator is responsible for program organization, administration,
procurement, communications, and for meeting all requirements for
program implementation specified in the PSC CCA order, unless otherwise
specified. The CCA Administrator shall be designated by the Town Board of
the Municipality.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all default consumers, including the customer of
record's name, mailing address, telephone number, account number, and
primary language, if available, and any customer-specific alternate billing
name, address, and phone number.
DEFAULT CONSUMERS — Customers of electricity and/or natural gas
within opt-out eligible service classes (as delineated in the PSC CCA order),
who receive supply service from the distribution utility as of the date
the supply contract goes into effect, or consumers within these service
classes that subsequently become eligible to participate in the program,
including those that have terminated a supply contract with an ESCO,
removed a freeze or block on their account, have voluntarily suspended
service pursuant to a special rate, or are new residents of the Municipality.
Consumers within opt-out-eligible service classes, as of the date the supply
contract goes into effect, taking service from an ESCO, those that have
placed a freeze or block on their account, and those for whom enrollment in
the CCA program would interfere with a choice they have already made to
take service pursuant to a special rate are not considered default consumers
and will not be enrolled on an opt-out basis. For the avoidance of doubt,
all default consumers must reside or be otherwise located at one or more
locations within the geographic boundaries of the Municipality, as such
boundaries exist as of the date the supply contract goes into effect.
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES (DER) — Local renewable energy
projects, community distributed generation (e.g., shared solar), peak
demand management, energy efficiency, demand response, energy storage,
community resilience microgrid projects, and other innovative Reforming
the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives that further engage and/or reduce cost
§ 115-3 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 115-3
110:211
of service for participating consumers, optimize system benefits, and/or
address infrastructure and demand challenges within geography of the
CCA.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity in the Municipality. The distribution utility
also serves as the default supplier of electricity and natural gas preceding
the establishment of a CCA program.
ESCO or ENERGY SERVICES COMPANY — An entity duly authorized to
conduct business in the State of New York as an ESCO.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Default consumers who have not opted
out, and nondefault consumers of any service class that have voluntarily
enrolled in the program.
PSC CCA ORDER — The PSC's order authorizing framework for the
Community Choice Aggregation Opt-Out Program, issued on April 21, 2016,
in Case 14-M-0224, "Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable
Community Choice Aggregation Programs."
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION or PSC — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIER — An ESCO that procures electric power and natural gas for
participating consumers in connection with this chapter or, alternatively,
generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities who procure and
resell electricity or natural gas.
§ 115-4. Authorization of program.
A. A community choice aggregation program is hereby authorized by the
Municipality, whereby the Municipality may implement a CCA program
to the full extent permitted by the PSC CCA order, as set forth more
fully herein.
B. The Municipality may enter into contracts with one or more suppliers
for electric and/or natural gas supply and other services on behalf of
default consumers.
C. The Municipality may enter into agreements and contracts with other
municipalities, nonprofits, consultants, and/or other third parties to:
(1) Develop and implement the CCA program;
(2) Act as CCA Administrator; and/or
(3) Develop offers of opt-in DER products and services to participating
consumers.
D. The operation and ownership of the utility service shall remain with the
distribution utility. The Municipality's participation in a CCA program
constitutes neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the
furnishing of utility service. The Municipality shall not take over any
part of the electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will
§ 115-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 115-4
110:212
§ 115-5. Eligibility.
§ 115-6. Opt-out process.
§ 115-7. Data protection requirements.
not furnish any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with
suppliers on behalf of participating consumers.
E. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the uniform business practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. All default consumers shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis. Default
consumers will have the right to opt out before the supply contract goes
into effect, or disenroll any time thereafter with no penalty. Those that
do not opt out before the supply contract goes into effect will be
enrolled automatically.
B. All nondefault consumers within the Municipality, regardless of service
class, shall be eligible to participate in the CCA program on an opt-in
basis at any time.
C. CCA Administrator, on behalf of the Town of Irondequoit, shall issue
three or more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
program.
A. A program notification letter, printed on municipal letterhead, shall be
mailed to all consumers at least 60 days prior to customer enrollment.
The letter shall include information on the CCA program and the
contract signed with the selected supplier(s), including specific details
on rates, services, contract term, cancellation fee, and methods and
procedures for opting-out of and opting-in to the CCA program. The
letter shall explain that default consumers that do not opt-out will be
enrolled in the program under the contract terms and that information
on those consumers, including energy usage data and APP status, will
be provided to the ESCO. The letter will also explain how nondefault
consumers can opt in to the program and how default consumers who
have opted out can later opt in to the program.
B. All consumers shall have the option to opt out of the CCA program at
any time without penalty or any other administrative or other fee or
charge.
A. The Municipality, or CCA Administrator on its behalf, may request
aggregated data and customer-specific data from the distribution
utility.
§ 115-4 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 115-7
110:213
§ 115-8. Administration fee.
The Municipality or CCA Administrator may collect, or cause to be
collected, funds from customer payments to pay for administrative costs
associated with running the CCA program.
§ 115-9. Reporting.
B. Customer-specific data and all other data collected from customers
shall be protected in a manner compliant with, collectively:
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual that apply with respect to the
Municipality or its representative's processing of confidential
utility information;
(2) The utility's internal requirements and procedures relating to the
protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
an individual that apply with respect to the Municipality or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The PSC CCA Order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines
relating to confidential data.
C. For the purpose of protecting customer data, the Municipality must
enter into an agreement with the distribution utility that obligates each
party to meet, collectively:
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual default consumer or
participating consumer with respect to the CCA Administrator or
its representative's processing of confidential utility information;
(2) The distribution utility's internal requirements and procedures
relating to the protection of information that identifies or can be
used to identify an individual default consumer or participating
consumer with respect to the CCA Administrator or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The PSC CCA order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines
relating to confidential data.
A. Annual reports shall be filed with the Town Board of the Municipality by
March 31 of each year and cover the previous calendar year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year (e.g., installation of DER or other clean energy
services); and administrative costs collected. The first report shall also
§ 115-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 115-9
110:214
§ 115-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
§ 115-11. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 117
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 117-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — "Community residential facility
for the disabled" means a supportive living facility with four to fourteen
residents or a supervised living facility subject to licensure by the Office
of Mental Health or the Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities, which provide a residence for up to fourteen mentally disabled
persons, including residential treatment facilities for children and youth.
GROUP HOME — A facility operated by an authorized agency, for the care
and maintenance of not less than seven nor more than 12 children who
are at least five years of age, except that such minimum age shall not be
applicable to siblings placed in the same facilities nor to children whose
mother is placed in the same facility.
§ 117-2. Initial contact; preliminary meeting.
include the number of consumers who opted out in response to the
initial opt-out letter or letters.
C. If a CCA supply contract will expire less than one year following the
filing of the annual report, the report must identify current plans for
soliciting a new contract, negotiating an extension, or ending the CCA
program.
§ 115-9 COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITIES § 117-2
117:215
§ 117-3. Application; requirements.
The first meeting will involve a review of the proposed site. Prior to the
initial meeting, the agency should review the proposed site to ensure
compliance with all zoning laws of the Town of Irondequoit as outlined in
Article III, Districts.32 In addition, special consideration should be given to
the following points:
A. The applicant should make informal contact with the Town Supervisor
regarding interest in establishing a community residence or group
home in the Town of Irondequoit. The Supervisor will forward the
request to the Standing Community Residence and Group Home
Committee which, in turn, will contact the applicant to arrange for a
preliminary meeting to discuss the application.
B. The process of initial contact to the Supervisor, referral to the
Committee and contact by the Committee to the applicant should be
completed within 10 days.
A. Concentration. No community residence shall be located within a
radius of 1/2 mile of any other existing or proposed community
residence or group home regardless of political boundaries.
B. Parking. The application should address the question by providing a
reasonable plan for providing parking facilities for staff members and
visitors.
C. Building codes and safety requirements. Community residence facilities
and group homes shall be subject to all Town of Irondequoit local laws,
regulations and ordinances with respect to building codes and safety
requirements. Specific regulations may be found in Chapter 98,
Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
D. Availability of facilities. Every community residence and group home
shall be provided with or have ready access to facilities and services
necessary and appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and
passive recreation, medical care, educational, cultural and religious
activities, consumer goods and services and public transportation.
E. Supervision/staff. Every community residence or group home shall have
an approved level of supervision and staff on a twenty-four-hour basis
as provided in § 686.6, Operation of Community Residences, published
by the Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities
(OMRDD).
F. Individual programs. Individuals (clients) residing at community
residences or group homes must be engaged in a formal program (work
or education) as prescribed by Part 686 of the OMRDD regulations
relating to community residence facilities.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 117-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 117-3
117:216
§ 117-4. Contact with neighbors.
Upon preliminary approval of the Standing Community Residence and
Group Home Committee, a plan will be drawn for contacting those
neighbors most affected by the residence. This will be determined by the
Committee on a case-by-case basis. The Committee recommends the
following approach:
G. Required approvals. No residential care facility or group home shall be
established without, and every residential care facility and group home
shall be conditioned upon, the prior licensing, certification or other
approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or
supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every
application for a residential care facility and group home shall set forth
each agency which must approve the establishment or operation of the
facility, shall either be accompanied by a copy of an application or other
request to each such agency for such approval or by an affidavit of the
applicant stating reasonable grounds to justify postponing the filing of
such application pending the outcome of the application and
warranting that such applications for other approvals will be promptly
filed upon the approval of the facility, and shall state facts known to the
applicant which might result in the denial or delay of any required
approval which has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the
application.
H. Financial stability. No approval for a residential care facility or group
home shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall establish to
the satisfaction of the Town Board that there exists a reasonable certain
source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation
and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations
of the application and various standards applicable to such facility by
reason of this chapter and other laws and regulations.
A. A letter should be sent by the applicant to the neighbors announcing
the intention to establish a community residence or group home and
should indicate that personal contact by representatives of the
applicant and Standing Community Residence and Group Home
Committee will follow. The letter should be sent to all residents within a
radius of not less than 200 feet, but not more than 500 feet of the
proposed site, as will be more particularly set by the Committee.
B. Individual contact to establish a meeting of the applicant, the neighbors
and the Standing Community Residence and Group Home Committee to
discuss the proposal. The Committee recommends that this meeting be
informal in nature.
C. Appointment of three (3) neighbors who, with members of the Standing
Community Residence and Group Home Committee, will serve as the
Community Residence and Group Home Committee for the proposed
residence.
§ 117-3 COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITIES § 117-4
117:217
§ 117-5. Alternate sites.
If the preliminary meeting results in further question with respect to the
site or area, the Committee will obtain information from real estate listings
available (computer listings, known sites which might meet specifications)
and review with the applicant. The Standing Community Residence and
Group Home Committee will provide assistance in evaluating alternate
sites.
§ 117-6. Final approval.
Following preliminary approval, a public hearing will be conducted to
present the recommendation. After the public hearing, the Town Board may
formally approve the application. The process of application, review and
approval is expected to be completed within 30 to 60 days.
§ 117-7. Community Residence and Group Home Advisory
Committee.
Upon approval of the community residence or group home, an advisory
committee as prescribed in § 686.4 of the OMRDD regulations will be
formed to review progress of the residence until it becomes operational and
to monitor activities of the residence after it becomes operational.
§ 117-8. Report schedule.
The Standing Community Residence and Group Home Committee shall file
reports with the Town Board according to the following schedule:
Chapter 123
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Air pollution — See Ch. 69.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 136.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Trees — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
D. The applicant and the Community Residence and Group Home
Committee for the residence prepare a final recommendation for
approval to the Town Board.
A. Prior to operation: quarterly.
B. Operation, first year: semiannually,
C. Operation, beyond first year: annually, until the Committee
recommends discontinuance.
§ 117-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 117-8
123:218
§ 123-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Town of Irondequoit
Environmental Quality and Consistency Review Law."
§ 123-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the Town of Irondequoit the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act and Waterfront
Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act, thereby incorporating
environmental factors and consideration of coastal resources into existing
planning and decisionmaking processes.
§ 123-3. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under authority of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
State Environmental Quality Review Act and Regulations, as amended or
changed, and the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of
the State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive Law, as amended or
changed).
§ 123-4. Compliance required.
All boards, departments, offices, other bodies or officers of the Town of
Irondequoit must comply with the State Environmental Quality Review Act
and Regulations, as amended or changed, and this chapter, to the extent
applicable, prior to carrying out, approving and funding any action other
than an exempt or excluded action as those terms are defined in Part 617
of Title 6 of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the
State of New York (NYCRR), as amended or changed, or a Type II action as
that term is defined in this chapter.
§ 123-5. Definitions. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIONS —
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or other activities,
which change the use or appearance of any natural resources or
structure, which:
(1) Are directly undertaken by an agency;
(2) Involve funding by an agency; or
Require one or more permits or approvals from an agency or
agencies.
(3)
A.
§ 117-8 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-5
123:219
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or officer of
the Town of Irondequoit.
COASTAL AREA — The New York State coastal waters and adjacent
shorelands as defined in Article 42 of the Executive Law, as amended
or changed. The specific boundaries of the town's area are shown on
the coastal area map on file in the office of the Secretary of State and
as delineated in the Town of Irondequoit Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form used by an agency to
assist it in determining the consistency of an action with the LWRP.
CONSISTENT TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The action
will not substantially hinder the achievement of any of the policies and
purposes of the approved local waterfront revitalization program for the
Town of Irondequoit (LWRP) and, whenever practicable, will advance one or
more of such policies.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND ZONING — The Department of
Planning and Zoning of the Town of Irondequoit. The Department of
Planning and Zoning may review and make recommendations to
appropriate agencies regarding the consistency of Type I unlisted actions
with the policies and purposes of the Town of Irondequoit Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (EAF) — The long form appearing
at 6 NYCRR 617.21, Appendix A (or 6 NYCRR 617), as amended or changed,
used by an agency to assist it in determining the environmental significance
or nonsignificance of actions. A properly completed EAF shall contain
enough information to describe the proposed action, its location, its purpose
and its potential impacts on the environment.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS) — A written document
prepared in accordance with 6 NYCRR 617.8 and 617.4, as amended or
changed. An EIS either may be in draft or final form. A generic EIS may also
be prepared in accordance with 6 NYCRR 617.15, as amended or changed.
LEAD AGENCY — The agency principally responsible for carrying out,
funding or approving an action and therefore responsible for determining
whether an EIS is required in connection with the action and for causing
the preparation and filing of the EIS if one is required. The lead agency
shall determine whether a proposed action is consistent to the maximum
extent practicable with LWRP policy, standards and conditions. An agency
proposing to take an action which does not involve any other agency shall
be the lead agency.
Planning activities of an agency that commit the agency to a course of
future decisions.
B.
C. Agency rules, regulations, procedure and policymaking.
D. Any combinations of the above.
§ 123-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 123-5
123:220
LOCAL WATERFRONT AREA (LWA) — That portion of the Town of
Irondequoit New York Coastal Area within the Town of Irondequoit
delineated in the Town of Irondequoit Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The local
program as approved by the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront
Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act (Executive Law Article 42, as
amended or changed).
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — Article 8 of
the Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW REGULATIONS (PART 617)
— 6 NYCRR 617, as amended or changed.
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
TYPE I ACTION — Includes all those listed in 6 NYCRR 617.12, as amended
or changed.
TYPE II ACTION — Includes all those listed in 6 NYCRR 617.13, as amended
or changed.
UNLISTED ACTION — All actions not listed as a Type I or Type II action and
not an exempt or excluded action as those terms are defined in 6 NYCRR
617, as amended or changed.
§ 123-6. Duties of Department of Planning and Zoning. [Amended
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
With regard to an application for an action involving funding or approval
by the town or which will be undertaken, the Town Department of Planning
and Zoning will:
§ 123-7. Environmental and waterfront coastal assessment forms.
A. Advise each applicant, when an application is involved, and each
agency whether a proposed action is subject to the provisions of SEQR
and whether a proposed action would be located within the LWA.
B. Provide each applicant and each agency with an environmental
assessment form (EAF) and, where appropriate, a coastal assessment
form (CAF) pursuant to § 123-7 of this chapter.
A. When any agency contemplates directly carrying out, funding or
approving any Type I action, a full environmental assessment form
(EAF) must be prepared by it or on its behalf. When an unlisted action is
contemplated, either a full or short form EAF, as appropriate, must be
prepared. The EAF forms given in 6 NYCRR 617.21 or 6 NYCRR 617, as
amended or changed, will be used as models, but may be modified to
meet the needs of particular cases. However, the final scope of such a
modified EAF must be at least as comprehensive as the scope of the
model forms.
§ 123-5 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-7
123:221
§ 123-8. Determination of lead agency and referral for consistency.
B. When any person submits an application for funding or a permit or
other approval of a Type I or unlisted action to any agency of the town,
an EAF must accompany the application. For Type I actions, a full EAF
must be prepared; for unlisted actions, either the full EAF or the short
form EAF may be used, as appropriate. An applicant may choose to
prepare a draft EIS in place of an EAF.
C. When, pursuant to § 123-6 of this chapter, the initial review determines
that such Type I or unlisted action is contemplated within the Local
Waterfront Area (LWA), the full or short form EAF specified in § 123-6A
or B above shall be accompanied by the coastal assessment form (CAF).
A. Upon receipt by an agency of a completed EAF and, where appropriate,
a completed CAF, the agency will determine whether it involves one or
more agencies. The agency will distribute a copy of the application and
completed EAF/CAF to all involved agencies for the designation of lead
agency in accordance with the procedure set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.6
(Type I actions) or 617.17 (Unlisted actions), as amended or changed.
B. Where no federal or state agency funds, permits or approvals are
necessary:
(1) The Town Board will be the lead agency for the determination of
environmental significance and consistency for the following
actions:
(a) Adoption, amendment or change of zoning and land use
regulations or special use permits pursuant to § 235-28 of
Chapter 235, Zoning.
(b) Construction or expansion of municipal buildings, structures
and other facilities, including highways within the town.
(c) Purchase, sale and/or lease of real property by the town.
(2) The Town Zoning Board of Appeals will be the lead agency for the
determination of environmental significance and zoning appeals
and variance applications.
(3) For all other actions, agencies will be designated lead agency for
the determination of environmental significance and consistency
under the procedures referred to in § 123-8A.
C. The Genesee Finger Lakes Regional Planning Board will be the areawide
clearinghouse for lead agency designation. It will assist agencies
and applicants to identify other federal, state and local agencies that
may be involved in approving, funding or carrying out Type I of the
unlisted action. The clearinghouse will make recommendations on
designation of lead agencies for particular actions.
§ 123-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 123-8
123:222
§ 123-9. Local waterfront revitalization program review. [Amended
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
§ 123-10. Determination of environmental significance. [Amended
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
D. Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency will be
processed in accordance with 6 NYCRR 617.16, as amended or
changed.
A. For proposed actions located within the LWA, the full EAF for a Type I
action, each CAF and each draft EIS shall be referred to the
Department of Planning and Zoning for review and recommendation
regarding the consistency of such an action with the policies and
purposes of the LWRP.
B. For proposed listed actions within the LWA, the full or short form EAF
may be referred to the Department of Planning and Zoning along with
the CAF when the agency contemplating the action deems the referral
necessary and beneficial in determining the proposed action's
consistency with the policies and purposes of the LWRP.
C. The recommendation of the Department of Planning and Zoning shall
be provided to the agency contemplating the action within 30 days from
the date of referral. In the event that such recommendation is not
forthcoming within the allotted time period, the agency shall proceed as
provided under §§ 123-10 through 123-13 of this chapter.
A. The lead agency must make a determination of environmental
significance of the action. This determination must be based on the EAF
and on such other information as the lead agency may require. The
criteria listed in 6 NYCRR 617.11, as amended or changed, must be
considered by the lead agency in making its determination of
significance. The determination must be made within 15 days of the
date of the lead agency designation or within 15 days of its receipt of all
information required by the lead agency to make the determination,
whichever is later.
B. If the lead agency makes a determination of nonsignificance and the
action is to be located within the LWA, decisionmaking on the action
shall proceed with regard to § 123-13 of this chapter. Recommendations
of the Department of Planning and Zoning shall be considered required
information for the determination of significance to when:
(1) The agency of the town is the lead agency; and
(2) Such recommendations are required or requested pursuant to
§ 123-9A or B of this chapter, respectively.
C. If the lead agency makes a determination that the action may have
significant effect on the environment and the action is to be located
within the LWA, an environmental impact statement will be required
§ 123-8 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-10
123:223
§ 123-11. Environmental impact statements; fees.
and the provisions of §§ 123-11 through 123-13 of this chapter,
inclusive, shall apply.
D. If the lead agency makes a determination that the action may have a
significant effect on the environment and the action is not located
within the LWA, an environmental impact statement will be required
and the provisions of §§ 123-11 through 123-12 of this chapter,
inclusive, shall apply.
A. Environmental impact statement preparation and procedures.
(1) When required pursuant to § 123-10 of this chapter, an EIS must be
prepared in accordance with the environmental impact statement
procedures as provided under 6 NYCRR 617.8, as amended or
changed, and the requirements for preparation and content of
environmental impact statements as provided under 6 NYCRR
617.14, as amended or changed.
(2) When the EIS is prepared for a proposed action located within the
LWA, it must also contain an identification of the applicable policies
and purposes of the Town of Irondequoit LWRP as required by
§ 123-12 and a discussion of the effects of the proposed action of
such policies and purposes.
B. Fees for review and preparation of EIS's.
(1) The fees for publication of notices and for review or preparation of
an EIS involving approval or funding of an action will be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
(2) Fees so fixed will be consistent with the limitations set by 6 NYCRR
617.17, as amended or changed. When the EIS is prepared by the
applicant, fees will reflect actual expenses of reviewing it and for
the publication of notices. When the EIS is prepared by an agency
on behalf of the applicant, fees will reflect the cost of preparation,
including publication of notices, but not the cost of environmental
review by the agency. However, the lead agency may not charge a
fee for its determination of significance.
C. Decisions and findings for actions subject to EIS's. Decisionmaking and
findings for any proposed action which is the subject of a final EIS shall
be made by the agency of the town contemplating such action in
accordance with the provisions of 6 NYCRR 617.9, as amended or
changed, and §§ 123-12 and 123-13 of this chapter, regardless of
whether or not it is the lead agency.
§ 123-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 123-12
123:224
§ 123-12. Notices and filing.
All notices, CAF's, EAF's, draft EIS's, final EIS's and all other documents
shall be prepared, filed, circulated and made available as prescribed under
6 NYCRR 617.10, as amended or changed, and this chapter.
§ 123-13. Consistency. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
A. Whenever a proposed action is located in the LWA, the lead agency shall
make a determination that it is consistent to the maximum extent
practicable with the LWRP policy standards and conditions set forth in
Subsection E. No action shall be approved, funded or undertaken
without this determination.
B. Prior to making the determination of consistency, the lead agency shall
solicit and consider the recommendation of the Department of Planning
and Zoning with the reference to the consistency of the proposed
action. The lead agency shall make the determination of consistency
based on the EAF, the CAF, the Department of Planning and Zoning
recommendation and such other information as is deemed to be
necessary in its determination. The lead agency shall issue its
determination within seven days of the date of receipt of the
Department of Planning and Zoning's recommendation.
C. After receipt of a completed CAF for an action, the Department of
Planning and Zoning shall consider whether the proposed action is
consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions set forth in Subsection E. The Department of
Planning and Zoning shall require the applicant to submit any
completed applications, EAF's and information deemed to be necessary
to its consistency recommendation.
D. The Department of Planning and Zoning shall render its written
recommendation to the lead agency within 30 days following the
submission by the applicant of the required information, unless
extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Department of
Planning and Zoning. The recommendation shall indicate whether, in
the opinion of the Department of Planning and Zoning, the proposed
action is consistent to the maximum extent practicable or inconsistent
with one or more of the LWRP policy standards or conditions. The
recommendations shall state the manner and extent to which an
inconsistency affects the LWRP policy standards and conditions. The
Department of Planning and Zoning shall, along with its consistency
recommendation, make any suggestions to the lead agency concerning
modification of the proposed action to make it consistent to the
maximum extent practicable with LWRP policy standards and
conditions or to advance them to a greater degree. In the event that the
Department of Planning and Zoning's recommendation is not
forthcoming within the specified time, the applicant shall be deemed to
have received a recommendation that it is consistent to the maximum
extent practicable.
§ 123-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-13
123:225
E. Actions to be undertaken within the LWA shall be evaluated for
consistency in accordance with the following LWRP policy standards
and conditions, which are from and further explained and described in
Section III of the Town of Irondequoit LWRP, a copy of which is on file in
the Town Clerk's office and available for inspection during normal
business hours. Agencies which directly undertake actions shall also
consult with Section IV of the LWRP in making their consistency
determination. The action shall be consistent with the policy to:
(1) Restore, revitalize and redevelop deteriorated and underutilized
waterfront areas for commercial and cultural, recreational and
other compatible uses (Policy 1 and Subpolicies 1A through 1H).
(2) Facilitate the siting of water-dependent uses and facilities on or
adjacent to coastal waters (Policy 2 and Subpolicies 2A through
2C).
(3) Strengthen the economic base of small harbor areas by
encouraging the development and enhancement of those
traditional uses and activities which have provided such areas with
unique maritime identity (Policy 4 and Subpolicies 4A and 4B).
(4) Encourage the location of development in areas where public
services and facilities essential to such development are adequate,
except when such development has special functional requirements
or other characteristics which necessitate its location in other
coastal areas (Policy 5 and Subpolicies 5A and 5B).
(5) Expedite permit procedures in order to facilitate the siting of
development activities at suitable locations (Policy 6).
(6) Protect, preserve and, where practical, restore significant coastal
fish and wildlife habitats, as identified on the coastal area map, so
as to maintain their viability as habitats (Policy 7 and Subpolicy
7A).
(7) Protect fish and wildlife resources in the coastal area from the
introductions of hazardous wastes and pollutants which
bioaccumulate in the food chain or which cause significant
sublethal or lethal effects on those resources (Policy 8).
(8) Expand recreational use of fish and wildlife resources in coastal
areas by increasing access to existing resources, supplementing
existing stocks and developing new resources. Such effects shall be
made in a manner which ensures the protection of renewable fish
and wildlife resources and considers other activities dependent on
them (Policy 9 and Subpolicy 9B).
(9) Site buildings and other structures in the coastal area so as to
minimize damage to property and the endangering of human life
caused by flooding and erosion (Policy 11 and Subpolicies 11A
through 11C).
§ 123-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 123-13
123:226
(10) Undertake activities or development in the coastal area so as to
minimize damage to natural resources and property from flooding
and erosion by protecting natural protective features, including
beaches, dunes and bluffs. Primary dunes will be protected from all
encroachments that could impair their natural protective capacity
(Policy 12 and Subpolicies 12A through 12C).
(11) Undertake the construction or reconstruction of erosion structures
only if they have a reasonable probability of controlling erosion for
at least 30 years as demonstrated in design and construction
standards and/or assured maintenance or replacement programs
(Policy 13).
(12) Undertake activities and development, including the construction
or reconstruction of erosion-protection structures, so that there
will be no measurable increase in erosion or flooding at the site of
such activities or development or at other locations (Policy 14).
(13) Mine, excavate or dredge in coastal water so as to not interfere
with the natural coastal processes which supply beach materials to
land adjacent to such waters and shall be undertaken in a manner
which will not cause an increase in erosion of such land (Policy 15).
(14) Use public funds only for erosion-protective structures where
necessary to protect human life and new development which
requires a location within or adjacent to an erosion-hazard area to
be able to function or existing development; and only where the
public benefits outweigh the long-term monetary and other costs,
including the potential for increasing erosion and adverse effects
on natural protective features (Policy 16 and Subpolicy 16A).
(15) Use, whenever possible, nonstructural measures to minimize
damage of natural resources and property from flooding and
erosion. Such measures shall include:
(a) The setback of buildings and structures.
(b) The planting of vegetation and the installation of sand fencing
and draining.
(c) The reshaping of bluffs.
(d) The floodproofing of buildings or their elevation above the base
flood level. (Policy 17 and Subpolicies 17A through 17C).
(16) Safeguard the vital economic, social and environmental interests of
the state and of its citizens; proposed major actions in the coastal
area must give full consideration to those interests and to the
safeguards which the state has established to protect valuable
coastal resources (Policy 18).
(17) Protect, maintain and increase the level and types of access to
public water-related recreation resources and facilities so that
§ 123-13 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-13
123:227
these resources and facilities may be fully utilized by all the public
in accordance with reasonably anticipated public recreation needs
and the protection of historic and natural resources. In providing
such access, priority will be given to public beaches, boating
facilities, fishing area and waterfront parks (Policy 19 and
Subpolicies 19A and 19B).
(18) Provide access to the publicly owned foreshore and to land
immediately adjacent to the foreshore or the water's edge that are
publicly owned in a manner compatible with adjoining uses. Such
lands shall be retained in public ownership (Policy 20 and
Subpolicies 20A through 20C).
(19) Encourage, facilitate and give priority to water-dependent and
water-enhanced recreation uses over non-water-related uses along
the coast, provided that it is consistent with the preservation and
enhancement of other coastal resources and takes into account
demand for such facilities. In facilitating such activities, priority
shall be given to areas where access to the recreation opportunities
of the coast can be provided by new or existing public
transportation services and to the areas where the use of the shore
is severely restricted by existing development (Policy 21 and
Subpolicies 21A through 21D).
(20) Assure development, when located adjacent to the shore, will
provide water-related recreation as a multiple use whenever such
use is compatible with reasonably anticipated demand for such
activities and the primary purpose of the development (Policy 22
and Subpolicies 22A and 22B).
(21) Protect, enhance and restore structures, districts, areas or sites
that are of significance in the history, architecture, archaeology or
culture of the state, its communities or the nation (Policy 23 and
Subpolicy 23A).
(22) Protect, restore or enhance natural and man-made resources which
are not identified as being of statewide significance, but which
contribute to the overall scenic quality of the coastal area (Policy
25 and Subpolicies 25A and 25B).
(23) Assure ice-management practices shall not damage significant fish
and wildlife and their habitats, increase shoreline erosion or
flooding or interfere with the production of hydroelectric power
(Policy 28).
(24) Assure that municipal, industrial and commercial discharge of
pollutants, including but not limited to toxic and hazardous
substances, into coastal waters conform to state and national water
quality standards (Policy 30 and Subpolicies 30A and 30B).
(25) Consider state coastal area policies and management objectives of
approved local waterfront revitalization programs while reviewing
§ 123-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 123-13
123:228
coastal water classifications and while modifying water quality
standards; however, those waters already overburdened with
contaminants will be recognized as being a development constraint
(Policy 31).
(26) Use best management practices to ensure the control of
stormwater runoff and combined sewer overflows draining into
coastal waters (Policy 33 and Subpolicy 34 and 33A).
(27) Limit the discharge of waste materials into coastal waters from
vessels so as to protect significant fish and wildlife habitats,
recreational areas and water supply areas (Policy 34 and Subpolicy
34A).
(28) Undertake dredging and dredge spoil disposal in coastal waters in
a manner that meets existing state dredging permit requirements
and protects significant fish and wildlife habitats, scenic resources,
natural protective features, important agricultural lands and
wetlands (Policy 35).
(29) Conduct activities related to the shipment and storage of
petroleum and other hazardous materials in a manner that will
prevent or at least minimize spills into coastal waters; all
practicable efforts will be undertaken to expedite the cleanup of
such discharges; and restitution for damages will be required when
these spills occur (Policy 36).
(30) Use best management practices to minimize the nonpoint
discharge of excess nutrients, organics and eroded soils into
coastal waters (Policy 37).
(31) Conserve and protect the quality and quantity of surface water and
groundwater supplies, particularly where such waters constitute
the primary or sole source of water supply (Policy 38).
(32) Conduct the transport, storage, treatment and disposal of solid
wastes, particularly hazardous wastes, within coastal areas in such
a manner so as to protect groundwater and surface water supplies,
significant fish and wildlife habitats, recreation areas, important
recreation areas, important agricultural lands and scenic resources
(Policy 39).
(33) Ensure that land use or development in the coastal area will not
cause national or state air quality standards to be violated (Policy
41).
(34) Consider coastal management policies if the state reclassifies land
areas pursuant to the prevention of significant deterioration
regulations of the Federal Clean Air Act (Policy 42).
(35) Preserve and protect tidal and freshwater wetlands and preserve
the benefits derived from these areas (Policy 44).
§ 123-13 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 123-13
123:229
Chapter 132
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 53. Peace and good order — See Ch. 164.
§ 132-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to preserve and to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Irondequoit.
§ 132-2. Definitions.33
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
F. Actions causing hindrance.
(1) If the lead agency determines that the action would cause a
substantial hindrance to the achievement of the LWRP policy
standards and conditions, such action shall not be undertaken
unless the agency determines with respect to the proposed action
that:
(a) No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action
to be undertaken in a manner which will not substantially
hinder the achievement of such LWRP policy standards and
conditions;
(b) The action would be undertaken in a manner which will
minimize all adverse effects on such LWRP policy standards
and conditions to the maximum extent practicable; and
(c) The action will result in an overriding local, regional or
statewide public benefit.
(2) Such a finding shall constitute a determination that the action is
consistent to the maximum extent practicable.
G. Each agency shall maintain a file for each action made the subject of a
consistency determination, including any recommendations received
from the Department of Planning and Zoning, and any findings
pursuant to § 123-10 of this chapter. Such files shall be made available
for public inspection upon request.
33.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 123-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 132-2
132:230
FIREARM — Includes a shotgun, air gun, air pistol, spring gun or rifle, BB
guns, rifles and pistols of any caliber or any implement which impels with
force a pellet or single projectile of any kind (i.e., bow and arrow, slingshot,
crossbow, etc.).
§ 132-3. Discharge prohibited; exceptions.34
No person shall, except in self defense, within the Town of Irondequoit
discharge a firearm except as hereinafter provided.
§ 132-4. Permit required.
No person shall, within the Town of Irondequoit, maintain or operate a gun
shoot, skeet or clay pigeon shoot, target or pistol competition, rifle range or
shooting gallery or any similar place for gun shooting, target, gun or pistol
practice, other than a shooting gallery or similar establishment required to
be licensed under the provisions of Chapter 76, Amusement Devices, of the
Code of the Town of Irondequoit and not conducted for profit, without a
permit therefor from the Town Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 132-5. Permit application.
Any person desiring to maintain or operate a gun shoot, skeet shoot or clay
pigeon shoot, target or pistol practice, rifle range or shooting gallery, other
than a shooting gallery or similar establishment required to be licensed
under the provisions of Chapter 76, Amusement Devices, shall make
application therefor to the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit upon a
form prescribed by the Town Board. Such permit may be granted under
such terms and conditions as the Town Board may prescribe.
§ 132-6. Applicability.
A. Police officers. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
police officer or other law enforcement officers or military personnel
engaged in the performance of their duties or ceremonial salutes by
honor guards of veterans' or military organizations.
B. Hunting. The provisions of § 132-3 shall not apply to that area of the
town located between high and low water mark along the shores of
Lake Ontario or the waters of Irondequoit Bay or Lake Ontario or any
part of the marshlands abutting Irondequoit Creek and the waters of
such creek during such period as may be designated by the Legislature
of the State of New York or other authorized agency as the season
during which waterfowl, rail and shore birds may lawfully be taken by
shooting and also shall not apply to deer being taken by bow and arrow
pursuant to a nuisance wildlife permit duly issued by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation. [Amended
7-7-1983 by Ord. No. 83-2]
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 132-2 FIREARMS § 132-6
132:231
§ 132-7. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 136
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire — See Ch. 98.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
C. Special permit. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
police officer or other law enforcement officers who have been issued a
special permit by the Town Board authorizing the harvesting of the deer
population in the town subject to the laws of the State of New York
regarding the discharge of a firearm for hunting. [Added 12-12-1992
by L.L. No. 6-1992]
D. Special permit. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
person who has been issued a special permit by the town authorizing
the harvesting and/or managing of the deer population in the town
subject to the laws of the State of New York regarding the discharge of
a firearm for hunting and subject to rules and regulations established
by the Town Board. [Added 11-19-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 1-16.35
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of such chapter.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 132-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 132-7
132:232
ARTICLE I
Findings, Purpose and Objectives
§ 136-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of Irondequoit and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 136-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 136-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 136-1 FIREARMS § 136-3
132:233
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 136-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-3
132:234
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 136-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. As used
in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
A. A nonbasement building:
§ 136-4 FIREARMS § 136-4
132:235
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
Built, in the case of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of
a building in Zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(1)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE,
or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
B.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
§ 136-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-4
132:236
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see the definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A above.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 136-4 FIREARMS § 136-4
132:237
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, the Code Enforcement Officer, or an employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 136-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-4
132:238
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 136-14B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement
of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. "Permanent construction" does not include
land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling); the
installation of streets or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations; the erection of temporary forms; or the installation of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 136-4 FIREARMS § 136-4
132:239

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 136-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe County.
§ 136-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 136-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 136-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 136-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Irondequoit,
Community Number 360422, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36055C0088G,
3605500089G, 36055CO201G, 36055CO202G, 36055CO203G,
36055CO204G, 36055CO206G, 36055CO208G, 36055CO209G,
36055CO216G, 36055CO217G, whose effective date is August 28,
2008, and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not
affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Monroe County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated August 28,
2008.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Department of Community Development, located at the Town Hall,
1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 136-5 FIREARMS § 136-9
132:241
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Irondequoit from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 136-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Irondequoit, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 136-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-10
132:242
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 136-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Director of Community Development is hereby appointed local
administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 136-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 136-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 136-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Irondequoit for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project, including, but not limited to, the legal fees incurred by the
Town. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$1,000 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 136-11 FIREARMS § 136-13
132:243
§ 136-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 136-16C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 136-18, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 136-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 136-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 136-15A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 136-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-14
132:244
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 136-13G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meets the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
§ 136-14 FIREARMS § 136-14
132:245
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator may review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
by the local administrator shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project unless immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect may make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 136-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable law and/or
the conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop-work
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 136-9
of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 136-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
§ 136-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-14
132:246
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 136-14E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 136-14D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 136-14D(1) and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedure; and
(5) Notices required under § 136-14C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 136-14 FIREARMS § 136-14
132:247

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 136-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 136-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Irondequoit agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Town of Irondequoit for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Irondequoit for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 136-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 136-15 FIREARMS § 136-15
132:249
§ 136-16. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Irondequoit agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Town of Irondequoit for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Town of Irondequoit for all costs related to the
final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
§ 136-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-16
132:250
§ 136-17. Residential structures.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in § 136-15A, Subdivision proposals;
§ 136-15B, Encroachments; and § 136-16, Standards for all structures:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
§ 136-16 FIREARMS § 136-17
132:251
§ 136-18. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 136-15A,
Subdivision proposals; and § 136-15B, Encroachments; and § 136-16,
Standards for all structures.
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 136-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements of
any nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Section 136-18A(2).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 136-18A(2), including the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
§ 136-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-18
132:252
§ 136-19. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 136-15, General
standards; and § 136-16, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard;
(4) Within Zones AH and A0, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C, and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 136-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 136-18 FIREARMS § 136-19
132:253

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 136-20. Appeals Board.
A. The Planning Board as established by the Town of Irondequoit shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board may appeal such
decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 136-20 FIREARMS § 136-20
132:255
§ 136-21. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 136-20D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 136-20D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 136-20 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 136-21
132:256
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing chapters or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as
$25 for $100 of insurance coverage and such construction below the
base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required
in § 136-14H of this chapter.
§ 136-21 FIREARMS § 136-21
132:257
Chapter 139
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 139-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Restaurant Ordinance of the Town of
Irondequoit."
§ 139-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 139-3. Definitions.
As used in the chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESTAURANT — Includes a restaurant, eating place, lunch counter, soft
drink counter, milk bar, hot dog stand or similar place for the sale for
consumption upon the premises of beverages and food of any class or
description, other than a delicatessen, grocery, drug or confectionery store.
§ 139-4. Hours of operations; permits for exceptions.
A. Prohibited hours. No food or beverages shall be sold, offered for sale or
given away in any restaurant subject to the provisions of this chapter
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Special permits. The Town Clerk, with the approval of the Town Board,
may issue a special permit for a restaurant to be conducted on a twentyfour-
hour basis; provided, however, that such restaurant shall be
engaged in the business of selling food only for consumption on such
premises and beverages other than beverages for the sale of which a
license is required from the State of New York.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to any
restaurant which shall have obtained from the Monroe County Alcoholic
Beverage Control Board a special license or permit to remain open for
any part of the period of closing prescribed by such provisions; such
exception, however, shall apply only to the particular restaurant
specified in such special permit or license and only for the period
specified in such special permit.
§ 136-21 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 139-5
139:258
§ 139-5. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police and officers of the Town of Irondequoit Police
Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 139-6. Penalties for offenses.36
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a Class C violation, punishable as provided in § 1-16. The imposition of
any and all penalties for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue. The application of the above penalty
or penalties or the prosecution for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall not be held to prevent the enforcement of this chapter by any
other action.
Chapter 142
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Air pollution — See Ch. 69.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 142-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Freshwater Wetlands Protection
Ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 142-2. Declaration of policy; requirements.37
A. It is declared to be the public policy of the Town of Irondequoit to
preserve, protect and conserve freshwater wetlands regulated by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation for stateregulated
wetlands and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers
for any federally regulated wetlands and the benefits derived
therefrom, to prevent the despoliation and destruction of stateregulated
and/or federal freshwater wetlands and to regulate the
development of such wetlands in order to secure the natural benefits of
state-regulated and/or federal freshwater wetlands consistent with the
general welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the Town of Irondequoit. It is further declared to be the
policy of the Town of Irondequoit to exercise its authority pursuant to
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 139-5 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-2
142:259
§ 142-3. Findings.
Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or
changed.
B. Permit requirements for disturbance within federal wetlands shall
conform to Section 404 of the Clean Waters Act and administration of
permitting are through the Buffalo office of the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.
A. The freshwater wetlands located in the Town of Irondequoit are
invaluable resources for flood protection, wildlife habitat, open space
and water resources.
B. Considerable acreage of freshwater wetlands in the town has been lost,
despoiled or impaired by unregulated draining, dredging, filling,
excavating, building, pollution or other acts inconsistent with the
natural uses of such areas. Other freshwater wetlands are in jeopardy
of being lost, despoiled or impaired by such unregulated acts.
C. Recurrent flooding aggravated or caused by the loss of freshwater
wetlands has serious effects upon natural ecosystems.
D. Freshwater wetlands conservation is a matter of town concern.
E. Any loss of freshwater wetlands deprives the people of the Town of
Irondequoit of some or all of the many and multiple benefits to be
derived from wetlands, as follows:
(1) Flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage
capacity of freshwater wetlands.
(2) Wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting and feeding
grounds and cover for many forms of wildlife, wildfowl and
shorebirds, including migratory wildfowl and rare species.
(3) Protection of subsurface water resources and provision for
valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
(4) Recreation by providing areas for hunting, fishing, boating, hiking,
bird watching, photography, camping and other uses.
(5) Pollution treatment by serving as biological and chemical oxidation
basins.
(6) Erosion control by serving as sedimentation areas and filtering
basins, absorbing silt and organic matter and protecting channels
and harbors.
(7) Education and scientific research by providing readily accessible
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training
and education resources.
(8) Open space and aesthetic appreciation.
§ 142-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-3
142:260
§ 142-4. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein:
ADJACENT AREA — Any land in the Town of Irondequoit immediately
adjacent to a freshwater wetland lying within 100 feet, measured
horizontally, of the boundary of a freshwater wetland.
AGENCY — The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit.
APPLICANT — Any person who files an application for any permit issued by
the Agency pursuant to this chapter, and includes the agent of the owner or
a contract vendee.
BOARD — The Freshwater Wetlands Appeals Board established by Article
24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed.
BOUNDARIES OF A FRESHWATER WETLAND — The outer limit of the
vegetation specified in Subsections A and B in the definition of "freshwater
wetlands" and of the waters specified in Subsection D of such definition.
FEDERAL — The United States Army Corps of Engineers. 38
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Lands and waters lying within the boundaries
of the Town of Irondequoit as shown on a freshwater wetlands map which
contain any or all of the following:
(9) Sources of nutrients in freshwater food cycles and nursery grounds
and sanctuaries for freshwater fish.
F. Regulation of freshwater wetlands, in accordance with the agriculture
exemption established in § 142-5 hereof, is consistent with the
legitimate interests of farmers and other landowners to graze and
water livestock, make reasonable use of water resources, harvest
natural products of the wetlands, selectively cut timber and otherwise
engage in the use of land for agricultural production.
Lands and submerged lands commonly called "marshes," "swamps,"
"sloughs," "bogs" and "flats" supporting aquatic or semiaquatic
vegetation of the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees, which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(Acer rubrum), willows (Salix species), black spruce (Picea
mariana), swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), red ash (Fraxinus
pennsylvanica), American elm (Ulmus americana) and larch (Larix
laricina).
(1)
Wetland shrubs, which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
(2)
A.
38.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 142-3 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-4
142:261
species), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bog rosemary
(Andromeda glaucophylla) and leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne
calyculata).
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
species), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus
species), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria
species), reed (Phragmites communis), wildrice (Zizania aquatica),
burr-reeds (Sparganium species), purple loosestrife (Lythrun
salicaria), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water
plantain (Alisma plantagoacquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating-leaved vegetation; including, among others, water
lily (Nymphaea odorata), watershield (Brasenia schreberi) and
spatterdock (Nuphar species).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemna species), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and
watermeal (Wolffia species).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation, which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a
competitive advantage over other open land vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex species), rushes (Juncus species),
cattails (Typha species), rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), reed
canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea), swamp loosestrife (Decodon
verticillatus) and spikerush (Eleocharis species).
(6)
Bog mat vegetation, including among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum species), bog rosemary (Andromeda glaucophylla),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), pitcher plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) and cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium
oxycoccos).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamogeton species), naiads (Najas species), bladderworts
(Utricularia species), wild celery (Vallisneria americana), coontail
(Ceratophyllum demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum species),
muskgrass (Chara species), stonewort (Nitella species),
waterweeds (Elodea species) and water smartweed (Polygonum
amphibium).
(8)
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do
not exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six feet; and provided,
further, that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention;
B.
Lands and waters enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as
set forth herein in Subsection A and dead vegetation as set forth
C.
§ 142-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-4
142:262
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP — 39 Either:
LOCAL GOVERNMENT — The Town of Irondequoit. 40
PARTY IN INTEREST — The applicant, the Agency, the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, each local government in which the regulated
activity or any part thereof is located and any person who appears and
wishes to be a party in interest at the public hearing held pursuant to
§ 142-7 of this chapter.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate,
one or more individuals and any unit of government or agency or
subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may
be injurious to humans, plants, animals or property.
PROJECT — Any action which may result in direct or indirect physical
impact on a freshwater wetlands, including but not limited to any regulated
activity.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any form of draining, dredging, excavation,
removal of soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate from any
freshwater wetland, either directly or indirectly; any form of dumping,
filling or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill
of any kind, either directly or indirectly; erecting any structures or roads,
the driving of pilings or placing of any other obstructions, whether or not
changing the ebb and flow of the water; any form of pollution, including but
not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall, discharging
sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes directly into or so as to
drain into a freshwater wetland; that portion of any subdivision of land that
involves any land in any freshwater wetland or adjacent area; and any other
activity which substantially impairs any of the several functions served by
in Subsection B, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation; and
The waters overlying the areas as set forth in Subsections A and B and
the lands underlying those areas in Subsection C.
D.
A map on which are indicated the boundaries of any freshwater wetland
and which has been filed with the Clerk of the Town of Irondequoit
by the State Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to
§ 24-0301 of the State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or
changed; or
A.
A map on which are located boundaries of any potentially federal
jurisdictional freshwater wetlands as prepared by the United States
Department of the Interior or the Fish and Wildlife Service, or both.
B.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 142-4 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-4
142:263
freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth
in § 142-3 of this chapter.
SELECTIVE CUTTINGS — The annual or periodic removal of trees,
individually or in small groups, in order to realize the yield and establish
a new crop and to improve the forest, which removal does not involve the
total elimination of one or more particular species of trees.
STATE — The State of New York.
STATE AGENCY — Any state department, bureau, commission, board or
other agency, public authority or public benefit corporation.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND — Any division of land into two or more lots,
parcels or sites, whether adjoining or not, for the purpose of sale, lease,
license or any form of separate ownership or occupancy (including any
grading, road construction, installation of utilities or other improvements
or any other land use and development preparatory or incidental to any
such division) by any person or by any other person controlled by, under
common control with or controlling such person or by any group of persons
acting in concert as part of a common scheme or plan. "Subdivision of land"
shall include any map, plat or other plan of division of land, whether or
not previously filed. "Subdivision of land" shall not include the lease of land
for hunting and fishing and other open space recreation uses and shall not
include the division of land by bona fide gift, devise or inheritance.
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
§ 142-5. Permit required; exceptions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall
conduct a regulated activity on any freshwater wetland or adjacent area
unless such person has first obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. No permit under this chapter shall be required for:
(1) The deposition or removal of the natural products of freshwater
wetlands and adjacent areas by recreational or commercial fishing,
shellfishing, aquiculture, hunting or trapping, where otherwise
legally permitted and regulated.
(2) The activities of farmers and other landowners in grazing and
watering livestock, making reasonable use of water resources,
harvesting natural products of wetlands or adjacent areas,
selective cutting of timber, draining land or wetlands for growing
agricultural products and otherwise engaging in the use of
wetlands or other land for growing agricultural products, except
that structures not required for enhancement or maintenance of
the agricultural productivity of the land and any filling activities
shall not be excluded hereunder. Each farmer or other landowner
who intends to conduct an otherwise regulated activity shall notify
the Agency, in writing, prior to conducting the activity, of his or her
intention to engage in such activity, stating the approximate
§ 142-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-5
142:264
§ 142-6. Permit application; notice; review of application.
acreage of freshwater wetland or adjacent area affected, the
location thereof, the methods to be employed and the uses to be
made of such land. A soil and water conservation plan prepared by
a Soil and Water Conservation District and filed with the Agency
shall be deemed sufficient notification for the purposes of this
subsection.
(3) Public health activities, orders and regulations of the State
Department of Health, County Department of Health or other, as
applicable, undertaken in compliance with § 24-0701, Subdivision
5, of the State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or
changed.
(4) Activities subject to the review jurisdiction of the State Public
Service Commission or the New York State Board on Electric
Generation Siting and the Environment under Article VII of the
State Public Service Law, as amended or changed, respectively. The
standards and restrictions of this chapter will be applied by said
bodies in determining whether to issue a certificate of
environmental compatibility and public need under such Articles.
(5) Any actual and ongoing emergency activity which is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life or property or
the protection or preservation of natural resource values. Such
emergency activities include, for example, search and rescue
operations; preventive or remedial activities related to large-scale
contamination of streams or other bodies of water; floods,
hurricanes and other storms; and public health concerns. Within
five days of the end of such an emergency involving the
undertaking of any activity which otherwise would be treated as a
regulated activity under this chapter, the person chiefly responsible
for undertaking such emergency activity shall send a written
statement to the Agency setting forth the pertinent facts regarding
such emergency, including an explanation of the life, property or
resource values such activity was designed to protect or preserve.
(6) Any activity located in a freshwater wetland where such wetland is
located in more than one city, town or village.
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity requiring a permit under this chapter upon any freshwater
wetland or adjacent area shall file an application for a permit with the
Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall immediately forward such application
to the Agency.
B. An application for a permit shall be filed by the applicant on a form
prescribed by the Agency. Such application shall set forth the purpose,
character and extent of the proposed regulated activity. The application
shall include a detailed description of the regulated activity, a map
§ 142-5 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-6
142:265
showing the area of freshwater wetland or adjacent area directly
affected, with the location of the proposed regulated activity thereon,
a deed or other legal description describing the subject property and
such additional information as the Agency deems sufficient to enable it
to make the findings and determinations required under this chapter.
The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names of the
owners of record of lands adjacent to the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area upon which the project is to be undertaken and the
names of known claimants of water rights, of whom the applicant
has notice, which relate to any land within, or within 100 feet of the
boundary, of the property on which the proposed regulated activity
will be located. An application shall not be deemed to be completed
or received until the Agency determines that all such information,
including any additional information requested, has been supplied in a
complete and satisfactory form.
C. The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of such completed application to be
mailed to all local governments where the proposed activity or any part
thereof is located.
D. Within five days of its receipt of a completed application for a permit
regarding a proposed regulated activity, the Agency shall provide the
applicant with a notice of application which the applicant shall publish
at his or her own expense at least once in each of at least two
newspapers having a general circulation in the Town of Irondequoit.
Said notice of application shall be in a form prescribed by the Agency
and shall:
(1) Specify that persons wishing to object to the application should file
a notice of objection by a specified date, together with a statement
of the precise grounds of objection to the application, with the
Agency.
(2) Specify that if no notices of objection are timely filed or if the
Agency determines that the proposed activity is of such a minor
nature as to not affect or endanger the balance of systems within
any freshwater wetland, then the Agency, in its discretion, may
determine a hearing is not necessary and dispense with the public
hearing.
(3) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the Town
Clerk. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
Agency may, in its discretion, dispense with the requirement for a
notice of application and require a notice of hearing pursuant to
Subsection F of this section.
E. Public hearing.
(1) No sooner than 30 days and not later than 60 days after its receipt
of a completed application for a permit regarding a proposed
regulated activity and after the publication of a notice of
§ 142-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-6
142:266
application pursuant to Subsection D of this section, the Agency
shall hold a public hearing on such application at a suitable location
in the Town of Irondequoit, which hearing shall be held pursuant to
the provisions of § 142-7 of this chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section,
where no notice of objection to the notice of application published
pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall have been filed within
the time specified by that notice or where the Agency determines
that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature as not to affect
or endanger the balance of systems within any freshwater wetland,
the Agency may, in its discretion, dispense with such hearing.
Where the Agency finds that a public hearing is not necessary, it
shall publish a decision setting forth its reasons therefor, which
decision shall be a matter of public record and shall be mailed to
each local government where the proposed regulated activity or
any part thereof will be located. Public notice of such decision that
a public hearing is not necessary shall be provided in the same
manner as notice of application set forth in Subsection D of this
section.
F. Notice of public hearing.
(1) The Agency shall, within 21 days of receipt of a completed
application, provide the applicant with a notice of hearing which
the applicant shall publish at his or her own expense at least 15
days prior to the date set for the hearing, at least once in each of at
least two newspapers of general circulation in the Town of
Irondequoit.
(2) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the Agency
shall by certified mail provide a notice of hearing to each local
government within whose boundaries the proposed regulated
activity or any portion thereof will be located.
(3) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the Agency
shall by certified mail provide notice of hearing to all owners of
record of land adjacent to the affected freshwater wetland or
adjacent area and to all known claimants of water rights, of whom
the applicant has notice, which relate to any land within, or within
100 feet of the boundary, of the property on which the proposed
regulated activity will be located.
(4) The notice of hearing shall:
(a) State the name of the applicant.
(b) Specify the location and outline the scope of the proposed
regulated activity.
(c) Specify the date, time and place of the public hearing on the
application.
§ 142-6 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-6
142:267
§ 142-7. Conduct of permit application hearing.
(d) Specify that persons wishing to be parties in interest and
eligible to be heard at such public hearing, if any, should file a
notice of appearance by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of support of, opposition to or
interest in the application, with the Agency.
(e) Specify that any person who wishes to be a party in interest
without filing a notice of appearance may do so by appearing at
the public hearing and indicating his or her desire to be a party
in interest, if a public hearing is held.
(f) Specify that if no notices of appearance are timely filed by any
party in interest and if the applicant waives any public hearing,
then the public hearing may be canceled by the Agency.
(g) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Town Clerk.
G. The Agency shall make the application, including all documents and
maps associated with it, available for public inspection at the office of
the Town Clerk.
H. If no timely notice of appearance has been filed as provided in the
notice of hearing published pursuant to Subsection F of this section and
the applicant waives, in writing, any public hearing on his or her
application, the Agency may dispense with a public hearing and in such
instance shall provide public notice of the cancellation of the hearing.
I. For any notice canceling a hearing which has been scheduled, notice
shall be given on the same basis as the notice of public hearing
provided in Subsection F of this section.
J. The Agency may establish permit fees to assist in its implementation of
this chapter.
A. Any public hearing held on a permit application received under this
chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the
Agency. The hearing officer shall have full authority to control the
conduct and procedure of the hearing and shall be responsible that a
complete record of the hearing be kept. The public hearing shall be held
within the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Parties in interest.
(1) Any person may appear as a party in interest, notwithstanding the
failure of such person to file a timely notice of appearance, by
appearing at the hearing and making known his or her desire to be
a party in interest. Persons who are not parties in interest may be
§ 142-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-7
142:268
§ 142-8. Decision on permit application.
§ 142-9. Standards for permit decisions.
allowed to participate in the hearing where the hearing officer finds
that such participation would be in the public interest.
(2) All parties in interest shall be afforded an opportunity to present
oral and written arguments on issues of law and policy and an
opportunity to call witnesses in their behalf and to present oral and
written evidence on issues of fact. The hearing officer shall permit
the parties in interest to cross-examine witnesses but may limit
such cross-examination to avoid the introduction of irrelevant or
repetitious material in the record of the hearing.
A. Where a public hearing has been held regarding a permit application,
the Agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or without
conditions, or deny the application. The decision by the Agency to issue
or deny a permit after public hearing shall be based on the record of the
hearing and shall be made, in writing, within 30 days of the Agency's
receipt of the hearing record.
B. Where no public hearing regarding a permit application has been held,
either because a hearing was determined not to be necessary pursuant
to § 142-6E(2) of this chapter or because no notice of appearance was
filed with regard to the public hearing and a hearing was canceled
pursuant to § 142-6H of this chapter, the Agency shall compile an
official file consisting of documents submitted by the applicant and any
additional documents relied on by the Agency with respect to the
application. The Agency may also take notice of general, technical or
scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of the Agency. Any
document made part of such official file shall be available for inspection
by the applicant and any interested member of the public. On the basis
of such file, the Agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or
without conditions, deny the application or order a public hearing to be
held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The decision by the
Agency to issue or deny a permit or to order that a hearing be held shall
be based on the official file and shall be made, in writing, within 30 days
of its completion of the official file and in any event within 60 days of its
receipt of a completed application, provided that, in the case where
there have been no objections filed regarding a proposed project, the
issuance of a permit shall be deemed to be a written decision by the
Agency.
C. A copy of the decision of the Agency on each application for a permit
under this chapter shall be mailed by the Agency as soon as practicable
following such decision to the applicant and to each local government
within whose boundaries the proposed regulated activity or any portion
thereof is located and, if a public hearing has been held regarding the
application, to each party in interest.
§ 142-7 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-9
142:269
§ 142-10. Permit conditions.
A. In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the Agency shall
consider the effect of the proposed activity with reference to the public
health and welfare, fishing, flood, hurricane and storm dangers and
protection or enhancement of the several functions of the freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth in
§ 142-3 of this chapter.
B. Requirements.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Agency pursuant to this chapter
unless the Agency shall find that:
(a) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the policy of
this chapter to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the
despoliation and destruction of freshwater wetlands and to
regulate the development of such wetlands in order to secure
the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands consistent with the
general welfare and beneficial economic, social and
agricultural development of the town;
(b) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the land use
regulations applicable in the Town of Irondequoit pursuant to
§ 24-0903 of Article 24 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law, as amended or changed;
(c) The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public
health and welfare;
(d) The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary;
and
(e) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent
area.
(2) The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed regulated activity will be in accord with the standards set
forth in this subsection.
C. Duly filed written notice by the state or any agency or subsection
thereof to the Agency that the state or any such agency or subsection is
in the process of acquiring the affected freshwater wetland on which a
proposed regulated activity would be located by negotiation or
condemnation shall be sufficient basis for denial of a permit for such
regulated activity. Such notice may be provided at any time prior to the
Agency's decision to issue or deny a permit for the regulated activity.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are necessary to assure
§ 142-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-10
142:270
§ 142-11. Agency powers and duties.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the Agency
shall have the following powers:
§ 142-12. Coordination with other hearings; interpretation with
other requirements.
the preservation and protection of affected freshwater wetlands and to
assure compliance with the policy and provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of the Agency's rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this chapter.
B. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following
conditions:
(1) The Agency shall have the right to inspect the project from time to
time.
(2) The permit shall expire on a certain date.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the Agency of the date on which
project construction is to begin, at least five days in advance of
such date.
(4) The Agency's permit shall be prominently displayed at the project
site during the undertaking of the activities authorized by the
permit.
C. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for all conditions attached
to any permit.
A. To appoint officers, agents and employees, to prescribe their duties and
qualifications and to fix their compensation.
B. To adopt, amend and repeal, after public hearing (except in the case of
rules and regulations that relate to the organization or internal
management of the Agency), such rules and regulations, consistent
with this chapter, as it deems necessary to administer this chapter and
to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out the
purpose and policies of this chapter.
C. To contract for professional and technical assistance and advice.
D. To hold hearings and subpoena witnesses in the exercise of its powers,
functions and duties provided for by this chapter.
A. To the greatest extent practicable, any public hearing held pursuant to
§ 142-7 of this chapter shall be incorporated with any public hearing
required by or pursuant to the New York State Town Law, Village Law,
General City Law, General Municipal Law or Environmental
Conservation Law relating to approvals or permits otherwise required
§ 142-10 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-12
142:271
§ 142-13. Bond required.
§ 142-14. Suspension or revocation of permits.
§ 142-15. Penalties for offenses.
for the undertaking of regulated activities on the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area in question.
B. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove any person's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited
to the acquisition of any other required permit or approval.
A. The Agency may require that, prior to commencement of work under
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall post a
bond with the Agency, in an amount determined by the Agency,
conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the terms of such permit
and for the indemnification of the Town of Irondequoit for restoration
costs resulting from failure to so comply. Such bond shall be issued by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and shall be in
favor of the Town of Irondequoit. It shall remain in effect until the
Agency certifies that the work has been completed in compliance with
the terms of the permit or the bond is released by the Agency or a
substitute bond is provided.
B. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for imposing a bond
pursuant to this section.
A. The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter where it finds that the permittee has not complied with any or
all terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the
permit or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in
the application.
B. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for revoking or suspending
a permit pursuant to this section.
A. Administrative sanctions. Any person who violates, disobeys or
disregards any provision of this chapter, including any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
by the Agency pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the people of
the state for a civil penalty of not to exceed $3,000 for every such
violation, to be assessed, after a hearing or opportunity to be heard
upon due notice and with the rights to specification of the charges and
representation by counsel at such hearing, by the Agency. Such penalty
may be recovered in an action brought by the Attorney General at the
request and in the name of the Agency in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the
§ 142-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-15
142:272
§ 142-16. Prosecution; additional remedies.
§ 142-17. Review and appeal.
Agency before the matter has been referred to the Attorney General,
and such penalty may be released or compromised and any action
commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued by
the Attorney General with the consent of the Agency. In addition, the
Agency shall have power, following a hearing held in conformance
with the procedures set forth in § 71-1709 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law, as amended or changed, to direct the violator to
cease his or her violation of this chapter and to restore the affected
freshwater wetland to its condition prior to the violation, insofar as that
is possible within a reasonable time and under the supervision of the
Agency. Any such order of the Agency shall be enforceable in an action
brought by the Attorney General at the request and in the name of the
Agency in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any civil penalty or order
issued by the Agency pursuant to this subsection shall be reviewable in
a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law and
Rules, as amended or changed.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person who violates an order, permit or rule or
regulation of the Agency regulating freshwater wetlands and adjacent
areas pursuant to this chapter shall, in addition, for the first offense, be
guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000; for a second and each subsequent offense he or she shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000
nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of not less than 15
days nor more than six months, or both. Instead of these punishments,
any offender may be punishable by being ordered by the court to
restore the affected freshwater wetland to its condition prior to the
offense, insofar as that is possible. The court shall specify a reasonable
time for the completion of such restoration, which shall be effected
under the supervision of the Agency. Each offense shall be a separate
and distinct offense and, in the case of a continuing offense, each day's
continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
A. The Attorney General, upon his or her own initiative or upon complaint
of the Agency, shall prosecute persons alleged to have violated any such
order of the Agency pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Agency shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provisions of this chapter.
A. Any decision or order of the Agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person affected thereby, including but not limited
to any owner of the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident
or citizen of the Town of Irondequoit, by the Freshwater Wetlands
Appeal Board in accordance with Title 11 of Article 24 of the State
§ 142-15 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 142-17
142:273
§ 142-18. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the filing with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Irondequoit of the final freshwater wetlands map by the State
Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the
New York State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed,
applicable to any or all lands within the Town of Irondequoit.
Chapter 146
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 76.
Bingo — See Ch. 88.
Special events — See Ch. 194.
Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed, provided
that such review is commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice
of review within 30 days after service of such order or notice of such
decision given, as the case may be.
B. Any party to any proceeding before the Agency may make an appeal to
the Board in accordance with Title 11 of Article 24 of the State
Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed, from any
order or decision of the Agency or any officer or employee thereof
issued or made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter, provided
that such appeal is commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice
of appeal within 30 days after service of such order or after notice of
such decision given, as the case may be.
C. Any decision or order of the Agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person, including but not limited to any owner of
the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident or citizen of the
Town of Irondequoit, in accordance with Article 78 of the State Civil
Practice Law and Rules, as amended or changed, provided that such
review is commenced within 30 days of the filing of such decision or
order; and the limitation upon the availability of such remedy as
prescribed in § 7801 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, as amended or
changed, shall not be applicable to the applications for review of
determinations and orders made pursuant to this chapter.
D. The institution of a judicial proceeding to review a determination or
order of the Agency shall preclude the institution of a proceeding
before the Board to review such a determination or order. The
availability of such review by the Board shall not affect the right of any
person to seek review of a determination of the Agency as provided in
Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law and Rules, as amended or
changed.
§ 142-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 142-18
146:274
§ 146-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Town of
Irondequoit, New York."
§ 146-2. Definitions.41
As used in this chapter, the certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in § 186 of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed.
§ 146-3. Authorization; license required.
Authorized organizations may, upon obtaining a license from the Town
Clerk, conduct games of chance within the Town of Irondequoit as provided
in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed, and as
provided further in this chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted
in accordance with the general state law and with the rules and regulations
of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 146-4. Restrictions.42
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
§ 146-5. Sunday games.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday,"
may be conducted pursuant to this chapter and appropriate statute and
regulation.
A. All of the restrictions set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, as amended or changed, shall apply to games of chance in the
town.
B. No game of chance shall be conducted under any license issued more
often than 12 times in any calendar year. Games shall be conducted only
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday and only between the hours of 12:00
noon on Friday and 2:00 a.m. Saturday and only between the hours of
12:00 noon on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. Sunday. Games of chance on
Sunday may be conducted only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 142-18 GAMES OF CHANCE § 146-6
146:275
§ 146-6. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall exercise control over and supervision of all
games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such
Department shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of
the General Municipal Law, as amended or changed.
Chapter 149
IRONDEQUOIT BAY HARBOR MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural Review Committee — See Ch. 3.
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Department of Community
Development — See Ch. 18.
Department of Parks and Recreation — See
Ch. 44.
Boats and boating — See Ch. 91.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Swimming — See Ch. 206.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 236.
§ 146-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 146-6
146:276
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 149-1. Purpose.
§ 149-2. Jurisdiction.
§ 149-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANCHOR — Any weighted device used to secure a vessel temporarily to the
harbor bottom.
A. The Town of Irondequoit accommodates a range of public and private
waterfront uses and activities, including recreational and commercial
boating, anchorage and mooring areas, marinas, and other maritime
festivals, special events and regattas, charter vessels, sport fishing,
small craft recreation, personal watercrafts, and swimming.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards, requirements and
procedures for the environmental protection of the Irondequoit Bay
sensitive natural areas and resources; improve and protect its water
quality for desired uses which emphasize a healthy aquatic ecosystem;
ensure that development around the bay occurs without impacting
significant resources (e.g., environmental, historical, archeological,
aesthetic features); regulate the operation of vessels and matters
relevant to navigation and safety; minimize and resolve water surface
use conflicts and conflicts among all users and stakeholders of the bay;
improve public access to diverse recreational opportunities on
Irondequoit Bay and make it an integral part of local and regional
tourism development efforts.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 46-a of the Navigation Law and
Article IX(2)c of the State Constitution — Municipal Home Rule Law
and Article 42, § 922, of the New York State Executive Law, Waterfront
Revitalization of Coastal Areas and Inland Waterways.43
B. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures and activities
on Irondequoit Bay within the corporate limits of the Town of
Irondequoit and to a distance of 1,500 feet from the shore as described
on the official Water Surface Use Map.
C. All activities conducted on Irondequoit Bay within the limits of the Town
of Irondequoit shall also comply with the requirements of the Town of
Irondequoit ordinance relating to noise.44
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Noise.
44.Editor's Note: Section 922 concerns "comprehensive harbor management plans."
§ 149-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-3
146:277
AUTHORIZED TOWN OFFICIAL — Harbormaster, Building Inspector, Code
Compliance Officer, Town Clerk or any other official designated by the Town
Board.
BERTH — See "boat slip."
BOAT HOIST — Any mechanical device or structure used for the purpose of
raising a boat out of the water and storing it on or off site.
BOAT RAMPS (LAUNCHES) — Public and private facilities that may provide
boarding piers (sometimes called a "courtesy pier," "launch dock,"
"pontoon" or "jetty") where boats are temporarily moored for embarking
and disembarking, one or more (paved or unpaved) launch ramps that are
sloped surface designed for launching and retrieving trailered boats and
parking areas for boats and trailers.
BOAT SLIP — The area of any dock or pier or any other facility the purpose
of which is the storage of one boat.
BOAT STORAGE — Any wet berth or dry berth facility used for the purpose
of docking, mooring, or indoor or outdoor on-land storage (including racks
and trailers) of marine vessels.
BUBBLER/AERATION SYSTEM — A mechanical device designed to keep ice
from forming around docks or docked vessels.
CHANNEL — Water area specifically reserved for unobstructed free flow of
vessels operating in Irondequoit Bay, as identified on the official Irondequoit
Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map.
DECORATIVE STRUCTURE — Any waterside man-made structure (e.g.,
fountain, aerator, light, canopy) for use in enabling water-dependent
activities whose profile is visible above the surface of the water and is
affixed in some way to the shore or the bay bottom to hold its position.
DOCK — A structure that extends from the shoreline into the water
designed to provide riparian access and/or securing of watercraft.
DREDGING — To dig or deepen a waterway by manual or mechanical
means.
DRY STORAGE — The vertical storage of boats in rack systems for in-andout
launching and retrieval of boats as well as winter storage. Dry stack
racks can be located either outside or inside and are usually located on or
near a waterfront, often at a marina or boatyard. Dry stack storage facilities
can stack boats from two to six levels high. Boats are loaded and unloaded
from the racks using forklifts.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS (EPODS) —
Environmentally sensitive areas within the Town such as steep slopes,
watercourses, floodplains, wetlands and woodlots where certain activities
are regulated through a permit process.
FAIRWAY — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan Water Surface Use Map, an unmarked navigation way where previous
dredging operations have created a channel to access dock facilities. (These
§ 149-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-3
146:278
channels are considered preexisting, nonconforming uses in the Harbor
Management Plan. Fairways function as overlay zones and are primarily
designed to maintain clear paths of travel connecting berthing areas and
destinations.)
FLOAT — A structure buoyant on the water surface, anchored to the
underwater lands by cables or lines, and detached and independent of a
dock or bulkhead, which provides an offshore surface for swimmers or other
recreational, water-dependent purposes.
FLOATING HOME — Any vessel used, designed, or occupied as a permanent
dwelling unit, business office, base of occupation, or private or social club
of whatever nature, including but not limited to a structure constructed
upon a barge primarily immobile and out of navigation which functions
substantially as a land structure while the same is moored or docked in
Irondequoit Bay.
HARBOR AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map to provide public access, safe
refuge, transient berthing and economic development opportunity. All
designated harbor areas meet three primary locational criteria, including
water depth, Waterfront Development District zoning and landside support
(parking and utilities). Four harbor areas are designated on the Water
Surface Use Map and include the North Harbor, the Center Harbor, Glen
Edith and the South.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE — A committee comprised of
representatives from state, county and local agencies with permit and
oversight jurisdiction on Irondequoit Bay.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan adopted by the Towns of
Irondequoit, Penfield and Webster and approved by the New York State
Secretary of State and composed of policies, goals, objectives and standards
for harbor management within Irondequoit Bay.
HARBORMASTER — Appointed by the Town Boards of Irondequoit, Penfield
and Webster, whose primary responsibility is the administration and
enforcement of the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan and local
laws pertaining to the management of Irondequoit Bay.
LIFT — See "boat hoist."
MARINA — Any dock, pier, or other facility operated for profit, or to which
public patronage is invited, providing moorings, dockage or other marine
services primarily for power and sailing vessels and other watercraft.
MEAN LOW AND HIGH WATER LEVELS — The approximate average low
water level or high water level for Irondequoit Bay, determined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers based on 1985 International Great Lakes Datum
(IGLD). According to the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, Division of Environmental Permits, the mean high water level
for Irondequoit Bay is 247.3 feet (75.4 m) and the mean low water level is
243.3 feet (74.2 m) above sea level.
§ 149-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-3
146:279
MOORING — A device with its associated tackle, such as chains, floats, and
other equipment, manufactured and used specifically for the long-term or
transient securing of a vessel to the harbor bottom. This device typically
consists of an anchoring weight (mushroom or other) which is placed on the
bottom and is connected to a floating device (i.e., ball) cables, chains, or
lines.
NAVIGATIONAL AID — A sign, buoy or floating object, buoyant or affixed
to land or a structure, and possibly lighted or emitting a sound, that has
been installed by a local, state, or federal agency, or a private entity with
the approval of such government agency, for the sole purpose of assisting in
the safe operation of a vessel or identifying a way to port or other marinerelated
destination.
NAVIGATION CHANNEL — Depicted as the outlet channel on the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map. This
channel is considered a federal navigation channel, is identified with
channel markers and extends from Stony Point through the outlet to Lake
Ontario. This navigation channel is regulated with a no-wake/five-mile-perhour
zone pursuant to the New York State Navigation Law.
NAVIGATION WAYS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map to insure that travel is not limited
or impacted by water surface use or structures and to ensure safe use of the
bay. Navigation ways delineate the navigation channel and fairways.
NEAR SHORE AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map defined in this chapter as being
all areas within 300 feet of shore.
OPEN WATER AREA — Area depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map not encumbered by any other
designations. This area supports active recreational use.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person or entity granted a permit.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT (PWC) — A vessel that uses an inboard motor
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power, such
as Jet-skies™, Wave-runners™, Sea-doo™, or hybrids thereof, and which is
designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the
vessel.
PIER — A structure, usually wood or masonry, extending into the water,
used as a landing place for boats and ships.
RAFT — See "float."
RAFTING — Two or more boats anchored together on a temporary basis.
RAMP/RAIL SYSTEM — See "boat hoist."
RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES — Structures such as slides and
trampolines and their support systems.
§ 149-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-3
146:280
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit
Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map associated with the
presence of sensitive natural resources.
SEASONAL — The period from April 1 to December 1 of each calendar year.
SHORELINE — The mean high waterline (247.3 feet above the 1985
International Great Lakes Datum) for Irondequoit Bay at a given location
that distinguishes between predominantly aquatic habitat and
predominantly terrestrial habitat.
SPECIAL ANCHORAGE AREAS — The water areas designated on the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map that are
reserved specifically for the mooring of vessels.
TRANSIENT MOORING — Any public mooring utilized for short-term
purposes.
VESSEL — All waterborne craft or other contrivance capable of being used
as a means of transportation in the water, including seaplanes and personal
watercraft.
VESSEL OWNER — The person or entity under whose name the vessel
was last registered in accordance with the State Vehicle and Traffic Law or
documented in accordance with the provisions of 46 U.S.C. Chapters 121 to
125, and in any other case the last known owner or the person who claims
lawful possession of such vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest
therein which entitles him or her to such possession.
WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Any activity that can be conducted on, in,
over or adjacent to a water body, because such activity requires access to
water, and involves the use of water as an integral part of the activity.
WATER SURFACE USE MAP — An official map of the Irondequoit Bay water
surface use as incorporated in the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan.
WAVE ATTENUATION DEVICE — A floating mechanism designed solely
to diffuse wave energy to protect the shoreline and/or water-dependent
improvements.
§ 149-4. Administration.
A. Harbor Management Committee.
(1) Membership; meetings.
(a) The Town Board shall appoint a member and an alternate
member to the Committee who shall represent a range of
harbor interests, including but not limited to navigation and
boating safety, commercial operations, recreational marinas,
marine infrastructure, special events and maritime history. The
Committee shall be composed of six voting members,
consisting of one representative from each of the Towns of
Irondequoit, Penfield and Webster, appointed by their
§ 149-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-4
146:281
respective Town Boards; a representative of the County of
Monroe, appointed by the County Executive; a representative
of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, appointed by the Regional Director; and the
New York State Department of State, appointed by the
Secretary of State. The Harbormaster shall be a nonvoting, ex
officio member of the Committee.
(b) The Committee shall meet at least four times per year.
Additional meetings may be scheduled to address issues of
importance as deemed necessary.
(2) Committee members shall serve until they are replaced by the
appointing authority. Vacancies shall be filled as necessary and in
accordance with the initial appointment.
(3) The Chairperson shall be elected for the following year by the
members of the Committee at the last meeting of each year.
(4) The Committee shall receive and review reports from the
Harbormaster pertaining to recreational boating and marinas;
navigation and safety; navigational aids; depth of water and
dredging needs; moorings; marine structure conditions and the
need for repair; the use of local docks and facilities; regattas;
special events; and enforcement activities and violations.
(5) The Committee shall make recommendations regarding the use of
the harbor waters as requested by the Town Board and as the
Committee may otherwise deem appropriate.
(6) The Committee shall review the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan and this chapter and recommend revisions to the
Town Boards, as necessary. The Harbor Management Plan shall be
reviewed and updated at least once every 10 years, if necessary.
(7) When requested by the Town Board, or when there is a
Harbormaster permit issuance dispute, the Committee shall act as
a mediator.
(8) The Committee shall seek to resolve disputes to the satisfaction of
the parties at hand while meeting goals and objectives of the
Harbor Management Plan.
(9) To commence its review, the Committee shall be formally notified
by the Town Board of a particular conflict, with a description of the
issue at hand. In handling such cases, the Committee shall examine
the sites of the proposed activities and affected areas, current
zoning, compliance with the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan, this chapter and other applicable sections of the Town Code.
(10) A Committee member may be removed for cause or in the event of
absence from three consecutive meetings.
§ 149-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-4
146:282
B. Harbormaster. The Harbormaster appointment shall be recommended
by the Committee and approved by the Town Boards. The duties of the
Harbormaster shall be to enforce this chapter and provide other
assistance as needed to implement the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan.
§ 149-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-4
146:283

ARTICLE II
Water Surface Uses and Ancillary Uses
§ 149-5. Water surface uses.
A. Water Surface Use Map. The Water Surface Use Map defines the
designated water surface use of Irondequoit Bay as incorporated in the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan. Said map is hereby adopted
by the Town Board, is incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" of this chapter
and is declared to be a part hereof.45
B. Operation of vessels. All vessels operating in the waters of Irondequoit
Bay are to observe the Federal Inland Navigation Rules and comply
with Article 4 of the New York State Navigation Law.
C. Speed limit/wake responsibility.
(1) No vessel shall be operated on Irondequoit Bay at a speed
exceeding 25 miles per hour unless such vessel is being operated
for the purpose of enabling a person engaged in waterskiing or
other water sport to be towed, in which case no such vessel shall be
operated at a speed exceeding 35 miles per hour. The Town Board
may, by local law, limit the speed of vessels in Irondequoit Bay
waters and post notice of such speed limits as stated in this chapter
at appropriate locations serving boaters, such as marinas, boat
launches and parks. Any person who operates a vessel at a speed
faster than specified shall be deemed to have violated this chapter
and be subject to its penalties.
(2) No person shall operate a vessel at a speed greater than is
reasonable or prudent, so as not to:
(a) Endanger the life or limb of another person using the harbor
under all conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing.
(b) Disturb the reasonable comfort or endanger persons on or
operating another vessel or cause damage to another vessel,
structure, shoreline property, or the environment or interfere
with the free and proper use of the waters of any channel.
(3) All vessels operating on Irondequoit Bay shall be subject to No-
Wake Zone requirements. The no-wake/maximum five-mile-perhour
zone is located within 300 feet of the shore, the channel, a
dock, pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored vessel. Waveattenuating
devices shall not be subject to the three-hundred-foot
no-wake/maximum-five-mile-per-hour zone.
(4) No vessel shall be operated in the channel between Irondequoit
Bay and Lake Ontario or within 300 feet of the shore, the channel, a
45.Editor's Note: The Water Surface Use Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 149-5 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-5
146:285
dock, pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored vessel in a
manner or at a speed that causes a wake that unreasonably
interferes with or endangers such dock, pier, raft or float or an
anchored or moored vessel but in no event at a speed exceeding
five miles per hour.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C(5) above, a vessel
engaged in waterskiing or other towed water sport activities shall
be permitted to exceed five miles per hour within 300 feet of shore,
the channel, a dock, bridge, pier, raft or float or an anchored or
moored vessel to enable a towed participant to take off or land.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vessel
competing in or practicing for a regatta or boat race over a
specified course held by a bona fide club or racing association,
provided that a permit has been issued for the same by the
authorized Town official and all provisions of this chapter have
been complied with.
D. Dredging.
(1) Dredging within the limits of Irondequoit Bay shall be regulated by
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No dredging hereinafter
shall be permitted in any Resource Protection Areas as identified
on the Irondequoit Bay Water Surface Use Map except for
maintenance dredging, which has been previously approved.
(2) The only area deemed appropriate for additional dredging is the
North Harbor Area. Dredging in the North Harbor Area should only
be considered with further biological and chemical analysis and
approval by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No permits for
dredging to accommodate new and/or expanded facilities should be
issued outside of the North Harbor Area.
E. Hazards to navigation; abandoned vessels.
(1) Any vessel which becomes a menace to navigation shall be
immediately removed by the owner. Failure on the owner's part to
remove such vessel shall result in its removal by the Town or its
designee. The cost of such removal shall be borne by the owner.
(2) Any vessel which sinks, grounds or otherwise becomes disabled or
incapable of navigation which does not pose an immediate threat to
navigation on the Bay shall be removed or restored to navigable
condition by the owner upon written notice from the Town, which
notice shall be sent by registered mail to the vessel's owner. Failure
on the owner's part to remove such vessel shall result in its removal
by the Town or its designee. The cost of such removal shall be
borne by the owner.
§ 149-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-5
146:286
(3) In cases where the Town Board or its designated agent may direct
the removal or disposal of a vessel, the cost of removal, including
storage charges, shall attach to and shall become a lien upon the
vessel and be chargeable against the owner of the vessel. The
vessel may be sold upon direction of the court at a public auction to
defray expenses, and any surplus shall be returned to the owner of
record. The Town shall not be liable for any damage done to the
vessel during its removal, storage and sale.
(4) Unattended vessels shall not be moored or anchored overnight in
Irondequoit Bay without registering the vessel with the Town.
Vessels moored or anchored overnight without registration may be
impounded by the Town. The owner shall be liable for payment of
overnight fees, if applicable, along with expenses for its removal
and storage. The Town shall not be liable for damage done to
impounded vessels during their removal and storage.
(5) Waterfront and shore protection structures shall be maintained and
repaired as necessary and must not pose a threat to shoreline
erosion, boating and public safety.
F. Marine maintenance and environmental protection.
(1) Sanitary equipment aboard a vessel must meet the applicable
standards established by the appropriate federal, state and local
agencies.
(2) Marina operators shall not discharge any pollutant, such as from
boat washing, power washing, painting and other maintenance
activities, to surface waters or groundwaters of the state without a
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit.
(3) Best management practices shall be followed by in-water and
waterfront activities, including but not limited to use of contained
work areas to reduce residuals (e.g., sanding residue, solvents,
oils); source controls (e.g., sander vacuums); use of swales around
parking areas to contain runoff and facilitate percolation and
filtering; use of pervious materials in the upland areas; adequate
receptacles for disposal and recycling of solid waste; holding tanks
or dry wells to capture first flush runoff; disposal of fish waste;
proper on-site storage and disposal techniques for waste fuel and
used oil, spent solvents and antifreeze and signage directing users
to the disposal areas; petroleum control techniques, including the
installation of fuel/air separators on all vessels and the use of oilabsorbent
bilge pads; minimizing the use of cleaners (teak
cleaners, fiberglass polish, detergents) and bottom paints, cleaning
outside the water, and use of phosphate-free and biodegradable
cleaning compounds.
(4) Fueling stations shall be located where spills can be contained in a
limited area; spill contingency plans are in place for storage and
§ 149-5 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-5
146:287
fueling dispensation areas; and spill containment equipment is
readily accessible in a nearby locker.
G. Waterskiing.
(1) No person shall ride on water skis or similar device, or use or
operate a vessel to tow a person thereon, within the designated
harbor areas or the navigation channel.
(2) Water-skiers in other areas of the Bay shall comply with the
provisions of the New York State Navigation Law.
H. Personal watercraft.
(1) All operators shall obtain the necessary training and certification
prior to operating any personal watercrafts.
(2) All operators and riders of personal watercraft shall wear a United
States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device.
(3) No operators of personal watercraft shall:
(a) Operate said apparatus in such a manner so as to become
airborne or completely leave the water while crossing the wake
of another vessel (wake-jumping).
(b) Operate in any manner or at any speed which is reckless,
unsafe or hazardous to public safety, giving due regard to
visibility, traffic density, state of wind, water and current,
proximity of other craft, operators and water users, and
proximity of navigational hazards.
(c) Tow any water-skier, raft or other non-motorized vehicle,
unless the personal watercraft accommodates three people
and has an observer/spotter on board that is at least 10 years
of age.
I. Swimming/skin diving.
(1) No person shall skin dive or use self-contained underwater
breathing apparatus (SCUBA) in Irondequoit Bay unless a
regulation red diving flag is displayed in accordance with the
Navigation Law. No person shall allow or permit such diving flag to
remain in any area unless a person is skin diving in said area while
such flag is displayed.
(2) No person shall operate a vessel within 100 feet of any area marked
for skin diving by the placement of a regulation red diving flag.
J. Commercial activities. Any commercial use or activity operating on the
waters of Irondequoit Bay shall first receive a permit from the Town in
which the docking facilities accommodating such use are located. No
such use or activity shall be situated or conducted in a manner which
may interfere with the full use of channels and open water, nor shall any
§ 149-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-5
146:288
vessel engaged in such use or activity be moored or anchored within a
minimum of 50 feet of any dock or other vessel docking or launching
facilities.
K. Organized events. All organized events, such as winter festivals,
competitions, regattas, races or derbies, shall be permitted subject to
approval by the Town to minimize conflicts.
L. Vehicle use. No automobiles or trucks shall be permitted on the surface
of Irondequoit Bay at any time.
M. Use of bubbler/aeration systems.
(1) No bubbler/aeration system shall be installed, modified, enlarged
or repaired in Irondequoit Bay without first obtaining a permit for
such activity from the Town. Application for the said permit shall be
accompanied by a location plan and specifications of the proposed
installation, modification, enlargement or repair. The Town shall
review said application with the Harbor Management Committee
for the determination of its potential impacts. Upon a finding that
the proposed system will not create an adverse impact on the Bay
or surrounding property owners and other users in the area, the
Town may issue a permit subject to conditions and
recommendations set forth in the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan.
(2) Bubblers involving construction of any type of base shall be subject
to approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the
NYSDEC.
(3) All bubblers installed in Irondequoit Bay shall be accompanied by
signs reading "CAUTION: THIN ICE" during the winter season.
Said signs shall be visible at a distance of at least 100 feet from the
affected area.
N. Operation of aircraft. Operation of aircraft within the Irondequoit Bay
area shall comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and
Town regulations pertaining to the construction of landside support
facilities.
O. Marine sanitation devices. Any vessel with an approved Marine
Sanitation Device or waste holding tank shall comply with all applicable
sanitary codes.
P. Decorative/recreational structures and devices. It shall be hereby
deemed unlawful to install anchored fountains, water slides, ski jumps,
trampolines, driving ranges or other decorative/recreational structural
devices within the waters of Irondequoit Bay.
Q. Aquatic vegetation control. The installation of any bottom barriers, use
of weed harvesters or use of aquatic pesticides within the waters of
§ 149-5 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-5
146:289
§ 149-6. Ancillary uses.
Irondequoit Bay shall be subject to review by the NYSDEC and may
require a permit.
A. Dry boat storage. Dry boat storage or "ramped boat storage" shall only
be permitted in cases where the site is able to accommodate proposed
storage structures, adequate parking facilities and launching areas. Dry
boat storage can take the place of or be combined with wet storage, but
the total shall not exceed the number of permitted slips on any given
site established by the Town of Irondequoit Dock Ordinance.
B. Tree topping/removal.
(1) Removal or topping of trees within the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan boundary area shall be prohibited unless it is
demonstrated that such activity is to be undertaken to protect the
safety of the property owner or structures on said property.
(2) Upon a finding by the authorized Town official that said activity is
necessary, the property owner shall apply for and obtain an
Environmental Protection Overlay District (EPOD) permit and
demonstrate compliance with the conditions of said permit prior to
commencement of the activity.
C. Marine pump-out facilities. Pump-out facilities shall be subject to
permit requirements of the Monroe County Department of Health and
the Town of Irondequoit. Said facilities shall be sited only at marina
facilities. All such facilities must adequately demonstrate access to a
sanitary sewer or storage tank and have adequate landside
accommodations to maintain the pump-out. Temporary storage tanks
must be emptied by a NYSDEC-permitted waste hauler and maintained
by the property owner/operator.
D. Hunting. Hunting activities shall comply with the regulations identified
in the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
Hunting and Trapping Regulations Guide shall apply on Irondequoit
Bay within the limits of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 149-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-6
146:290
ARTICLE III
Docking, Boat Storage and Moorings
§ 149-7. Boat storage facilities: general provisions.
§ 149-8. Standards for boat storage facilities.
A. For the purposes of this article, docks, moorings and dry storage are all
considered the same in establishing the amount of permitted boat
storage on a parcel.
B. Boat storage shall be permitted only as an accessory use to the
principal permitted use of a property. Rail systems and boat hoists shall
be considered accessory uses to docks and moorings. No dock in any
residential zoning district shall be utilized for commercial purposes.
C. No vessel or float shall be so docked, moored or anchored so that it at
any time rests within any channel or fairway, interferes with the full use
of such channel or fairway or obstructs navigational aids and signage.
D. No vessel or float shall be moored or anchored so that it interferes with
access to an adjoining or nearby property.
E. No boat shall be docked, hoisted or moored within 10 feet of an
adjoining property line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the
shoreline. No accessory structure supporting water-dependent uses
shall be permitted within 10 feet of an adjoining property line.
F. No person shall moor or secure a vessel or float at a public dock or
mooring located in Irondequoit Bay without first obtaining a permit
from the authorized Town official and/or any other appropriate agency
having jurisdiction.
G. No dredging shall be permitted within any area of the Bay, with the
exception of the North Harbor Area, to accommodate the installation of
new docks, moorings or dry storage facilities.
H. No person shall place a mooring or float in the territorial waters of the
Town without the consent of the authorized Town official and obtaining
a permit from the Town Clerk.
I. Rafting at a public dock or mooring is prohibited unless expressly
allowed by the authorized Town official.
J. The Planning Board shall have the authority of site plan review to
approve placement of multiple berths (wet and dry) in or adjacent to
Irondequoit Bay.
A. Resource protection areas. Boat storage is incompatible with Resource
Protection Areas and shall be restricted in such areas. If permitted,
dock and mooring development in Resource Protection Areas shall be
limited based on its proximity to significant habitat areas and its
potential impact on such environmental features. Each parcel within
§ 149-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-8
146:291
Resource Protection Areas, regardless of parcel use, may be permitted
to have a maximum of one dock or one mooring.
(1) Standards for docks.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a dock permit in these areas, the
applicant shall be responsible for identifying other reasonable
alternatives such as mooring offshore with minimal shoreline
development or access to nearby off-site docking facilities.
(b) In no case shall any dock in such areas extend offshore more
than 50 feet and exceed a maximum of 200 square feet in area.
(c) No commercial docking or marina activity shall be permitted in
Resource Protection Areas.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the property
line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the shoreline.
(b) A mooring shall only be placed in water that is at least eight
feet deep but no more than 30 feet deep throughout the
boating season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a Special Anchorage Area as
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate, retrievable,
device, as approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Dry storage facilities. Dry storage structures shall not be permitted
in Resource Protection Areas.
B. Near Shore Areas. Near Shore Areas are designated on the Water
Surface Use Map and extend 300 feet from the shore.
(1) Standards for docks.
(a) In cases where environmental constraints exist or landside
support is inadequate, alternative options for riparian access
should be explored. This may include shared docking facilities,
mooring offshore with minimal shoreline development, or
access to nearby off-site dock facilities.
§ 149-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-8
146:292
(b) Each single-family residentially zoned parcel within Near
Shore Areas may be permitted to have a maximum of one dock
or one mooring. Docks shall not extend offshore more than 50
feet and exceed a maximum of 200 square feet in area.
(c) Docks serving multifamily sites.
[1] The number of docks serving multifamily residential sites
shall be limited based on the linear feet of shoreline
contained within the parcel. The calculations to determine
the maximum number of boats stored on a multifamily
parcel shall be based on the length of shoreline as follows:
Linear Feet Number of Docks or Boats
0 to 100 1 dock or 2 boats
101 to 250 2 docks or 4 boats
251 to 500 3 docks or 6 boats
Greater than 500 1 dock or 2 boats per 150 linear
feet
[2] The dock structure associated with multifamily parcels
shall not extend offshore more than 200 feet and not
exceed 200 square feet for the first dock plus 50 square
feet for each additional dock. If adequate water depth is
not found within 200 feet of the shoreline, alternative
docking/boat storage options shall be explored.
(d) No new commercial boat storage (including dry storage) shall
be allowed in Near Shore Areas.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the extension of
the property line.
(b) A mooring shall be placed in water that is at least eight feet
and no more than 30 feet deep throughout the boating season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a Special Anchorage Area
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
§ 149-8 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-8
146:293
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate device as
approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Dry storage facilities.
(a) Dry storage structures shall not be permitted in Near Shore
Areas.
C. Harbor areas. Harbor areas are established within the Irondequoit Bay
to provide public access, safe refuge, transient berthing and
commercial marina activities. Harbor areas meet three primary
locational criteria, including water depth, Waterfront Development
District zoning and landside support (at least 0.8 parking spaces per
wet or dry berth).
(1) Standards for public and private docks.
(a) In cases where environmental constraints exist or landside
support is inadequate, alternative options for riparian access
should be explored. This may include shared docking facilities,
dry storage facilities or mooring offshore with minimal
shoreline development.
(b) Docking in harbor areas shall be limited as set forth in Article
III, § 149-8C(4), of this chapter.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the property
line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the shoreline.
(b) A mooring shall be placed in water that is at least eight feet
and no more than 30 feet deep throughout the boating season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a Special Anchorage Area as
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate, retrievable
device, as approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Standards for dry storage facilities.
(a) Dry storage structures may be permitted in the Harbor Areas
where wet storage facilities are inappropriate or where such
§ 149-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-8
146:294
§ 149-9. Public and private docks and moorings; permit procedures;
floats and rafts.
facilities would cause significant impact upon natural
resources.
(b) Dry storage structures may be combined with wet storage
facilities; however, the total number of slips for a specific
harbor area shall not exceed the maximum number set forth in
Subsection C(4) of this section.
(c) Dry storage structures must be designed to be compatible with
and not a visual nuisance to the surroundings or adversely
affect access to property or views from adjoining parcels.
Location and design of all dry storage structures shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board.
(4) Boat storage limitations.
(a) North Harbor.
[1] The North Harbor includes the outlet channel and water
surface area on either side of the channel at the north end
of the Bay. The regulated docking capacity for the North
Harbor Area is a total of 414 berths, which may include
transient docks, seasonal docks, permanent moorings and
dry storage. The location and number of berths to be
permitted at any individual site within this area shall be
dependent upon available landside support facilities and
water surface area.
[2] The North Harbor Area has a Special Anchorage Area
established within it to provide a formal location for
anchoring vessels. This Special Anchorage Area is
designated on the Water Surface Use Map. Water surface
uses allowed within the Special Anchorage Area include
transient anchorage. The authorized Town official shall be
responsible for managing the Special Anchorage Areas
within the Town and assigning permits.
(b) Center Harbor. The Center Harbor Area is located on the west
side of Irondequoit Bay south of the Route 104 bridge,
including the Newport Marina. Any additional berths in this
area shall be contingent on providing additional landside
support. The regulated capacity for the Center Harbor Area is
a total of 217 boats.
A. Public docks and moorings: general provisions.
(1) The Town Board may establish, by resolution, rules and regulations
for the operation of the docks, moorings and marine facilities under
§ 149-8 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-9
146:295
its jurisdiction. Such rules shall be posted at the Town Hall and at
the Town docks.
(2) The Town Board may, from time to time, establish, by resolution,
administrative fees for the transient and seasonal use of Town
facilities.
(3) Applicants utilizing Town facilities shall hold the Town harmless
from any and all liability, including counsel fees, costs and
disbursements, resulting from operation or dockage of the vessel or
the use of the Town facilities by the vessel, owner or crew.
(4) All fastenings to any docks and moorings of the Town shall be done
in a seamanlike manner as determined by and subject to periodic
inspection by the Town.
(5) No commercial, ancillary activities or services shall be allowed on
public docks without issuance of a special use permit by the Town
of Irondequoit.
B. Public docks.
(1) The authorized Town official shall designate and assign available
transient berthing space for vessels at the public docks upon
payment of the required fee. Space shall not be occupied without
paying the required fee.
(2) The authorized Town official may also assign seasonal, temporary
or interim accommodations for the docking of visiting commercial
vessels at these docks upon payment of the required fee.
Applications for such accommodation shall be made in writing to
the authorized Town official.
(3) The authorized Town official shall post all docking regulations and
safety procedures and other appropriate information to assure safe
use of the Bay.
(4) All vessels shall be berthed under the supervision and direction of
the authorized Town official. Failure by a captain to act in response
to directives of the authorized Town official shall result in the loss
of privileges without reimbursement of fees and other penalties as
may apply.
(5) Except in the case of emergency or as otherwise approved by the
Town, maximum stay at the docks shall be limited to 72 hours for
recreational pleasure craft. In cases where vessels must overstay
this limit because of unsafe or disabling conditions, the vessel
owner must promptly notify the authorized Town official. The
authorized Town official may then waive the limit and impose
additional fees as may be reasonable given the circumstances.
§ 149-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-9
146:296
(6) All vessels must be operated and secured in a safe and protective
manner. The Town assumes no liability for damage to craft or injury
that may result from dockage at public docks.
(7) No rafting is permitted at public docks unless expressly allowed by
the authorized Town official.
C. Public moorings.
(1) Use and assignment of moorings shall be supervised by the
authorized Town official. Seasonal moorings shall be occupied only
upon the submission and approval of an application and the
issuance of a permit.
(2) Mooring application forms shall be available through the office of
the Town Clerk. Annual applications may be submitted no earlier
than January 1 of each year with the appropriate fee, established by
the Town Board.
(3) When an applicant has been approved for a mooring, the
authorized Town official shall assign a mooring and mooring
registration number. A seasonal mooring permit shall be valid for
only the stated vessel at a designated mooring, from the date of
issue to December 31 of that year.
(4) The mooring float shall be marked by the Town with the mooring
registration numbers in black lettering four inches high, minimum.
(5) Relocating moorings shall be prohibited without prior approval of
the authorized Town official.
(6) A permit holder shall be deemed to have forfeited the registered
mooring by refusing the grant of a mooring permit when offered or
not occupying the mooring by the permitted vessel for a period of
one month from the grant date unless approval has otherwise been
granted by the authorized Town official.
(7) Only one mooring per person shall be permitted, and the permit for
said mooring shall be nontransferable.
(8) If a permit holder is temporarily without a vessel, the permit holder
may apply to the authorized Town official to retain that mooring
permit for a designated period of time.
(9) If mooring space is not available, the applicant's name will be
added to a waiting list upon request. The list shall be maintained in
the office of the Town Clerk and made available upon request. It
shall contain the names of persons who applied for a mooring, the
date of application, the area in which such space is desired, and the
size of the vessel. The waiting list shall be maintained in the order
of the date of application (month, day, year). To maintain a place on
the waiting list, applicants must reapply on an annual basis.
§ 149-9 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-9
146:297
(10) All moorings in the mooring field shall be available to transient
vessels. Transient mooring floats will be distinctly marked. No
transient mooring shall be occupied for a period longer than 48
hours, unless expressly allowed by the authorized Town official.
(11) Overnight transient moorings, beginning at 12:00 noon each day,
shall be available from the authorized Town official after payment
of the appropriate fee.
D. Private docks.
(1) All docks are considered accessory structures and uses and there
must be a principal use on the site to accommodate them.
(2) No building permit for a private dock shall be issued unless a
NYSDEC Article 15 and/or 24 permit and an Article 404 permit
from USACE has been issued.
(3) Review of permit applications for all docks shall take into account
the specific areas, as identified on the Water Surface Use Map, in
which they are being installed, proximity to adjacent property lines,
impact on unique environmental features, depth of water and
landside support.
(4) Dredging for dock installation and subsequent maintenance
dredging is discouraged in all cases; however, dredging may be
permitted in the harbor areas or where a preexisting,
nonconforming condition occurs, as identified in the Harbor
Management Plan.
(5) The authorized Town official will inspect the dock upon its
completion to insure safety standards and compliance with all
permit conditions.
(6) No dock shall be used for commercial purposes unless approved by
the Town as a marina activity. Leasing or rental of private
residential docks is prohibited.
(7) The authorized Town official shall keep an updated inventory of all
docks.
E. Private moorings.
(1) All private moorings outside of the harbor area shall be accessory
to the principal land use.
(2) A private mooring shall not be installed into the waters of
Irondequoit Bay unless a Town permit and applicable NYSDEC and
USACE permits have been issued.
(3) Issuance of permits for all moorings shall take into account safety,
day and night navigation, water depth, bottom conditions, tackle,
access and compliance and consistency with the Irondequoit Bay
§ 149-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-9
146:298
Harbor Management Plan. No moored vessel shall be situated in
a manner which may interfere with the full use of channels and
open water, nor shall any vessel be moored or anchored within a
minimum of 50 feet of any dock, pier or other vessel docking or
launching facilities.
(4) All moorings must have the tackle and anchor inspected by the
authorized Town official prior to their setting.
(5) Every permittee shall be required to maintain the mooring in a safe
condition. Any chain, shackle, swivel or other tackle which has
become warped or worn by 1/3 of its normal diameter shall be
replaced. Failure to maintain a safe mooring shall be cause for
revocation of the mooring permit and shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. The authorized Town official may inspect moorings at
any time to determine compliance with this section.
(6) All moorings shall be inspected every three years by a qualified
third-party inspector. Said inspector shall certify that the mooring
is properly installed subject to the requirements of the U.S. Coast
Guard.
(7) All costs of any mooring inspection required under the provisions of
this chapter shall be borne by the mooring owner.
(8) The authorized Town official shall keep a detailed record of all
private moorings. This record shall include the mooring location
and number, information from the mooring permit application, the
date the mooring was set, and any other information deemed
necessary by the Harbor Management Committee, and the location
of docks, floats and moorings plotted on a map showing the location
of all moorings within the Bay.
(9) Leasing or rental of private moorings shall be prohibited.
(10) The authorized Town official shall have authority, for reasons of
safety, to direct and order that the location, position or tackle of
moorings be changed or use suspended in periods of storm
conditions. The authorized Town official shall give notice to the
owner or operator of the vessel using such mooring, and
compliance shall be required immediately in such circumstances.
Failure to comply with such direction or order of the authorized
Town official by any person shall be a violation of this chapter,
subject to the appropriate penalty.
(11) The owner of a mooring shall be responsible for winterizing the
mooring to insure that it is not damaged or moved by ice or other
weather-related events.
F. Floats/rafts. No new floats or rafts shall be allowed on the waters of
Irondequoit Bay.
§ 149-9 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-9
146:299

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Penalties for Offenses
§ 149-10. Enforcing authority.
§ 149-11. Violations; permit and fee required; notice; expenses.
A. The U.S. Coast Guard, New York State Police, New York State
Environmental Conservation Police, New York State Park Police, the
Monroe County Sheriff's Office and local police shall be empowered to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Every person in charge of a
vessel must at all times obey the lawful orders of the enforcement
officer.
B. The Town Board shall issue application forms, permit forms, mooring
tackle standards and otherwise promulgate such forms, fee schedules
and information as may be necessary for the administration of this
chapter.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to refuse to move or
stop on oral command or order of the authorized Town official and
enforcement officers exercising the duties lawfully assigned to them.
B. No person shall tie to or berth a vessel at a Town-operated dock or
bulkhead unless the determined user fee has been paid to the Town and
a permit obtained for use and occupancy of such space by such vessel.
C. Any person who fails to move such vessel when ordered by the
authorized Town official, or any other lawful enforcing authority, shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate and additional
violation.
D. Any vessel or float moored or anchored in violation of any part of this
chapter shall be removed by the owner or person in charge thereof
upon written notice from the authorized Town official. If a vessel or float
is not removed after the authorized Town official provides written
notice to its owner, that vessel or float may be removed by the Town.
Such notice shall be served by mail upon the owner of the vessel or float
at the last known address of the owner.
E. All expenses incurred by the Town in removing a vessel, mooring or
float, including any reasonable attorney fees, shall be borne by the
owner of the vessel or float, and the Town may enforce that obligation
by a civil action. Any such expenses shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any penalties as may be prescribed by and imposed under this
chapter or under any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation
of the Town.
F. Violations shall subject the violator to the penalties imposed by
§ 149-14 of this chapter. Said penalties shall include but are not limited
§ 149-10 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-11
146:301
§ 149-12. Preexisting nonconformance.
Any preexisting nonconforming use of land or structure shall comply with
Chapter 23546 of the Code pertaining to such use of land or structure.
§ 149-13. Appeals.
§ 149-14. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as may be limited by the laws of the State of New York,
a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by not more
than 15 days incarceration or a fine of $250 for each violation. Each day of
violation shall be deemed a new violation and shall be treated accordingly.
to immediate revocation of permit, fine or imprisonment or any
combination thereof.
A. Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results
inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter may be the result
from the application of the provisions thereof, variances may be
granted as provided in this section. Any variance granted shall be
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting a variance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions to protect the best
interest of the surrounding property, the neighborhood, or the Town as
a whole.
B. The criteria for granting variances shall be consistent with Chapter 235
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
C. An individual may appeal the decision of the authorized Town official to
deny or revoke a permit to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30
calendar days of receipt of notice of denial/revocation. Such an appeal
shall be made by filing with the authorized Town official a written form
obtained from the Town Clerk stating the appellant's arguments and
setting forth specifically the questions of procedure, fact, law or policy
to which exceptions are taken or identifying that part of the authorized
Town official's decision and order to which objection is made. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon receipt of an appeal of revocation,
at its discretion, stay the effective date of the authorized Town official's
decision.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in making its findings for determination,
shall maintain consistency with the goals of the Harbor Management
Plan and the regulations of the Harbor Management Law.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 149-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-14
146:302
ARTICLE V
Severability; Construal of Provisions
§ 149-15. Severability; construal of provisions.
A. The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and
if any section, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall for any reason be
held to be invalid, ineffective, in conflict with regulations of the federal
and state authorities or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining provisions hereof, and such provisions
shall remain in full force and effect.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the Town or
the county from continuing, adopting or enacting any other local laws,
resolutions or ordinances related to persons operating a vessel within
its limits; however, no such municipality shall have the power to make
less restrictive any of such provisions.
§ 149-15 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-15
146:303
Chapter 157
MORATORIUMS
§ 149-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 149-15
157:304
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)47
47.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, adopted 7-15-1997
by L.L. No. 5-1997, expired 120 days from its effective date.
MORATORIUMS § 149-15
157:305
Chapter 160
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 79, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 164.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 167.
Operation of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 160-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known the as "Noise Ordinance of the Town of
Irondequoit."
§ 160-2. Findings; intent.
§ 160-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A SCALE — The measurement of sound approximating the auditory
sensitivity of the human ear as measured with a sound-level meter using the
A-weighing network. The unit of measurement is the dB(A).
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — The use, operation or maintenance of any
sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business or
any goods or any services or for the purpose of attracting the attention of
A. The Town Board has determined that the making and creating of
excessive noise within the limits of the Town of Irondequoit is a
condition that has existed for some time and such noise is increasing.
Noise on streets, sidewalks, public parks or places and residential
neighborhoods is most likely to interfere with the peace and quiet of the
inhabitants of the Town and to injure human and animal life, property
values and business. Schools, churches, courts, hospitals, nursing
homes and homes for the aged are places where special precaution
must be taken in order to ensure their proper functioning.
B. The Town Board hereby intends to promote and assure an environment
free from noise which threatens or affects the well-being of the
inhabitants of the Town; to protect, promote and preserve the public
health, safety and welfare by reducing and otherwise regulating noise
levels to promote the use and enjoyment of property; to protect the
value of property; to protect the enjoyment of sleep, comfort and
repose; to promote commerce; and to protect and improve the quality of
life.
C. This chapter shall be liberally construed to provide an effective noise
control program.
§ 149-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 160-3
160:306
the public to or advertising for or soliciting patronage or customers to or
for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event or for the
purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment.
CONSTRUCTION — Any or all activity, except tunneling, necessary or
incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing of
equipment of buildings, public or private highways, roads, premises, parks,
utility lines (including such lines in already-constructed tunnels) or
property, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
DECIBEL — The unit of sound measurement, on a logarithmic scale, of
the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a standard
reference pressure which for the purpose of this chapter shall be 0.002
microbar.
EMERGENCY — A public calamity or an exposure of any person or property
to imminent danger.
EMERGENCY SIGNAL DEVICE — Any gong, siren, whistle, air horn or
similar device, the use of which on emergency vehicles is permitted by
Subdivision 26 of § 375 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound which endangers or injures the safety or
health of humans or animals or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivity or endangers or injures personal or real property.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn, which is propelled by any
power other than muscular power, except vehicles which run only upon rails
or tracks. This definition shall include but not be limited to trucks, buses,
automobiles, vans, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motor scooters, dune
buggies, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, minibikes, trail bikes
and all other types of motorized recreational vehicles.
NOISE — Any erratic, intermittent, statistically random oscillation or
unwanted sound.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE — The use, operation or maintenance of any
sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. "Noncommercial
purpose" shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic,
political, patriotic and charitable purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, corporation, association,
firm, organization, governmental agency, administration or department or
any other group of individuals or any officer or employee thereof.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Soundamplifying
equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when
used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile
radio is installed. "Sound-amplifying equipment," as used in this chapter,
shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or
horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
§ 160-3 NOISE § 160-3
160:307
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICE — A device intended primarily for the
production or reproduction of sound, including but not limited to any radio
receiver, television receiver, tape recorder, musical instrument, phonograph
or sound-amplifying system.
SOUND TRUCK — Any motor vehicle or any other vehicle, regardless of
motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or
attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.
§ 160-4. Excessive noise prohibited.
§ 160-5. Sound-reproduction devices for commercial purpose.
No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any soundreproduction
device for commercial or business advertising purposes or
for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale
or display of merchandise in connection with any commercial or business
enterprise, including those engaged in the sale of radios, television sets,
phonographs, tape recorders, phonograph records or tapes, in front or
outside of any building, place or premises or in or through any aperture of
such building, place or premises abutting on or adjacent to a public street,
park or place or in or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or on
any public street, park or place where the sound therefrom may be heard
upon any public street, park or place or from any stand, platform or other
structure or from any airplane or other device used for flying, flying over
A. No person shall make, continue or cause or permit to be made or
continued any excessive noise.
B. Standards to be considered in determining whether excessive noise
exists in a given situation include but are not limited to the following:
(1) The volume of the noise.
(2) The intensity of the noise.
(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
(4) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
(5) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
(6) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
(7) The density of inhabitation of the area which the noise emanates.
(8) The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
(9) The duration of the noise.
(10) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
(11) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
§ 160-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 160-5
160:308
the Town or on a boat or on the waters within the jurisdiction of the Town
or anywhere on the public streets, parks or places; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall prohibit vehicles from which ice cream products
and similar products are sold from being equipped with a bell not exceeding
three inches in diameter or a set of up to four such bells, nor prohibit the
use thereof by the driver of such vehicle, provided that no such bell or set of
bells shall be capable of being heard from a distance greater than 400 feet;
provided, further, than no such bells shall be used for any purpose between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. nor be used as an ordinary warning
signal at any time.
§ 160-6. Sound reproduction devices used for miscellaneous
purposes. [Added 5-15-2001 by L.L. No. 5-200148]
A. No person shall use or operate or permit to be used or operated any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or other machine or
device for the producing or amplification of sound with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who
are voluntary listeners thereto. It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section if sound emanating from such machine or
device is:
(1) Audible beyond the property line of the premises upon which it is
being used between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(2) Audible at a distance of 50 feet beyond the property line of the
premises upon which it is being used between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(3) Audible at a distance of 50 feet from such machine or device if
operated from within a motor vehicle on a public street.
(4) Audible at a distance of 50 feet from such machine or device when
operated in a public park or other public place.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Funeral procession or use of such devices by a church.
(2) The production of music in connection with any parade authorized
under any provision of law.
(3) Any musical performance upon a public place where a permit has
been obtained from the Town Clerk of the Town of Irondequoit for
such purpose.
(4) The use of amplifiers or other sound-producing instruments or
equipment in connection with any religious or political activity or
any permitted athletic competition or recreational event held on
athletic fields, stadiums or public places in the Town.
48.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 160-6 through 160-8 as 160-7
through 160-9, respectively.
§ 160-5 NOISE § 160-6
160:309
§ 160-7. Public transportation.
No person shall operate or use any radio, musical instrument, television,
phonograph or other machine or device in or on any bus or public means of
conveyance, other than taxicabs, in such manner that the sound emanating
from such sound-reproduction device is audible to another person.
§ 160-8. Vehicle signal devices.
No person shall cause the sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle, except as a danger
warning.
§ 160-9. Emergency signal devices.49
No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any
emergency signal device, except:
§ 160-10. Construction activities.
C. Any motor vehicle used in connection with the commission of a violation
of this section shall be subject to towing and its associated fines.
A. On an emergency vehicle when such vehicle is in the immediate act of
responding to an emergency;
B. To give notice as a warning of an emergency; or
C. In order to reasonably test such device.
A. No person shall engage in or permit any person to be engaged in
construction activities which create excessive noise at the property
limits of the construction site between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one
day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day on any day of the week, except as
is permitted in Subsections B and C hereof.
B. Following the receipt of a written application for a variance from the
requirements of Subsection A, the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall, within a reasonable time, grant a
variance authorizing such construction activities for an initial period
not to exceed 14 calendar days, upon a showing that the public health
and safety and/or welfare necessitates said variance. The Commissioner
shall set any stipulations deemed necessary in the interest of the public
health, safety and/or welfare at the time of granting such a variance.
The applicant may apply for a renewal of such variance for periods of
time not exceeding 14 calendar days each, as long as the necessity
continues. Any such variance granted shall be clearly marked on the
application thereof and shall be prominently posted at the site of the
construction activities by the applicant.
49.Editor's Note: Former § 160-9, Motor vehicles, was repealed 5-15-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001.
See now § 160-6.
§ 160-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 160-10
160:310
§ 160-11. Disruption of certain institutions prohibited.
No person shall create or permit to be created any noise on any street,
sidewalk or public place or on private property adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use or adjacent
to any hospital, nursing home or home for the aged, which noise
unreasonably interferes with the working of such school, institution of
learning, church or court or which disturbs or annoys patients in a hospital,
nursing home or home for the aged.
§ 160-12. Loading and unloading of boxes and containers.50
No person shall make or permit to be made excessive noise in connection
with loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening, unloading or
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
§ 160-13. Hawkers and peddlers.51
No person within the Town shall sell anything by outcry within any area
of the Town zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall
not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and
beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other
similar licensed public entertainment events.
§ 160-14. Drums and other instruments restricted.
No person shall use any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for
the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the Town.
This section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school
band or duly authorized parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized
to engage in such conduct.
C. In the case of an emergency, construction activities directly connected
with the abatement of such emergency may be undertaken without
obtaining a variance, for a period not to exceed 72 hours from the
commencement of such activities, during which time application for a
variance hereunder shall be made. In such an emergency, construction
activities shall not continue after the seventy-two-hour period unless
prior to the expiration of that period at least verbal approval is issued
by the Commissioner or his or her authorized subordinates to continue
such activities and unless written confirmation of such verbal approval
is issued within four hours following the start of the next normal
business day of the Department of Public Works. Approval or
confirmation shall not be withheld unreasonably.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 160-12, Distance restrictions, was repealed 9-25-2001 by L.L. No.
18-2001. This local law also provided for the redesignation of §§ 160-13 through 160-21 as
§§ 160-12 through 160-20, respectively.
51.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 167, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 160-10 NOISE § 160-15
160:311
§ 160-15. Machinery, equipment, fans and air-conditioning
apparatus.
No person shall operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, airconditioning
apparatus, lawn mower or similar mechanical device which
creates excessive noise at the property line of the premises upon which it is
used between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 160-16. Vehicle repairs.
No person shall, within any residential area of the Town, repair, rebuild or
test any motor vehicle so as to create excessive noise at the property line
of the premises upon which such motor vehicle is being repaired, rebuilt or
tested between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 160-17. Animals.
No person shall keep or permit the keeping of any animal or bird which
makes excessive noise.
§ 160-18. Amplification equipment; registration; fees.
A. Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than
personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use
or operate within the Town a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying
equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound
truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or
assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park,
place or public property without first filing a registration statement and
obtaining approval thereof as set forth in this section. A permit issued
pursuant to this section may provide for a waiver of other requirements
of this chapter.
B. Registration requirements and duties.
(1) Registration statements: filing. Every user of sound-amplifying
equipment shall file a registration statement with the Town Clerk at
least five days prior to the date on which the sound-amplifying
equipment is intended to be used. Whenever necessary, the Town
Clerk shall process the statement as expeditiously as possible. The
statement shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of both the owner
and user of the sound-amplifying equipment.
(b) The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying
equipment, which shall include the wattage to be used, the
volume in decibels of sound which will be produced and the
approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the
sound-amplifying equipment;
§ 160-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 160-18
160:312
(c) The license number if a sound truck is to be used;
(d) A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment
which is to be used; and
(e) Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for
commercial or noncommercial purposes.
(2) Registration statements: approval. The Town Clerk shall return to
the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration
statement unless it is found that:
(a) The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that in
the opinion of the Chief of Police, use of the equipment would
constitute a detriment to traffic safety;
(b) The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that in the
opinion of the Chief of Police use of the equipment would
constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or
(c) The registration statement reveals that the applicant would not
be able to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Registration statement: disapproval. In the event that the
registration statement is disapproved, the Town Clerk shall
endorse upon the statement the reasons for disapproval and return
it forthwith to applicant. The applicant may within five days
thereafter appeal to the Town Board, who may either approve or
disapprove the application.
C. Fees. Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee
established pursuant to § 1-18 for each day or any portion thereof shall
be paid to the Town if the loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment
is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee shall be required for the
operation of loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment for
noncommercial purposes. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
D. Regulations. The commercial and noncommercial use of soundamplifying
equipment shall be subject to the following regulation:
(1) The only sounds permitted should be either music or human
speech, or both.
(2) The operation of sound-amplifying equipment shall only occur
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day, except on
Sundays and legal holidays. No operation of sound-amplifying
equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on Sundays
or legal holidays. The operation of sound-amplifying equipment for
noncommercial purposes on Sundays and legal holidays shall only
occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 160-18 NOISE § 160-18
160:313
§ 160-19. Penalties.
§ 160-20. Administration and enforcement.
Chapter 164
TOWN PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 79.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 167.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Swimming — See Ch. 206.
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town Property Ordinance."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of real property owned,
leased, used or occupied by the Town of Irondequoit and in particular but
not limited to recreation sites throughout the Town, including all parking
areas adjacent thereto, all for preserving the public peace, good order and
safety of the Town.
(3) No sound emanating from the sound-amplifying equipment shall
exceed 15 dB(A) above the ambient as measured at any property
line.
(4) It shall be unlawful to operate any sound-amplifying equipment
within 200 feet of churches, schools or hospitals except when said
equipment is being operated by such churches, schools or
hospitals.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
Class B violation, punishable as provided in § 1-16.
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police
unless provision is made otherwise herein.
B. The Chief of Police shall develop and promulgate measurement
standards, testing methods and procedures to provide for the effective
implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 160-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 164-3
160:314
§ 164-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter also apply to beaches which are subject to the
provisions of Chapter 206, Swimming.
§ 164-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Includes all beverages as defined in the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, cup or similar receptacle suitable for
or used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:
TOWN PROPERTY — Includes not only real property to which the Town of
Irondequoit has fee title, but also all real property leased, used or occupied
by the Town of Irondequoit, including all parking areas adjacent thereto.
§ 164-5. Hours of use.
No person shall use Town property between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless
otherwise posted or authorized, in writing, by the Commissioner of Public
Works or his or her designee.
§ 164-6. Regulations.
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands.
C.
A. Loitering. No person shall, within the hours during which use of Town
property is prohibited, except in an emergency, loiter on, congregate on
or use any portion of Town property.
B. Garbage and rubbish. The deposit of rubbish, garbage, paper, cans and
bottles on any Town property, except in receptacles provided for such
purpose, is prohibited.
C. Beverages. No person shall bring onto any Town property or have in his
or her possession thereon any liquor, beer or alcoholic beverage with
the intent to consume the same in any open or unsealed container,
except for lodges at Camp Eastman, the Octoberfest festival site, and
the beer garden at the July 4 celebration, or as otherwise approved by
the Commissioner of Public Works. Requests for approval for liquor,
beer, or alcoholic beverage consumption on Town property must be
submitted, in writing, to the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 164-3 NOISE § 164-6
160:315
§ 164-7. Establishment and designation of paid parking where
posted.
No parking shall be allowed in violation of any sign posted by the Town of
Irondequoit.
§ 164-8. Permits for organized sports.
D. Disorderly conduct. No person shall use profane language, engage in
lewd or licentious acts, engage in any sort of disorderly conduct
pursuant to Penal Law 240.20, as amended or changed, or otherwise
interfere with the orderly use of Town property by other persons.
E. Peddlers and vendors. Public vendors and peddlers shall be excluded
from Town property for purposes of selling or distributing any food, ice
cream or beverages unless otherwise authorized, in writing, by the
Commissioner of Public Works or his or her designee.
F. Dogs, cats and other household pets. No person shall bring into, have or
keep on Town property any dog, cat, household pets or other animal
destructive to wildlife, except dogs or cats are permitted if held in
control by a leash.
G. Golf. No golf practice or play is permitted on any Town property.
H. Skateboarding and rollerblading. All skateboarding and rollerblading is
prohibited on Town Hall campus.
I. Snow vehicles, ATVs and motorbikes. No person shall ride a snow
vehicle, ATV or motorbike upon the lawn on Town property.
J. Tobacco and related products. No person shall use any tobacco or
tobacco-related products, including cigarettes, vaporizers, or vape
pens, on Town property except in areas so designated by the
Commissioner of Public Works or his or her designee.
K. Firearms. No person, except peace officers of the Town or other law
enforcement officers, shall have, carry and/or discharge any pistol, gun,
fireworks of any kind or description, switchblade, hunting knife,
slingshot, bow and arrow, dagger, metal knuckles or other dangerous
weapon or instrument concealed on or about his or her person while on
Town property. This prohibition shall not apply to a Irondequoit Bow
Hunt Program participant during such time of approved participation
pursuant to Chapters 93 and 132 of the Town Code.
A. Unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner of Public Works or
his or her designee, permits for organized sports shall be for the period
from May 1 to November 30.
B. A person or persons with a permit to use a designated area of Town
property shall have priority to use such property, and all others must
immediately vacate such designated area.
§ 164-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 164-9
160:316
§ 164-9. Advertising.
The Town of Irondequoit may sell advertising on Town property or within
Town publications pursuant to Town Law § 64.
§ 164-10. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 165
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JEWELRY
AND COIN EXCHANGE DEALERS
§ 165-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board finds that:
§ 165-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTIQUES — Such items or collectibles recognized as such by established
dealer associations within the industry.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Town of Irondequoit Chief of Police or his/her
designee or representative.
JEWELRY — Articles composed (in whole or in part) of gold, silver, or other
precious metals, gems or gemstones which, as constructed, are designed to
be worn for personal adornment.
JEWELRY AND COIN EXCHANGE DEALER — Persons or business
establishments engaged in the business of sale, purchase, or exchange of
precious metals and/or jewelry for other objects of precious metal, jewelry,
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class C violation pursuant to § 1-16.
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of such chapter.
A. The creation of a Town-specific licensing and reporting program for
personal property acquired by pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and
jewelry and coin exchange dealers will curtail the distribution and
facilitate the recovery of stolen property in the Town of Irondequoit.
B. The establishment of such a licensing and reporting system to monitor
and track the transactions set forth in this chapter is necessary for the
protection of the citizens of the Town of Irondequoit and is reasonable
and appropriate for pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and jewelry and
coin exchange dealers.
§ 164-9 NOISE § 165-2
160:317
United States currency, bank drafts, other negotiable instruments as
defined in the Uniform Commercial Code or any other object or thing
of value within the Town of Irondequoit, including the sale, purchase, or
exchange of such goods from the Town of Irondequoit through Internet
commerce sites.
PAWNBROKER — Any person or business establishment which holds goods
as collateral on short-term, high-interest loans or a person who qualifies as
a "collateral loan broker" pursuant to § 52 of the New York General Business
Law.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, copper or coins, utensils, or
objects containing one or more of those metals.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE — Any article or object, with the exception of
clothing, books, that has previously been bought or sold at retail and/or
which has been previously used and/or is not in a new condition. This shall
include any "gift card" or other electronic payment device that is usable at
a single merchant or an affiliated group of merchants that share the same
name, mark, or logo, is issued in a specific amount, and may or may not
be increased in value or reloaded, or as otherwise defined in Article 26,
§ 396(1), or Article 13, § 1315, of the New York State General Business Law.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person or business establishment who
deals in the purchase, sale, exchange or pledge as security for a sum of
money of any secondhand article within the Town of Irondequoit, including
the purchase, sale, exchange or pledge as security for a sum of money for
or of such goods from the Town of Irondequoit through Internet commerce
sites.
§ 165-3. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry and
coin exchange dealer to purchase any articles, jewelry or precious
metals from any person whom such dealer knows to be or has reason to
believe to be under the age of 18 years.
B. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry
and coin exchange dealer to sell, dispose of, destroy, alter or remove
from such dealer's premises any articles, jewelry or precious metals
until the expiration of 14 calendar days after the electronic reporting by
such dealer of any such articles, jewelry or precious metals.
C. When requested to do so by the Chief of Police in connection with a law
enforcement investigation, it shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer or jewelry and coin exchange dealer to sell, dispose
of, destroy, alter or remove from such dealer's premises any articles,
jewelry or precious metals until the expiration of 30 calendar days from
the date of the request. Upon the written request of the Chief of Police,
the property shall be held for up to two additional thirty-day periods.
§ 165-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 165-3
160:318
§ 165-4. Licensing.
D. Dealers shall not employ any person who has been convicted within
three years of any felony related to the operation of a business or who
has had a dealer's license revoked or denied within the past year.
E. No dealer shall permit his or her place of business to remain open for
the transaction of business any time except between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
A. Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and jewelry and coin exchange
dealer operating within the Town of Irondequoit is required to be
licensed according to this chapter. The Chief of Police shall be the
licensing authority authorized to issue licenses for pawnbrokers,
secondhand dealers and jewelry and coin exchange dealers.
B. Licenses shall expire annually on December 31 after date of issuance.
C. The initial fee for the first issuance of a license to every pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer or jewelry and coin exchange dealer shall be $250.
The annual fee thereafter shall be $150. There shall be a fee of $10 for
replacement of a lost license.
D. An application for a pawnbroker's, secondhand dealer's or jewelry and
coin exchange dealer's license (hereinafter "dealer's license") shall be
made by the owner (or operator, if different from the owner) on forms
provided by and filed with the Town Clerk. The application shall include
relevant information relative to the owner or operator, the business to
be conducted at the premises, and the names and dates of birth of all
employees, meeting the following requirements:
(1) If a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry and coin exchange
dealer business, as defined above, employs over five people at a
location, the employee names, dates of birth, and dates of
employment shall be kept and made available for inspection by the
Chief of Police for one year.
(2) Where the owner is not directly involved with the day-to-day
operation of said business, the operator must also be included on
the application. If a partnership, corporation or other business
entity is involved, the application must designate an operator who
is involved in the day-to-day operation of the business. In this
situation, the dealer's license shall be issued to the operator; the
names, addresses and phone numbers of the partners, officers or
principals shall also be listed on the application. All addresses of
persons involved shall be home addresses listing street and
number.
(3) The application shall also require the legal address of the premises
where such business is to be carried out and whether the applicant
or any officer and operator has previously been involved in the
purchase or sale of secondhand goods and, if so, the name of the
§ 165-3 NOISE § 165-4
160:319
business, its location and the dates of involvement. The application
shall be signed and sworn to before a notary public or other official
authorized to administer oaths in the county.
(4) The application shall also include any and all e-commerce websites,
including Internet storefronts, third-party sales outlets, as well as
any and all written or electronic classified advertisements. The
application shall further include any seller names or otherwise
identifying names used within those e-commerce sites.
E. Before the issuance of a dealer's license, the Chief of Police shall have
the right to enter upon such premises during normal business hours for
the purpose of making inspections. After a dealer's license has been
issued, further inspections of the premises to ensure compliance with
the laws, ordinances and rules and regulations relating to the dealer's
business may be made in any area of the premises.
F. Any change in the facts or information required on said application that
occurs after the application has been filed shall be reported by the
licensee, in writing, to the Chief of Police within 10 days of the change.
G. All applications for dealer's licenses shall be issued or denied within 30
days after a fully completed application has been received by the Chief
of Police. The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of any delay which
is due to incomplete application, investigative delays, or other
reasonable cause.
H. Except as provided in Article 23-a of the New York State Correction
Law, the Chief of Police reserves the right to deny a dealer's license to
any person convicted of any crime related to the operation of the
business. No person who stands convicted of a felony (other than those
defined by the Vehicle and Traffic Law) shall be eligible for a license
pursuant to this law.
I. No dealer's license shall be issued for a period of one year to any
applicant that has been found guilty of operating a business without a
dealer's license when required under state or local law.
J. Dealer's licenses shall not be transferred. In the event of any change
involving the owner or operator of the business or the business location,
a new dealer's license shall be required. A dealer's license shall not be
transferred to any person who holds power of attorney.
K. The Chief of Police may deny or revoke any license granted herein in
the following situations:
(1) Where the dealer has made a false statement in connection with its
application; or
(2) Where the dealer revokes the consent to examine such records and
items or refuses to allow inspection of its premises; or
§ 165-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 165-4
160:320
(3) Where the dealer has more than five violations in one inspection or
two convictions of a violation in the calendar year.
L. The following entities are exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter:
(1) Any dealer that is exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) or
§ 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
(2) Garage sales, basement sales, porch sales, yard sales, auctions,
and other such events at which a person desires to sell or trade his
or her personal used items, household goods, furniture or
equipment upon his or her premises, said premises not being a
regular place of business or purchase or sale of secondhand items,
shall be exempted from the license requirement of this chapter. No
more than three such sales shall be conducted by the same person
or persons upon the same premises within one calendar year, and
each such sale shall not exceed three consecutive days.
(3) Any jewelry or coin exchange dealer whose annual gross retail
sales are comprised of less than 15% of secondhand articles. Any
jewelry or coin exchange dealer claiming this exemption must
provide written proof of its applicability by a certified public
accountant within 20 days upon request of any law enforcement
agency.
(4) Any dealer in secondhand or used motor vehicles.
(5) Any sale conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court or
sales by executors or administrators.
(6) The sale of antiques by an antique dealer, or his/her employee or
associate, provided that the antique dealer:
(a) Has an established antique shop advertised and promoted as
such; or
(b) Exhibits at least twice a year at established advertised and/or
promoted antique shows; or
(c) Is a private dealer working from home and/or nonretail
location and has applied for and has been granted a New York
State resale number for collection and submission of sales tax.
(7) The sale of secondhand articles at antique shows or trade shows,
where such shows are advertised and/or promoted as such.
(8) Any secondhand clothing store where 100% of its gross revenues
are related to items of clothing, shoes, and/or other wearable items
(e.g., hats, scarves, belts) except for jewelry. Any clothing store
claiming this exemption must provide written proof of its
applicability by a certified public accountant within 20 days upon
request of any law enforcement agency.
§ 165-4 NOISE § 165-4
160:321
§ 165-5. General operation.
(9) The occasional sale, purchase or exchange of coins or stamps by a
person at his/her permanent residence who is engaged in the hobby
of collecting coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale,
purchase or exchange of such coins or stamps to or from the
general public by billboard, sign, handbill, newspaper, magazine,
radio, television, Internet or other form of printed or electronic
advertising.
(10) Any store where 100% of its gross revenues comes from
consignment. Any store claiming this exemption must provide
written proof of its applicability by a certified public accountant
within 20 days upon request of any law enforcement agency.
(11) This chapter shall not apply to the return of secondhand items for
credit, exchange or refund to the person from whom said items
were originally obtained, provided that the items were not
secondhand items when originally obtained.
M. If an application for a license is denied or an existing license is revoked,
the applicant or holder of the revoked license may, within 10 calendar
days of notice of denial or revocation, request reconsideration by the
Chief of Police by providing him or her with any additional, relevant
information. The Chief of Police shall, within 10 calendar days of receipt
of the reconsideration materials, issue a final notice of denial or
revocation setting forth the grounds upon which the license was either
denied or revoked. Such final notice shall be transmitted by certified or
registered mail.
A. Dealers shall comply with all provisions of federal, state and local laws
and ordinances relating to the conduct of businesses and occupation,
use and maintenance of the premises and shall ensure that all of their
employees and agents do also. Where the dealer is also a pawn dealer,
the dealer shall comply with Article 5 of the New York State General
Business Law entitled "Collateral Loan Brokers Law."
B. All dealers covered under this chapter shall cause the dealer's license
and business permit to be posted in a conspicuous place immediately
visible upon entering the business establishment.
C. If the dealer or employee of any establishment covered by this chapter
has reason to believe from the circumstances presented that an item
has been stolen or acquired by dishonest means, it shall be his or her
duty to immediately report same to the Chief of Police.
D. In the event the Irondequoit Police Department confiscates property
from a business covered under this chapter as evidence or for
safekeeping in an investigation or to return to an owner, the
Irondequoit Police Department shall issue a receipt to the business. The
§ 165-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 165-5
160:322
§ 165-6. Identification required.
receipt shall contain a crime report number which references the
investigation.
E. Any dealer covered under this chapter shall release to the Irondequoit
Police Department any item in the dealer's possession when:
(1) The item is established to be stolen; and
(2) The owner of the item or the victim of a theft has positively
identified the item and provided an affidavit of ownership and has
made a report of the theft to any law enforcement agency; and
(3) The stolen property report describes the item by one or more of the
following: date, initials, an insurance record, a photograph, a sales
receipt, a serial number, specific damage, or a statement of facts
that show the item is one of a kind or a unique engraving; and
(4) The dealer is given a receipt for the item released.
F. Any dealer covered by this chapter who is required to relinquish an
item pursuant to this provision is not entitled to demand or condition
the release upon any reimbursement from the law enforcement agency,
the owner of the item, or the victim of the theft. A dealer who is himself
or herself a victim of a crime may seek restitution or reparation in
accordance with the New York State Penal Law.
A. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and jewelry
and coin exchange dealer to verify the identity of every person from
whom a purchase is made through acceptable photographic
identification (as detailed below) and to make and to keep a written
record of the nature of the evidence submitted by such person to prove
identity. The signature of the dealer shall be included in the recording
of each transaction.
B. Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity: any
official document (except a social security account number card) issued
by the United States government, any state, county, municipality or
subdivision thereof, any public agency or department thereof, or any
public or private employer, which requires and bears the signature of
the person to whom issued.
C. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry
and coin exchange dealer to require that every person from whom any
article, jewelry or precious metal is purchased sign his/her name in the
presence of the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry and coin
exchange dealer and to compare the signature on the identifying
document, if any, and retain on said premises the person's signature,
together with the number and description of the identifying document,
if any.
§ 165-5 NOISE § 165-6
160:323
§ 165-7. Reporting.
D. If the individual is acting as an agent for a principal, proof of the
principal's true name, date of birth and residence address.
E. It shall further be the duty of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or
jewelry and coin exchange dealer to take, and maintain, a copy or
digital photo of the identification required by § 165-6B above.
F. It shall further be the duty of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or
jewelry and coin exchange dealer to take, and maintain, a digital
photograph of each article, jewelry or precious metal received or
purchased by the dealer or otherwise in his or her possession. The
photograph must include the serial number and model number or
product key if the item(s) contain those features.
G. It shall further be the duty of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or
jewelry and coin exchange dealer to affix a tag to each article, jewelry
or precious metal received or purchased by the dealer or otherwise in
his or her possession. The tag will include the date and time of purchase
of said article and will include a brief description of the article or a
corresponding ticket number that will be generated via the electronic
reporting system.
A. Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and jewelry and coin exchange
dealer shall furnish to the Chief of Police all information requested by
such agency relative to all records required to be kept under this
chapter no later than 48 hours after receipt of any item covered by this
chapter. If any items composed wholly or in part of articles, jewelry or
precious metals shall be advertised in any newspaper printed in the
County of Monroe as having been lost or stolen, and if any items
matching such advertised description or any part thereof shall be in or
come into possession of any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or jewelry
and coin exchange dealer upon receiving actual written or oral notice of
the similarity of description of such articles, such pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer or jewelry and coin exchange dealer shall
immediately give information relating thereto to the Chief of Police. No
disposition of such items shall be effected until authorization to do so is
given to such dealer by the Chief of Police.
B. Every dealer covered by this chapter shall upload to the Chief of Police
electronic records of all reportable transactions. Each transaction
record shall contain all information required by this chapter and shall
be uploaded via Internet connection to an electronic reporting service
determined by the Chief of Police according to the following
procedures:
(1) Using point of sale software, all dealers covered by this chapter
shall review the compatibility of their software with the electronic
reporting service used by the Chief of Police, and dealers with
compliant point-of-sale software shall electronically upload all
§ 165-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 165-7
160:324
§ 165-8. Release of stolen property.
§ 165-9. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an offense and
shall be punished as follows:
required information from their point-of-sale software to the
specified electronic reporting service via Internet connection using
the upload process or reporting service; or
(2) All dealers covered by this chapter and using point-of-sale software
noncompliant with that utilized by the Irondequoit Police
Department or not using point of sale software shall manually enter
all reportable transactions into the electronic reporting service via
Internet connection.
(3) In the event that any dealer covered by this chapter is unable to
successfully upload transaction records via the electronic reporting
service within the required 48 hours, the dealer shall, within 24
hours of the unsuccessful upload, notify the Chief of Police of the
reason for the submission failure and provide the Chief of Police
with an estimated time of compliance. Under these circumstances,
the dealer shall provide the Chief of Police a daily electronic data
table or spreadsheet of all transactions that would otherwise have
been submitted via the electronic reporting service. This data shall
either be hand-delivered or e-mailed to the Chief of Police no later
than one business day after the transaction date.
A. A dealer shall release to the Irondequoit Police Department any item in
the dealer's possession if:
(1) The item is established to be stolen;
(2) The owner of the item or the victim of the theft has positively
identified the item and provided an affidavit of ownership and made
a report of the theft to a law enforcement agency;
(3) The stolen property report describes the item by one or more of the
following: date, initials, an insurance record, a photograph, a sales
receipt, a serial number, specific damage, a statement of facts that
show the item is one of a kind or a unique engraving; and
(4) The dealer is given a receipt for the item released.
B. When the Irondequoit Police Department no longer needs an item for
evidence, it shall be returned to the owner.
A. Any individual, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity
violating the provisions of this chapter or failing to take reasonable
action to prevent the violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
§ 165-7 NOISE § 165-9
160:325
§ 165-10. Severability; supersession of County provisions.
Chapter 167
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 164.
Special events — See Ch. 194.
not to exceed $200 for the first offense, $1,000 for the second offense,
and $3,000 for each subsequent offense. Each such violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any member of the Town of Irondequoit Police Department shall have
the authority, pursuant to New York State Criminal Procedure Law, to
issue an appearance ticket subscribed by him/her directing a
designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a
designated future time in connection with the alleged violation of this
chapter or any order made hereunder.
C. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
of Irondequoit also may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of
the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or to restrain by injunction any offense
against this chapter.
D. No remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be the exclusive
remedy or penalty available to address the violation of the chapter, and
each remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to,
and not in substitution for or limitation of, the other remedies or
penalties allowed under other applicable law. This chapter shall be
enforced by the Chief of Police.
A. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or article of this chapter
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such determination shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or article thereof directly involved in the proceeding
in which such adjudication shall have been rendered.
B. This chapter is intended to supersede Chapter 384 of the Monroe
County Code entitled "Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Jewelry
and Coin Exchange Dealers."
§ 165-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-1
167:326
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Except as hereinafter expressly provided, any
person, either principal or agent, who, from any public street or public place
or by going from house to house or place of business to place of business,
on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barters
or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise,
books, magazines, periodicals or any other item or items of value, except
milk, water and newspapers.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place or house to house
or by telephone or stands in any street or public place taking or offering to
take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals
or any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk) or for
services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or
repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The term
"solicitor" shall, however, also mean and include any person taking or
offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines,
periodicals or any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk)
or for services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing
or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery at the
home or residence of any person who has been solicited prior thereto by
telephone or has responded to any type of advertising media requiring an
appointment or consultation or sales presentation in the home or place of
residence of such person.
§ 167-2. Applicability.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to:
(1) Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
(3) Berry pickers who sell berries of their own picking.
(4) The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities.
(5) Any honorably discharged member of the armed forces or any other
person who has procured a license issued by the County Clerk as
provided by § 32 of the General Business Law of the State of New
York, as amended or changed.
B. Exempt organizations.
(1) Nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit organizations and persons
working for such organizations shall be exempt from the license
fees. However, such organizations shall be subject to the
§ 167-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-2
167:327
application fee and shall register annually by the application
process with the Town Clerk in the event that they plan to engage
in vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting and shall indicate the
type of activities to be undertaken and the time when they will
be performed. At the time of application, such organizations shall
also offer proof of their nonprofit status as being organized under
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, that maintains a chapter or local organization within
Monroe County. Proof should be submitted in the form of evidence
of nonprofit filing from the department of state in the state for the
organization has incorporated.
(2) Children, veterans, fraternal organizations. A child residing in the
Town and regularly attending any public school district or
parochial or private school located, in whole or in part, within the
County of Monroe or a member of a veterans organization or
fraternal organization, provided that such organization has and
maintains a chapter, post, lodge, camp or other group within
Monroe County, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter,
provided that any person coming within the provisions of this
exemption shall only peddle, vend or solicit in connection with an
authorized activity of the organization of which he or she is a
member or of the school which he or she attends.
C. Interstate commerce. This chapter also shall not apply so as unlawfully
to interfere with interstate commerce, and, to that end, all persons
claiming to be engaged in interstate commerce or claiming any of the
exemptions hereinabove set forth shall apply to the Town Clerk for a
certificate of compliance, using the form of application described in
§ 167-4; the applicant shall also submit to the Town Clerk satisfactory
evidence that he or she is engaged in interstate commerce.
D. Certificate of compliance for exemptions. When the applicant shall have
established to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that he or she is
engaged in interstate commerce or is entitled to one or more of the
above exemptions, the Town Clerk shall issue to him or her a certificate
of compliance stating, among other things, that such person has
complied with the requirements of this section and has satisfactorily
established that he or she is engaged in interstate commerce. Such
certificate shall be carried with the person exercising it and shall be
exhibited upon demand. All certificates issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year, nor a shorter term
than three months, but in any event shall expire on the 31st day of
December following the date of issuance. The securing of any such
certificate by fraud or misrepresentation by any person not in fact
engaged in interstate commerce or entitled to one or more exemptions
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 167-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-3
167:328
§ 167-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Town
to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined or assist the same
without first having obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a
license therefor and having received a solicitor's permit.
§ 167-4. Application fee.
A nonrefundable application fee must be submitted to the Town Clerk prior
to receiving an application for a license. Said fee shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board. All funds are to be cash or
certified check or money orders.
§ 167-5. License application.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided is required
to furnish the appropriate application fee and file a written application
upon a form furnished by the Town Clerk. Along with submission of the
written application, the applicant must obtain a police background
check of each person to be soliciting within the Town. The police check
must be made at the applicant's expense, must be obtained from the
town or city where each solicitor resides and be personally provided to
the Town Clerk's office. Such application shall be given to the Town
Clerk at least two weeks in advance of the first day of solicitation and
shall contain the following information:
(1) The quantity of vehicles and the vehicle identification number, copy
of the vehicle registration, plate number, model and make of each
vehicle to be used by the applicant in carrying on the business for
which the license is desired.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he or she desires to sell
or the kind of service he or she desires to perform.
(3) The method of distribution.
(4) The name, permanent business address, business telephone
number and age of the applicant.
(5) Whether or not the applicant and each solicitor associated
therewith has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so,
give the date of conviction, the nature of the offense, the penalty
imposed and the name and address of the court.
(6) A police background check of each person to be soliciting within
the Town. The police check must be made at the applicant's
expense and must be obtained from the town or city where each
solicitor resides.
(7) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he or she
represents.
§ 167-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-5
167:329
§ 167-6. Bond required.
An application for a license as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall also be
accompanied by a cash deposit or surety company bond or other bond
secured by sufficient collateral in such amount as is determined by
resolution of the Town Board, said bond to be approved by the Town
Attorney as to form and surety conditioned for making a final delivery of
the goods, wares or merchandise ordered or services to be performed in
accordance with the terms of such order or, failing therein, that the advance
payment on such order be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action
of any licensed solicitor shall have the right by action on the bond for the
recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force
and effect, and, in case of a cash deposit, such deposit shall be retained by
the Town for a period of 90 days after the expiration of any such license,
unless sooner released by the Town Board.
§ 167-7. Issuance of license.
(8) The length of time the applicant desires the license; such a license
shall not be issued for a longer term than one year nor a shorter
term than three months.
(9) A written, detailed description of the specified proposed plan of
operations to be used by the applicant.
(10) Any violation(s) of this chapter or any comparable laws,
ordinances, statutes, rules, orders or regulations of any other
municipality or of the State Door-to-Door Sales Protection Act,52
within the past 10 years, by the applicant or any individuals
employed by or on behalf of the applicant as a vendor, solicitor or
peddler.
(11) Such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk to
determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior statements
required in this subsection.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing
and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined
and approved.
C. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by proof of a
professional license held if said license must be used in conjunction
with the solicitation.
A. Application; grant. Except for those organizations which are exempt as
outlined in this chapter, the Town Clerk shall issue a license pursuant to
a valid application for peddling and soliciting.
52.Editor's Note: See Personal Property Law § 425 et seq.
§ 167-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-7
167:330
§ 167-8. Term of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for a period not
to exceed one year, nor a shorter term than three months but, in any event,
shall expire on the 31st day of December following the date of issuance.
§ 167-9. License fees.
License fees set in accordance with § 1-18 shall be paid to the Town Clerk
for the license herein required.
§ 167-10. Employees; card of identification.
B. Use. A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who
permits it to be used by any other person and any person who uses such
license granted to any other person shall each be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
C. Contents. All licenses shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office and shall
state clearly the kind of vehicle, if any, to be used and the kind of goods,
wares or merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the dates of
issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and
address of the licensee.
D. Display. Every licensee, while exercising his or her license, shall carry
the license with him or her and shall exhibit the same upon demand or,
if engaged in telephonic solicitation, shall, upon each completed call,
immediately state his or her name and address and number of his or her
license.
A. Number limited. Any person who aids or assists a solicitor in selling and
delivering must obtain a separate license.
B. Identification card required. All persons who have obtained a solicitor's
license shall at all times carry and on demand display a card of
identification issued by the Town Clerk, which card shall contain the
following information: the name of the employee, the name of the
employer and the date of expiration of the employer's license. Such
identification cards shall be valid until the expiration of the license
under which they are issued.
C. Statement required. Each such employee shall file with the Town Clerk
a statement, including his or her name, age, permanent and city
address, telephone number and the name, address, and telephone
number of his or her employer.
D. Refusal; revocation of card. The provisions of § 167-6 respecting the
revocation of a license shall apply to the revocation of cards of
identification. The issuance of a card of identification may be refused
upon the same grounds as set forth in § 167-6A for the refusal of a
license.
§ 167-7 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-11
167:331
§ 167-11. Written statement of orders required.
A written statement of all orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand,
accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery,
setting forth the terms thereof, the amount paid in advance, the name of the
solicitor and the name of the person or firm he or she represents, shall be
given to the purchaser at the time the money is paid to or deposited with
the solicitor.
§ 167-12. Regulations.
A. Unlawful sales. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not falsely or
fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any
article offered for sale or offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or
diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Sanitary conditions. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall keep the
vehicles and receptacles used by him or her in a clean and sanitary
condition and the food stuffs and edibles offered for sale well covered
and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
C. Noises. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not blow a horn, ring a bell
or use any other noisy device so as to create a public nuisance.
D. Obstructions. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not create or maintain
any booth or stand or place any barrels, boxes, crates or other
obstructions upon any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or public place for
the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
E. Measuring devices. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not use any
weighing or measuring device unless the same shall have been
examined and sealed by the County Sealer of Weights and Measures.
F. Hours. A licensee may not sell or vend within 250 feet of any school
property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days,
nor enter upon private property for the purpose of peddling or soliciting
before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after 1/2 hour before sunset of any day,
except upon the prior invitation of the householder or occupant.
G. Appealing to sympathies. No peddler or solicitor shall, in order to
effectuate or assist in any sale or solicitation, represent that he or she is
engaged in any contest or in any way attempt to induce a sale or
solicitation by appealing to the sympathies of the person so solicited.
H. Permitted place. A licensee may perform his/her respective acts and
occupations at any place in the Town of Irondequoit, except on property
owned or leased by the Town of Irondequoit or any district thereof or on
property owned by any school district, or otherwise prohibited by the
owner of private property.
§ 167-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-12
167:332
§ 167-13. Permit restriction for Fourth of July Celebration;
exception.
§ 167-14. Solicitation of funds; registration.
I. Use of public streets. None of the foregoing licensees shall use any of
the public streets or government property within the Town of
Irondequoit as standing places for their vehicles, handcarts or
pushcarts for the conduct of business.
A. No peddler, solicitor or vendor of any type shall be issued a permit for
the duration of the Fourth of July Celebration in the Town of
Irondequoit, from start to finish, for the portion of Titus Avenue from
the intersection of Portland Avenue to the intersection of Kings
Highway.
B. Exception. The license procedure as set forth in this chapter will not
apply to those vendors participating in the July Fourth Celebration as
selected by the July Fourth Committee.
A. Application for registration; contents. An application to solicit funds for
any cause whatever as provided for in this section shall be addressed to
the Town Clerk at least two weeks in advance of the first day of
solicitation, and such application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and purpose of the cause for which permission is sought.
(2) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and
directors of the organization.
(3) The time for which permission is sought and localities and places of
solicitation.
(4) Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation.
(5) Such other information as the Town Clerk shall require to
determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior statements
required in this subsection.
B. Statement of finances. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, before
granting permission to solicit funds or donations as provided for in this
section, to compel the applicant to file with him or her a signed
statement of all moneys collected in the calendar year or the fiscal year
of such organization, society, association or corporation previous to the
application, the expenditures connected therewith, together with the
names and addresses of all persons receiving wages, commissions or
emoluments and the amounts so expended.
§ 167-12 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-14
167:333
§ 167-15. Refusal of license.
A license may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony, which, in the judgment of the Town Clerk, renders
the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the trade or occupation
of peddler or solicitor. The Town Clerk may also refuse a license to any
person who, in his or her judgment, shall be an undesirable person or
incapable of properly conducting such occupation. In addition, the Town
Clerk, upon consultation with the Irondequoit Police Department and Town
Attorney, where applicable, may revoke any such license upon his or her
determination and finding the regulations and rules herein have been
C. Registration. Registration as required by this section shall be done, in
writing, at the office of the Town Clerk during regular business hours
and shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the organization,
society, association, religious institution or corporation desiring to
solicit in the Town.
(2) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and
directors of the organization, society, association, church or
corporation.
(3) The names, addresses, telephone numbers and ages of all agents or
representatives who will solicit in the Town.
(4) Whether or not the agents or representatives or any of them have
ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so, give the
date of conviction, the nature of the offense, the penalty imposed
and the name and address of the court.
(5) A police background check of each person to be soliciting within
the Town. The police check must be made at the applicant's
expense and must be obtained from the town or city where each
solicitor resides.
(6) The number, year, trade name identification or registration number,
state of registration and owner of every vehicle to be used.
(7) The name and purpose of the cause for which soliciting is to be
done.
(8) The time, localities and places of solicitation.
(9) Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation and to whom.
(10) A statement of finances as hereinafter provided in Subdivision B.
(11) Such other reasonable information as the Town Clerk shall require
to determine the veracity or to clarify any of the information
required by the subsection.
§ 167-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-15
167:334
violated. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Town Clerk
may appeal to the Town Board therefor, and the same may be granted or
refused by the Town Board, except as prohibited by Town Law § 137, as
amended or changed.
§ 167-16. Revocation of license or permit.
Licenses or permits issued under provisions of this chapter may be revoked
immediately by the Town Clerk upon consultation with the Irondequoit
Police Department and Town Attorney. If the licensee has one or more
employees, agents or contractors, the revocation hereunder shall apply to
all. Revocation may occur for the following reasons:
§ 167-17. Appeals.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business as peddler, huckster, vendor or solicitor.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral
turpitude.
E. Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
F. Any breach of stipulations or conditions specified by the Town Board, if
any, or any deviation from the terms and agreements upon which a
special permit has been granted, as provided herein.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Clerk in the denial of an
application for a license or revocation of a license, as provided in this
chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Town Board.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing, within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, as shown on the application, a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for the appeal.
C. The Town Board shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at his or her
last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
D. The granting, refusal, revocation or suspension of a license or permit by
the Town Board shall be subject to review pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York. Any such Article
78 proceeding must be commenced within 30 days of the mailing of
notice of the action sought to be reviewed.
§ 167-15 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-18
167:335
§ 167-18. Eligibility for new license restricted.
Any person denied a license or permit or whose license or permit has been
suspended or revoked in accordance with § 167-8 of this chapter shall be
ineligible to apply for a new license or permit for a period of six months
from the date of such denial, revocation or suspension, unless the applicant
shows that the conditions upon which such action was based have been
remedied or removed.
§ 167-19. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 1-16.
Chapter 171
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 136.
§ 167-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 167-19
171:336
ARTICLE I
Standards; General Provisions
§ 171-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of plumbing
or to install, alter or repair any plumbing system or any part thereof in
any building or premises for hire or to display a sign of master plumber or
plumbing contractor in the Town of Irondequoit unless such person holds
a master plumber's license issued in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 171-2. Standards applicable to plumbing; compliance required.
§ 171-3. Emergency repairs.
Any provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, no owner or occupant of
property with a plumbing system or systems shall be prohibited from
making emergency repairs to such system. Such repairs shall not result in
alteration of the system, but shall consist only of restoration of the facilities
to substantially their condition prior to the emergency. A permit shall be
obtained within a reasonable time after such repair work has been done,
and all such repairs shall be subject to tests and/or inspection.
§ 171-4. Plumbing Board of Examiners.
There is hereby created a five-member Plumbing Board of Examiners which
shall consist of at least three master plumbers chosen for their expert
knowledge of installation of plumbing and drainage systems and two other
A. New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable
to plumbing. All plumbing and drainage conditions and constructions
shall comply with the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code applicable to plumbing and all other
provisions of this Code applicable thereto.
B. Drainage and water systems. No person shall construct or ventilate any
system whereby drainage or fluids are discharged into a cesspool,
septic tank, watercourse or sewer; nor construct a water service and/or
a water distribution system, nor make connections or repairs to, extend
or alter any such systems or any part thereof, except in compliance with
this Code.
C. Plans and specifications. All plans and specifications for plumbing and/
or drainage shall conform to the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code applicable to plumbing and other
applicable provisions of this Code.
D. Alterations. Alterations in the plumbing and/or drainage systems or a
change in the style or location of a fixture shall be governed by the
provisions for new work.
§ 171-1 PLUMBING § 171-4
171:337
qualified persons. Each member of such Board shall be a resident of the
Town of Irondequoit. Appointments to such Board shall be made by the
Town Board for a term of five years each, except that the first term of
office of each member shall be designated by the Town Board for respective
periods of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years in
order to preserve continuity of membership. Any appointed member may be
removed from office at any time by the Town Board.
§ 171-5. Duties of Plumbing Board of Examiners.
§ 171-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to
abolish, transfer or curtail any power of the Town Board pursuant to Town
Law § 137, as amended or changed, or any other provision of state law.
A. The Plumbing Board of Examiners shall establish standards and
procedures for the qualifications, examination and licensing of master
plumbers and shall issue an appropriate certificate to each person who
meets the qualifications therefor and successfully passes the
examination given by the Plumbing Board of Examiners. The Plumbing
Board of Examiners shall keep an official record of all its transactions.
B. The Plumbing Board of Examiners shall assist the Building Inspector as
to the interpretation of any of the provisions of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable to plumbing.
C. Licenses may be revoked by the Town Board in accordance with the
procedure set forth in the Town Law § 137, as amended or changed.
D. The Plumbing Board of Examiners may recommend to the Town Board
suspension or revocation of the license herein provided for, for a
violation by the licensee, his or her agents or employees, of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable to
plumbing or applicable provisions of this Code.
§ 171-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 171-6
171:338
ARTICLE II
Registration and Licensing
§ 171-7. Registration and license required.
§ 171-8. Examination; certificate of competency.
Any person desiring to obtain a plumber's license shall be required to
submit to an examination by the Plumbing Board of Examiners as to his or
her experience and qualifications for such a trade, business or calling, and
if said Plumbing Board of Examiners finds such person to be competent and
qualified, it shall issue to such person applying a certificate of competency.
The Plumbing Board of Examiners shall act promptly in holding all
examinations and in notifying the applicant of the result of his or her
examination and shall hold at least one examination in each calendar year.
§ 171-9. Fees. [Amended 8-4-1983 by L.L. No. 5-198354]
Upon filing an application for a certificate of competency, the applicant
shall pay a fee set in accordance with § 1-18 to cover the cost of his or her
examination, and no part of said fee shall be returned.
A. Every person engaging in the trade, business or calling of employing or
master plumber in the Town of Irondequoit, New York, or representing
himself or herself or themselves to the public as an employing or master
plumber by the use of the word "plumbing" or "plumber" or words of
similar import or meaning on signs, cards, stationery or in any manner
whatsoever shall:
(1) Obtain a certificate of competency from the Plumbing Board of
Examiners as provided in this chapter.
(2) Register with the Plumbing Board of Examiners.
(3) Procure a license as hereinafter provided from the Building
Inspector.
(4) Procure current liability and workers' compensation insurance with
the Town of Irondequoit as the certificate holder.53
B. The Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways shall not issue a permit to anyone
to connect with the sewers or with the water mains within the Town of
Irondequoit unless such person has obtained and shall produce a
license as provided in this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 171-7 PLUMBING § 171-10
171:339
§ 171-10. Registration of certificate; additional fee.
Any person who has been examined by the Plumbing Board of Examiners
and who passed the required test shall be issued a certificate of competency
by the Plumbing Board of Examiners. The plumber shall register his or her
name and the certificate of competency with the Building Inspector and
pay the additional fee set in accordance with § 1-18 for the issuance of a
plumber's license by the Building Inspector.
§ 171-11. Reexamination.
Any person who fails to pass an examination as prescribed by the Plumbing
Board of Examiners may apply for reexamination after the expiration of 60
days upon the payment of the regular examination fee.
§ 171-12. Expiration of licenses.
All plumber's licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire on the 31st day of December of each year in which they are issued
and may be renewed for one year by applying to the Building Inspector not
later than the 30th day of January in each year. Licenses shall be void if the
holder fails to renew his or her license within the time above-specified.
§ 171-13. License renewal fee. [Amended 8-4-1983 by L.L. No.
5-198355]
A fee set in accordance with § 1-18 shall be paid to the Town of Irondequoit
for the renewal of a plumber's license.
§ 171-14. Corporations and partnerships.
§ 171-15. Reinstatement.
The holder of a license that has been revoked or has failed to renew such
license within the specified time may apply for reinstatement or renewal of
A. A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade,
business or calling of a plumber in the Town of Irondequoit may do so,
provided that one or more officers of such corporation holds a
plumber's license, issued by the Building Inspector.
B. Each member of a copartnership shall hold a plumber's license issued
by the Building Inspector.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or copartnership to
carry on or engage in the trade, business or calling or of employing or
as a plumber in the Town of Irondequoit unless the name and address of
such person or of the president, secretary or treasurer of such
corporation or all members of the copartnership shall have been
registered as provided in this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 171-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 171-15
171:340
his or her license to the Plumbing Board of Examiners. After the applicant
has had the opportunity to be heard, the Plumbing Board of Examiners
may at its discretion grant or refuse such reinstatement or renewal of said
license subject to review as provided in Town Law § 137, as amended or
changed.
§ 171-16. Qualifications.
Any person applying for a plumber's license must have had not less than
five years' experience in the plumbing industry in the United States, except
that three years' experience in the plumbing industry shall be sufficient,
together with a technical degree of engineering from a college or university.
§ 171-17. Procurement of permit for unlicensed contractors
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any registered plumber to sign the application or
specification for a plumbing permit or procure a plumbing permit for any
plumber or plumbing contractor who is without a plumber's license in the
Town of Irondequoit. Violation of the provision contained herein shall be
sufficient reason for the Town Board to revoke the license of the plumber
who willfully commits such violation after due notice and hearing.
§ 171-18. Meetings.
The Plumbing Board of Examiners shall hold its monthly meetings during
the first week of each month in the Town Hall. A majority of the members
of the Plumbing Board of Examiners present at meetings shall constitute
a quorum. A majority vote of the Plumbing Board of Examiners shall be
required whenever it is necessary to make any final decisions. The Plumbing
Board of Examiners shall meet whenever the Town Board or Supervisor
shall request them to do so.
§ 171-19. Existing licenses.56
A current plumbing license issued by the City of Rochester shall exempt the
licensee from any examination required under this chapter.
§ 171-20. Complaints.
Plumbing and/or drainage complaints shall be investigated by the Plumbing
Inspector or his or her authorized agents. The Plumbing Inspector shall
issue such orders as may be necessary to obtain reasonable conformity with
this chapter or applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 171-21. Supervision.
A. All work of plumbing, drainage and/or water supply and distributing
systems must be performed personally by a licensed and duly
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 171-15 PLUMBING § 171-21
171:341
§ 171-22. Workmanship.
Workmanship must be of such character as to fully secure the results sought
and as required in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code applicable to plumbing.
§ 171-23. Exemptions.
Employees of public service corporations shall not require a license while
engaged in the work of such corporations.
§ 171-24. Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any plumbing or drainage system for damages to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town of Irondequoit
be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the licensing authorized
herein or certificate of competency issued as provided herein.
registered employing or master plumber in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or directly under his or her supervision by
skilled journeymen plumbers (including qualified apprentices) having
a thorough and complete knowledge of the installation of such work
and/or by qualified workers for special branches (such as welding) who
must also be under the supervision of a master plumber on the premises
or a journeyman plumber employed by such master plumber.
B. Any firm or corporation engaged in the installation of new plumbing
work and/or the maintenance of a plumbing system, expressly in or on
their own premises, shall employ a licensed master plumber who shall
be responsible for all plumbing work, apply for all necessary permits
and have direct supervision of all plumbing work and the employees
engaged in such work. In instances where a licensed master plumber as
the person responsible for the plumbing work is or becomes an
employee of such firm or corporation, he or she shall not extend his or
her license rights or privileges to cover the installation and/or repairing
of plumbing work other than that required for his or her firm or that
which is done by him or her personally or by his or her employees.
§ 171-21 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 171-24
171:342
ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 171-25. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 171-25 PLUMBING § 171-25
171:343
Chapter 173
PUBLIC NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 79.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Noise — See Ch.160.
Rental properties — See Ch.177.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — The person or persons or entity or entities that are the owner or
owners of record at the office of the Town Assessor of the property.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes, but shall not be limited to, any one or more
of the following:
Any building, structure, or real property used for purposes of illegal
use, possession, or distribution of a drug, controlled substance or
marijuana as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
A.
Any building, structure, or real property used for purposes of
prostitution as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
B.
Any building, structure, or real property used for purposes of
indecency, obscene performances, and/or promotion of obscene
materials as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
C.
Any building, structure, or real property used for purposes of illegal
gambling activity as defined in the New York State Penal Law.
D.
Any building, structure, or real property used for the purpose of illegal
possession, use, or sale of firearms or weapons as defined by the New
York State Penal Law.
E.
Any building, structure, or real property used for the purposes of illegal
sale, manufacture, or consumption of alcoholic beverages as defined by
the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
F.
Any building, structure, or real property wherein there exists or has
occurred a criminal nuisance as defined by the New York State Penal
Law.
G.
Any building, structure, or real property used for purposes of loitering
as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
H.
§ 171-25 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 173-1
171:344
§ 173-2. Public nuisances prohibited.
No owner, operator, manager, tenant, lessee, or other occupant of or visitor
to a building, structure, or real property shall knowingly cause, conduct,
maintain, permit, or allow the existence of a public nuisance at the building,
structure, or real property.
§ 173-3. Presumption of knowledge.
Written notice delivered by the Town to the property owner, operator,
manager, tenant, lessee, or other occupant of a building, structure, or
real property by first-class, certified or registered U.S. Mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service on the owner, of any activity or activities
constituting a public nuisance shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge
of said public nuisance.
§ 173-4. Criminal convictions as presumption of existence of public
nuisance.
The existence of three or more criminal convictions for any of the activities
set forth in the definition of "public nuisance" in § 173-1 at any building,
structure, or real property within a two-year period prior to the
commencement of a civil action and/or an administrative hearing shall be
prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance. For the purposes
of this chapter, a "criminal conviction" shall be defined as the entry of a
guilty plea to, and/or a verdict of guilty for, one or more counts set forth in
an accusatory instrument.
§ 173-5. Other evidence of prohibited conduct as presumption of
existence of public nuisance.
The existence of three or more incidents of any of the following activities
at any building, structure, or real property within a one-year period prior to
the commencement of a civil action and/or an administrative hearing shall
be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance:
Any building, structure, or real property wherein there exists or has
occurred any violation of the Code of the Town of Irondequoit, including
but not limited to Chapter 79, Animals; Chapter 98, Building
Construction and Fire Prevention; Chapter 160, Noise; Chapter 235,
Zoning; and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, including the Property Maintenance Code of New York State.
I.
Any building, structure, or real property wherein an occupant, guest, or
business invitee commits criminal activities or other offenses involving
assault, gang assault, harassment, or disorderly conduct, as said
criminal activities are defined by the New York State Penal Law.
J.
A. Conviction for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a "public
nuisance" in § 173-1 occurring on or in immediate proximity to the
property.
§ 173-1 PLUMBING § 173-5
171:345
§ 173-6. Summons and complaint for civil action.
B. Arrest for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a "public
nuisance" in § 173-1 occurring on or in immediate proximity to the
property.
C. Service of an accusatory instrument charging any of the activities set
forth in the definition of "public nuisance" in § 173-1 occurring on or in
immediate proximity to the property. For purposes of this chapter,
"accusatory instrument" shall include, but is not limited to, any criminal
information, misdemeanor, and/or felony complaint filed in a court of
competent jurisdiction and/or, with regard to unfit, unsafe and/or firedamaged
buildings or structures on or in immediate proximity to the
property, a notice of violation issued by the Town of Irondequoit
Department of Community Development, the Town of Irondequoit
Police Department, the Fire Marshal of the Town of Irondequoit, and/or
other authorized entities or officials with jurisdiction in the Town.
D. Service of a search warrant on the building, structure, or real property
where controlled substances, marijuana, and/or illegal firearms or
weapons are seized.
E. The finding of illegal controlled substances or illegal firearms or
weapons on the building, structure, or real property.
F. Investigative purchases of illegal drugs, controlled substances or
marijuana on the building, structure, or real property by law
enforcement agencies or their agents.
A. The Town Attorney or Attorney to the Town, as the case may be, may
bring and maintain a civil action in the name of the Town to abate a
public nuisance and shall commence the civil action by the filing of a
summons and complaint in the manner required by the New York State
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. The summons and complaint shall name as defendants the building,
structure, or real property by describing it by Tax Map number and/or
street address and shall name as defendants one or more of the owners
of the property.
C. The summons and complaint may also name as defendants any
operator, manager, tenant, lessee or other occupant of the building,
structure or real property.
D. The complaint shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
E. The complaint shall be accompanied by affidavits demonstrating that
the owner or his agent had notice from the Town of the existence of the
nuisance and had an opportunity to abate the nuisance.
§ 173-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 173-6
171:346
§ 173-7. Civil penalty.
If, upon the trial of an action for a civil nuisance or upon a motion for
summary judgment, a finding is made that any defendant has caused,
conducted, maintained, permitted, or allowed a public nuisance, a penalty
may be awarded by the court in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for
each day it is found that such defendant caused, conducted, maintained,
permitted, or allowed the public nuisance after notice to abate same had
been given by the Town. Upon recovery, such penalty shall be paid to the
Town general fund.
§ 173-8. Permanent injunction.
F. The venue of the action shall be in any court of competent jurisdiction in
the county where the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained,
permitted or allowed.
G. In rem jurisdiction over the building, structure, or real property shall be
completed by affixing the summons to the building, structure, or real
property and by mailing the summons and complaint by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner.
H. Defendants other than the building, structure or real property shall be
served with the summons and complaint in the manner required by the
New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
I. With respect to any action commenced or to be commenced, the Town
may file a notice of pendency pursuant to the New York State Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
A. If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for
summary judgment, a finding is made that the defendants have caused,
conducted, maintained, permitted, or allowed a public nuisance, in
addition to any other right, remedy, recovery, award or judgment to
which the Town may be entitled under this chapter or other applicable
law, a permanent injunction against the same may be issued by the
court. Any such permanent injunction may include, among other things,
one or more of the following:
(1) A prohibition against defendants from causing, conducting,
maintaining, permitting or allowing the public nuisance.
(2) An authorization to the Town and its agents to remove and correct
any conditions in violation of the Code of the Town of Irondequoit.
The judgment may further order that the costs incurred by the
Town for removing and correcting the violations, plus an
administrative charge of 50% as compensation to the Town for
administering, supervising, and/or handling such work, shall be
charged against the defendants and awarded to the Town. Such
costs of removing and correcting the violations, plus such
administrative charge, shall constitute a lien against the real
§ 173-6 PLUMBING § 173-8
171:347
§ 173-9. Closing of building, structure, or real property.
§ 173-10. Preliminary injunction.
Upon a motion for a permanent injunction or order to show cause by the
Town and pending an action for a permanent injunction, a preliminary
property and shall be collected in the same manner provided by law
for the collection of real property taxes within the Town.
(3) A judgment directing the closing of the building, structure, or real
property by the Town of Irondequoit Police Department, to the
extent necessary to abate the nuisance.
B. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction shall provide for all costs
and disbursements allowed by the New York State Civil Practice Law
and Rules and for the actual costs, expenses, and disbursements of the
Town in investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
A. If the judgment of the court directs the closing of the building,
structure, or real property, the Town of Irondequoit Police Department
shall serve the judgment upon the defendants in the manner required
by the New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules and shall post a
copy of the judgment upon one or more of the doors at entrances to the
building, structure, or real property or in any other conspicuous place
on the building, structure, or real property.
B. In addition, the Town of Irondequoit Police Department shall affix upon
one or more of the doors at entrances to the building, structure, or real
property a printed notice stating "CLOSED BY COURT ORDER" in block
lettering a minimum of four inches high with a minimum of 1/2 inch
stroke width so as to be readily observed by anyone intending to enter
the premises.
C. Mutilation or removal of such posted judgment or notice while it
remains in force will be considered a separate violation under the New
York State Penal Law and the Code of the Town of Irondequoit and shall
be punishable pursuant to § 1-16.
D. The Town of Irondequoit Police Department may then command any
and all persons present in the building, structure, or real property to
vacate the property forthwith. After the building, structure or real
property has been vacated, the Town of Irondequoit Police Department
may secure the premises.
E. The closing directed by the judgment shall be for such period as the
court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of
more than one year from the posting of the judgment.
F. A closing by the Town of Irondequoit Police Department shall not
constitute an act of possession, ownership, or control by the Town.
§ 173-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 173-10
171:348
injunction enjoining the public nuisance may be granted for any of the relief
obtainable by a permanent injunction.
§ 173-11. Temporary restraining order.
Pending a motion or an order to show cause for a preliminary injunction, a
temporary restraining order or a temporary closing order may be granted,
without notice to defendants, for any of the relief obtainable by a permanent
injunction.
§ 173-12. Administrative hearing.
Whenever there is prima facie evidence of a public nuisance at any building,
structure, or real property within the Town, the Town Attorney or Attorney
to the Town, as the case may be, may initiate an administrative hearing.
A. Service of notice. A notice of the hearing shall be served on all owners
and may also be served on any known tenants or lessees or other
occupants of the building. The notice shall be served in the manner
required by the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. Content of notice. The notice shall allege the facts constituting the
public nuisance. The notice shall further contain a time and place for a
hearing to be held before a panel.
C. Hearing panel. The panel shall consist of a member to be appointed by
the Director of Community Development, a member to be appointed by
the Chief of Police, and a member to be appointed by the Fire Marshal.
Each appointing authority shall be authorized to appoint himself or
herself or any member of his or her staff to the hearing panel.
D. Hearing. At the time and place designated in the notice, the Town
Attorney or Attorney to the Town, as the case may be, or his or her
designee shall present all relevant evidence and/or witnesses
demonstrating the existence of a public nuisance at the building,
structure, or real property and as to any appropriate remedies. The
owners, or their representatives, shall have the right to examine such
evidence and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the Town
Attorney or Attorney to the Town, as the case may be, or his or her
designee. The owners, or their representatives, shall have the right to
present any relevant evidence and/or witnesses in their defense. The
Town Attorney or Attorney to the Town, as the case may be, or his or her
designee, shall have the right to examine such evidence and to crossexamine
any witnesses presented by the owners, or their
representatives.
E. Panel's finding and recommendation: Within five business days of the
hearing, the panel shall provide written findings of fact to the Town
Board. Such written findings shall state whether there prima facie
evidence exists of a public nuisance at the building, structure, or real
§ 173-10 PLUMBING § 173-12
171:349
§ 173-13. Administrative remedies.
property and shall further provide a written recommendation of
remedies to abate the public nuisance.
A. The Town Board, upon receipt of a finding of fact and recommendation
from the panel, shall have the following powers in furtherance of the
abatement of public nuisances:
(1) To issue a decision and order suspending or revoking, for a period
not to exceed one year, the certificate of occupancy and/or
certificate of registration of a rental occupancy and/or rental
dwelling unit pursuant to Chapter 177 of the Code of the Town of
Irondequoit, if applicable, for the building, structure, or real
property.
(2) To issue a decision and order directing the closing of the building,
structure, or real property by the Irondequoit Police Department to
the extent necessary to abate the nuisance, pursuant to the
procedures set forth above in § 173-9.
(3) In conjunction with, or in lieu of, the foregoing powers, to issue a
decision and order that various measures be taken by the owner,
tenant, and/or lessee of the property to the extent necessary to
both abate the existing nuisance and ensure the prevention of
future nuisance activity from occurring at or near the property,
which shall include, but not be limited to, requiring the owner to
modify and improve the usage and features of the premises to deter
further and future nuisance activity; mandating compliance with all
applicable building, housing, and property maintenance codes and
regulations pursuant to the Code of the Town of Irondequoit and/or
the laws of New York State; and/or directing subsequent owners to
comply with the provisions of any issued order of revocation or
suspension for the certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of
registration of a rental occupancy and/or rental dwelling unit
unless or until the subsequent owner appears before the hearing
panel to provide an appropriate plan for the panel to review and
make recommendations thereon, wherein said plan shall set forth
measures to avoid further incidents of nuisance activity.
B. The decision and order shall be served upon the owners and, at the
election of the Town, any tenant and/or lessee or the property in a
manner similar to that described in § 173-12A herein.
C. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town Board to
take such other and further actions and to avail itself and the Town of
any right or remedy available to it under this chapter or otherwise
under the Town of Irondequoit Code or other applicable law deemed
necessary or appropriate to abate any public nuisance so as to ensure
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 173-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 173-13
171:350
Chapter 175
RECORDS
§ 173-13 RECORDS § 173-13
175:351

ARTICLE I
Public Access
[Adopted 3-2-1978]
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Town of Irondequoit and its departments, divisions, offices,
bureaus and boards or commissions created or appointed by the Town
Board, and any special or improvement district of the town, other than a
library district, a fire district, a district corporation or a district having a
separately elected governing body.
RECORD — The same meaning as set forth in Subdivision 4 of § 86 of the
Public Officers Law, as amended or changed.
§ 175-2. Records access officers.
The following persons are hereby designated as records access officers for
the agency:
§ 175-3. Duties of agency personnel.
The records access officers shall be responsible for assuring that agency
personnel:
§ 175-4. Location of records.
A. The Town Supervisor, Town Hall, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New
York 14617;
B. The Town Clerk, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617; and
C. Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, 1280 Titus
Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617.
A. Comply with the requirements and provisions of the Freedom of
Information Law, the rules and regulations of COPAR and with this
Article in providing access to agency records.
B. Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list of records; update it twice a
year; and make it available for public inspection and copying.
C. Explain, in writing, reasons for denial of access and advise the
requester of the right to appeal, setting forth the name, title, business
address and telephone of persons to whom the appeal may be taken.
D. Upon request, calculate in advance the total cost of copies.
E. Permit the requester to make his or her own copy without damaging the
record and without relinquishing custody of the same.
§ 175-1 RECORDS § 175-4
175:353
§ 175-5. Requests for records.
A request to inspect or for a copy of a record shall reasonably describe the
same and shall be in writing.
§ 175-6. Appeals of denial of access.
The Town Board or the Town Attorney is hereby designated to hear and
determine appeals from a denial of access to agency records in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Law, rules and regulations of COPAR and
this Article.
§ 175-7. Response to requests regarding officers and employees.
The Town Supervisor shall respond to requests for a record of the name,
title, salary and public office address of every officer and employee of the
agency.
§ 175-8. Fees.58
Unless another fee is prescribed by state law, the fees shall be as follows:
A. Records of the agency are located at the Town Hall, 1280 Titus Avenue,
Rochester, New York 14617, or the following respective offices: Office
of the Town Clerk, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617.
B. All requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours that the Town Hall (or the respective offices)
is regularly open for business (i.e., 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.).
C. In the case of the office where regular hours are not kept, any person
wishing to inspect and copy records therein may contact the Town
Clerk at 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617, 467-8840 to
arrange an appointment for such purpose.57
A. Photocopying a record not exceeding nine by fourteen (9 x 14) inches:
$0.25.
B. Copies of records in excess of nine by fourteen (9 x 14) inches: the
actual cost of reproduction, not including the fixed costs, such as salary
of the employee.
C. Typed or handwritten transcripts: the actual clerical time involved in
making the transcript.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 175-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 175-8
175:354
ARTICLE II
Retention and Disposition
[Adopted 2-23-1989]
§ 175-9. Adoption of standard.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law, as amended or changed,
and containing legal minimum retention periods for municipal government
records, is hereby adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of
municipal government records listed therein.
§ 175-10. Disposition.
In accordance with Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law, as
amended or changed:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 175-9 RECORDS § 175-10
175:355
Chapter 177
RENTAL PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Collection and disposal of solid waste — See
Ch. 192, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 177-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 177-2. Definitions. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Full- and/or part-time employees of
the Department of Community Development, including the Director of
Community Development, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Code
Enforcement Officer, or others designated by the Director of Community
Development.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development.
A. Residential properties are significant assets and a critical investment in
the Town of Irondequoit because of their impact on community
character, property values and overall quality of life. To maintain our
neighborhoods and facilitate effective code enforcement, the Town
must be able to efficiently communicate with property owners
regarding maintenance and property conditions.
B. In instances when residential properties are rented, the Town Board
has determined that accurate and current contact information is
needed to facilitate timely communication with property owners
regarding potential issues related to property conditions and/or
violations of the Town Code and/or the laws of the State of New York.
The Town Board has also determined that the inability to make timely
contact with the owners of such residential rental properties may result
in extended physical deterioration of housing stock and/or substandard
living conditions for Town residents. The Town Board finds that
establishing registration requirements for rental properties is in the
best interest of public health, safety, and welfare and the good order
and governance of the Town will be promoted and enhanced by the
enactment of registration requirements for such rental properties and
their owners through the enactment of the provisions set forth in this
chapter.
§ 175-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 177-2
175:356
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or building, or any part thereof, or any
area, room or rooms therein, occupied or to be occupied by one or more
persons as a home or residence.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity shown to be the owner or owners
on the current assessment records of a dwelling unit or of a property
including one or more dwelling units.
RENT — A return, in money, property or other valuable consideration
(including payment in kind or services or other thing of value), for use and
occupancy or the right to the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit, whether
or not a legal relationship of landlord and tenant exists between the owner
and the occupant or occupants thereof.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit established, occupied, used or
maintained for rental occupancy in a one- or two-family home.
RENTAL OCCUPANCY — The occupancy or use of a dwelling unit by one
or more persons other than the owner as a home or residence under an
arrangement whereby the occupant or occupants thereof pay rent for such
occupancy and use. There is a rebuttable presumption that any occupancy
or use of a dwelling unit is a rental occupancy if the owner of the structure
or building containing the dwelling unit does not reside in the same
structure or building.
RENTAL PROPERTY — A property upon which is located a building or
buildings or structure or structures which include one or more rental
dwelling units.
SECURED BY NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by means used in the
design and approved plans for the building.
§ 177-3. Applicability; more restrictive provisions to prevail.
A. Scope. This chapter shall apply to all rental dwelling units located
within the Town, whether or not the use and occupancy thereof shall be
permitted under the applicable use regulations for the zoning district in
which such rental dwelling unit is located, as in this chapter provided.
B. Applicability.59 The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to
supplement applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules
and regulations, and nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish,
modify, limit, impair, supersede or replace any existing requirements of,
or remedies under, any other applicable federal, state or local statute,
laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations. In case of conflict
between any provision of this chapter and any applicable federal, state
or local statute, law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation, the more
restrictive or stringent provision or requirement shall prevail. The
59.Editor's Note: Section 6 of L.L. No. 4-2015, adopted 5-21-2015, states that the "chapter, as
amended, applies to all rental dwelling units as defined in this chapter. Any rental
dwelling unit that holds a current certificate of registration as of the effective date of this
local law shall not be required to submit an affidavit pursuant to § 177-5B. Renewals of
current certificates and new registrations that occur after effective date must comply with
all requirements of this chapter, as amended."
§ 177-2 RECORDS § 177-3
175:357
§ 177-4. Rental occupancy registration required.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any owner of any
rental property or rental dwelling unit in the Town to establish, maintain,
use, let, lease, rent or suffer or permit the occupancy and use thereof as
a rental occupancy without first obtaining and thereafter maintaining in
full force and effect a certificate of registration from the Town, as herein
provided.
§ 177-5. Application for rental occupancy registration. [Amended
5-21-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
acceptance of any registration, the filing of any application under this
chapter or other compliance with the requirements of this chapter
shall not cause, or be deemed to cause, any circumstance, condition,
status, action, or statement of facts that is otherwise illegal, unlawful or
noncompliant under any federal, state or local statute, law, ordinance,
code, rule or regulation, including, but not limited to, the Town Code,
to become or be deemed to be lawful, legal or in compliance.
A. Application for a certificate of registration of a rental occupancy and/or
for a rental dwelling unit shall be made in writing on a form provided by
and to be filed with the Department for that purpose. A separate
application shall be made for each rental dwelling unit or, where more
than one rental dwelling unit exists on a rental property, for each such
rental property. In the event that any rental dwelling unit or rental
property is owned by more than one person or entity, the application
shall be executed by each such owner, except in those instances in
which it is owned by an entity in which there are more than 10 owners,
in which event the application shall be executed by the chief executive
officer of such entity (e.g., president, general partner, managing
member). Such application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address (both street address and any post office
address), telephone and facsimile numbers, and e-mail address, if
any, of each owner. If any owner is an entity which has fewer than
10 owners (e.g., shareholders, partners and/or members), the
application shall also include the name, address (both street
address and any post office address), telephone and facsimile
numbers and e-mail addresses of each owner (e.g., shareholder,
partner, member) and of each officer (e.g., president, vice
president, treasurer, secretary, general partner, managing
member). If any owner is an entity which has more than 10 owners
(e.g., shareholders, partners and/or members), the application
shall also include the name, address (both street address and any
post office address), telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail
addresses of each officer (e.g., president, vice president, treasurer,
secretary, general partner, managing member).
§ 177-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 177-5
175:358
(2) The street address of the rental property, including the apartment
or unit number of the rental dwelling unit(s), if any.
(3) If the rental dwelling unit is occupied as of the date the application
is filed with the Department.
(4) A description of the building or structure, including the number of
rental dwelling units in the building or structure.
(5) If any owner does not live within and/or maintain an office or a
place of business within the Town, the name, address (street
address and any post office address), telephone and facsimile
numbers and e-mail address, if any, of the local managing agent or
agents or operator of each such intended rental property.
B. Conditions to be met; affidavit.
(1) Such application shall include an affidavit by the owner affirming
that rental dwelling unit(s) meet the following conditions:
(a) Rental properties and all rental dwelling units thereon shall
comply with all applicable federal, state or local statutes, laws,
ordinances, codes, rules or regulations, especially the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(b) Operational smoke and carbon monoxide detectors as required
by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
(c) Exterior walls, including foundations, shall be maintained. All
exterior walls and foundations must be free of holes and
crevices.
(d) Exterior doors, windows, skylights and similar openings shall
be maintained secured and weathertight.
(e) Exterior stairs, porches, entrance platforms, fire escapes and
the railings thereon shall be maintained in a safe and sound
condition.
(f) Roofs shall be maintained in a weathertight condition, secured
by normal means.
(g) Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions.
(h) Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition.
(i) Interior living spaces, including kitchen(s), bathroom(s) and
bedroom(s), are in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2) The affidavit will also affirm that owner has received and read the
following portions of the Town Code and understands the obligation
§ 177-5 RECORDS § 177-5
175:359
§ 177-6. Courtesy inspections. [Added 5-21-2015 by L.L. No.
4-201560]
Residents living in a rental dwelling unit subject to the regulations of this
chapter may apply to the Department for a courtesy inspection if they
believe the minimum standards set forth in § 177-5B are not present or
being maintained. Applicants shall pay the fee for courtesy inspection set
forth in § 1-18. The inspection fee is nonrefundable.
§ 177-7. Registration application fees. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
§ 177-8. Review of application. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
The Code Enforcement Official shall review each application for
completeness and accuracy. The Code Enforcement Official shall also
review all available information to confirm that the rental property and all
rental dwelling units thereon are in compliance with the Town Code or the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code at the time
the application is made. The application shall be accepted and a certificate
and responsibility to comply with all applicable state and local
laws, including but not limited to:
(a) Chapter 94, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
(b) Chapter 192, Solid Waste, Article II, Collection and Disposal.
(c) Chapter 235, Zoning, Article XIV, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, § 235-77A.
C. Such application shall be signed by the owner, or by each owner, of the
premises, and each such signature shall be notarized.
A. Registration application fee. A nonrefundable registration application
fee shall be paid to the Town upon filing each application for a
certificate of registration of a rental occupancy and/or for a rental
dwelling, in an amount to be set from time to time by the Town Board by
resolution. The Town Board resolution may, in its discretion, but subject
to applicable law, establish a schedule or schedules setting different
application fees for different categories of applicants or properties.
B. The fees required by this section shall be waived for any applicant that
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Official that it
is a not-for-profit housing development corporation organized under the
laws of the State of New York and that it is providing housing for senior
citizens or other designated special populations subject to income
guidelines established by either federal or state regulation.
60.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 177-6 through 177-14 as §§ 177-7
through 177-15, respectively.
§ 177-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 177-8
175:360
of registration shall be issued if, based on all such available information,
such application is found to be complete and accurate and if, based on
all such available information, the rental property and all rental dwelling
units thereon are in compliance with the Town Code or the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Applications shall be rejected
if they are deemed to be incomplete or inaccurate in any way or if the
rental property and all rental dwelling units thereon are determined to
not be in compliance with the Town Code or the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code. Notice to the owner of acceptance or
rejection of the application shall be made in writing.
§ 177-9. Term of certificate of registration. [Amended 5-21-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
A certificate of registration pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for as
long as the information in the application remains complete and accurate,
but in no case for more than a period of two years from the date on which
the certificate is issued. The owner shall file with the Department a new
application in accordance with the requirements of this chapter a) no less
than 60 days prior to 1) the expiration of the then current certificate or
2) if sooner, the date set forth in any contract of sale for the closing of
transfer of title to the rental dwelling unit or rental property; or b) except
for any change in the information provided in the application pursuant to
§ 177-5A(3), in the event that the prior application is no longer complete or
accurate, within 30 days following the occurrence of the event or change
in circumstances requiring the updating of such information. In the event a
new application is not filed if and when required pursuant to Item a)2) or b)
of this § 177-9, the existing certificate of registration shall be null and void.
§ 177-10. Record of registrations. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official to maintain a record of
registrations pursuant to this chapter. Such register shall be kept by owner
name and by street address, showing the name and address of the owner,
the number of rental dwelling units at such street address, and the date
of expiration of registration for such property. Each application shall be
maintained in accordance with all record retention requirements applicable
to the Town and shall be subject to public disclosure, inspection and copying
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable law of the State of
New York.
§ 177-11. (Reserved)
§ 177-12. Presumptions applicable to rental registration
enforcement and prosecutions. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
§ 177-8 RECORDS § 177-12
175:361
§ 177-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
Any person or entity which fails or refuses to comply with the requirements
of this chapter or violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation punishable, for a conviction of any offense, in each instance by a
fine of not less than $500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
A. Within the context of this chapter, the presence or existence of any one
of the following shall create a rebuttable presumption that a premises is
being used as a rental property or a rental dwelling unit:
(1) There exists a written or oral lease or rental arrangement, payment
or agreement for all or any portion of any building or structure
located on the property by and between the owner and any tenants,
occupants and/or other persons or entities in possession thereof.
(2) The property is occupied by someone other than the owner, and the
owner represents in writing or otherwise, to any person or
establishment, business, institution or government agency, that the
owner resides at an address other than the rental property.
(3) Utilities, cable, phone or other services are in place or requested to
be installed or used at the premises or any portion thereof in the
name of someone other than the owner.
(4) There are separate entrances for segregated parts of any building
or structure located on the property.
(5) There are partitions or internal doors which may serve to bar
access between segregated portions of any building or structure
located on the property, including but not limited to bedrooms.
(6) Any occupant or person in possession thereof does not have
unimpeded and/or lawful access to all dwelling units in a building
or structure.
(7) Two or more complete dwelling units, as defined herein or in the
Residential Code of New York State, exist in any building or
structure located on the property.
(8) A premises has been advertised in any newspaper, magazine, local
advertising publication, or posted or billed as being available for
rent.
B. The presumptions set forth above, subject to the limitations contained
therein, shall also be applicable to enforcement and prosecution of
illegal residential use and occupancy violations under other articles of
the Town Code.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent persons living together
with any owner as a two-family unit as defined by the Town Code.
§ 177-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 177-13
175:362
days, or both. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
§ 177-14. Severability. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in said judgment.
§ 177-15. Effective date. [Amended 5-21-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
This chapter originally took effect January 1, 2008.
Chapter 180
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 136.
Plumbing — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
§ 177-13 RECORDS § 177-15
175:363

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Sewer Use Ordinance."
§ 180-2. Purpose. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the sewage collection and
treatment facilities, to prevent danger to life or damage to property, to
promote the health, safety and general welfare, to prohibit the introduction
of storm, surface or subsurface waters into the sanitary sewers and to
form a basis and policy for controlling the quantity and quality of wastes
accepted into the sewage systems of the sewer districts now or hereafter
created in the Town of Irondequoit, Monroe County, New York.
§ 180-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all other wastes not
being domestic wastes but not limited to the wastes from commercial,
laboratory and industrial processes, wastes from domestic operations
or certain trade operations, such as sand, grit, waste petroleum
products from automotive service stations and the like, animal wastes,
straw and related items from dairy or other farming operations.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or groundwater.
§ 180-1 RECORDS § 180-3
175:365
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/4
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is owned or controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface- and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface- and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER DISTRICT — Any of the sanitary sewer districts and their
extension or extensions and/or any drainage district or districts now
existing or subsequently created by the Town Board of the Town of
Irondequoit.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which
carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT (Commissioner of Public Works) — The person
appointed by the Town Board in general charge of maintenance of
all sanitary pump stations and sanitary sewers within the Town of
Irondequoit.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 180-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 180-3
175:366
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 180-4. Unsanitary disposal of wastes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the Town of Irondequoit, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste,
excepting insofar as may be permitted under the provisions of the State
Sanitary Code.
§ 180-5. Discharge of untreated sewage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town
of Irondequoit, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-6. Use of privies, septic tanks and other facilities restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 180-7. Connection to available public sewer required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the Town of
Irondequoit and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of
the Town is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 120 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that connection to said public sewer is
feasible.
§ 180-4 RECORDS § 180-7
175:367

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 180-8. Private sewage disposal.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 180-7, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 180-9. Permit required; fee. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
As required by the Monroe County Health Department. See § 180-11.
§ 180-10. Inspection. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
As required by the Monroe County Health Department. See § 180-11.
§ 180-11. Compliance with Monroe County Department of Health
requirements. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Monroe County Health
Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet. Installation of a private sewage collection/disposal
system shall conform to all current policies and dictates mandated by the
Monroe County Health Department.
§ 180-12. Connection with public sewer when available.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 180-7, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 180-13. Operation at owner's expense.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the Town.
§ 180-14. Health officer may impose additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the municipal health
department and the authorized representatives of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 180-8 RECORDS § 180-14
175:369

ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 180-15. Superintendent to have charge of sewer system.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The sewer systems of the sewer districts of the Town of Irondequoit, New
York, as constructed or as hereafter added to or changed, shall be under
the charge and control of the Superintendent under whose supervision
they shall be used by property owners and no person shall enter into,
open or interfere with or use or do any repair or maintenance work with
respect to said sewer systems except under the inspection and direction
of the Superintendent and after a sewer entrance permit shall have been
issued by the Superintendent in which such entering, opening, use, repair
or maintenance is to take place. The Superintendent may adopt rules and
regulations to govern the maintenance and use of the sewer systems, and
the Town Board shall therein fix the amount of fees that shall be chargeable
to persons or property owners who may wish to enter or use the sewer
systems, which fee shall be sufficient in amount to pay for the cost of
inspection of such entry or entries.
§ 180-16. Restrictions on sewer entrance permits. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Permits granted under this chapter shall be for a specific waste or wastes
and such permits shall be granted only after the submission and approval
of plans as set forth hereinafter. Subsequent wastes of different quantity,
quality or characteristics shall be covered by separate permits.
§ 180-17. Classes of building sewer entrance permits. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 180-18. Owner's responsibility for installation.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Sewer Commission from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For domestic waste service; and
(2) For service to all other contributors.
B. The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by
the Superintendent. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit fee in an amount fixed in
the Rules and Regulations for Sewer Districts in the Town of
Irondequoit shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
§ 180-15 RECORDS § 180-19
175:371
§ 180-19. Separate building sewers required. [Amended 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building and building lot.
§ 180-20. Old building sewers, when permitted.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 180-21. Construction to conform to rules and regulations.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the State
Building Construction Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Town. In the absence of provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and
W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 180-22. Required elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 180-23. Drainage connections to sanitary sewers prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 180-24. Standards for connection to public sewer.
A. Specifications. The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Building
Construction Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Town or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 or any amendments,
changes or supplements thereto which may then be in effect. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
B. Superintendent to inspect construction. The applicant for the building
sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer
§ 180-19 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 180-24
175:372
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent
or his representative.
C. Guarding of excavations; restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 180-24 RECORDS § 180-24
175:373

ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 180-25. Discharge of surface waters prohibited in sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 180-26. Discharge of stormwater or unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 180-27. Prohibited wastes or water.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature lower than 32º F. or higher
than 150º F.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per
liter, by weight, of fats, oils or grease.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grit, straw, animal wastes, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure or any other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works in the opinion of the Superintendent.
F. Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works in
the opinion of the Superintendent.
G. Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant in the opinion of
the Superintendent.
§ 180-25 RECORDS § 180-27
175:375
§ 180-28. Interceptors. [Amended 2-26-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
An approved grease-intercepting trap shall be installed in the fixture drain
of sinks, floor drains, and other fixtures through which grease usually is
introduced into the sewer system, in any place or building having a capacity
to serve group meals, which includes, but is not limited to, the following
establishments: restaurants, hotel kitchens or bars, factory cafeterias or
restaurants, clubs and other commercial kitchens. In such establishments,
grease traps shall be installed in the fixture drains of pot, scullery, or
food scrap sinks and floor drains receiving waste or spillage; however, no
dishwashers shall be allowed to discharge through a grease-intercepting
trap. All interceptors shall be the type and capacity approved by the Town
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. They shall be of suitable construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers, which when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight.
§ 180-29. Owner's responsibility to maintain.
Where installed, all grease, oil, sand and grit interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation
at all times.
§ 180-30. Restrictions on admission of certain wastes.
H. Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant.
I. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance.
A. The admission into public sewers of any waters or wastes having a fiveday
biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter
by weight, containing more than 350 milligrams per liter by weight of
suspended solids, containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 180-27 of this article or having an
average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of
the sewer district shall be subject to review and approval of the
Superintendent.
B. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
(1) Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter
and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter by weight;
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in this article; or
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
§ 180-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 180-30
175:376
§ 180-31. Preliminary treatment facilities.
§ 180-32. Manholes.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying commercial-industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be conveniently and safely located. It is to be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 180-33. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in §§ 180-27 and 180-30 shall be
determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage" or with methods approved by New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and may be determined at the
control manhole provided for in § 180-32 or upon suitable samples taken at
said manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole may be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
If, in the judgment of the Superintendent, analyses must be performed
which are beyond the scope of the laboratory at the sewage treatment
plant, these analyses shall be performed at a laboratory designated by the
Superintendent, and the cost of these analyses shall be borne by the owner.
§ 180-34. Special charges.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
the Town Board from establishing special charges for any industrial,
C. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent, together with a letter from the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation or appropriate
municipal health department approving the proposed preliminary
treatment facilities, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
A. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required for any waters or
wastes, no plumbing permit will be granted until such pretreatment
units have been placed in operation and have demonstrated their
effectiveness by test. The cost of such testing, sampling and analyzing
shall be borne by the waste contributor. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
B. Said preliminary treatment facilities shall be maintained continuously
and satisfactorily in effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 180-30 RECORDS § 180-34
175:377
commercial or other user from whose premises an industrial, commercial
or domestic waste eminates which is of such unusual strength or character
so that special treatment is required or extraordinary costs are incurred in
disposing of the same.
§ 180-34 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 180-34
175:378
ARTICLE VI
Repairs and Inspections
§ 180-35. Damaging or tampering with sewer.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest.
§ 180-36. Repair and maintenance work.
A. Superintendent to supervise. Any repair or maintenance work in
connection with sewer pipes and drains connected directly or indirectly
to any sanitary or storm sewer system or storm drain in the Town shall
be performed in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision and inspection of the Superintendent.
B. Charges for special benefits.
(1) For work performed on sewers, pipes, laterals or drains which are
not a part of a sanitary sewer or storm sewer system, at the
direction or under the supervision of the Superintendent, for the
particular or special benefit of any individual parcel or portion of
real property, a charge is hereby established in an amount equal to
the actual cost thereof to the sewer district.
(2) The Town Board shall annually assess against the individual parcel
of land the amount of any such charges remaining unpaid on
October 1 and such charges shall be added to the tax roll and
collected in the same manner and at the same time as the other
taxes are assessed, levied and collected in the Town pursuant to
statute.
§ 180-35 RECORDS § 180-36
175:379

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 180-37. Cancellation of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to cancellation
after a hearing in the event of a finding by the Town Board at such hearing
that the user or permittee of the sewerage system has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter. Such hearing shall take place on 10 days' written
notice to the permittee or user. Upon any cancellation provided for in this
section, the Town Board may terminate the use of the sewer by ordering the
severing of the connection to the sewerage system.
§ 180-38. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of § 180-35. Any person who shall violate any provision of
§ 180-35 shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Written notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any
provision of the foregoing articles of this chapter, except § 180-35, shall
be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
C. Continued violation. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subdivision B herein shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $250 for each violation.
D. Civil liability. Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation.
§ 180-37 RECORDS § 180-38
175:381
Chapter 192
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 196.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 198.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 230.
§ 180-38 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 180-38
175:382
ARTICLE I
Waterways
[Adopted 1-20-1977 as Ch. 174 of the 1977 Code]
§ 192-1. Dumping prohibited.
No person shall dump, place or dispose of any substances, including but not
limited to sludge, cinders, ashes or refuse of any type whatever, in any of
the streams, tributaries or waterways within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Irondequoit.
§ 192-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
The violation of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable
as provided in § 1-16. Each separate offense shall constitute a separate
violation. The provisions hereof are in addition to the regulations,
restrictions and requirements contained in the Environmental Conservation
Law.
§ 192-1 RECORDS § 192-2
175:383

ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 9-17-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
§ 192-3. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste Management Law of the
Town of Irondequoit."
§ 192-4. Findings; purpose.
§ 192-5. Definitions. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 10-1995;
7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Solid Waste Administrator of Monroe County.
A. The Congress of the United States has mandated resource recovery as a
component of solid waste management and to that end has enacted the
National Resource Recovery Act of 1989 which mandates recycling as a
method of resource recovery. The New York State Legislature has
followed the federal mandate in enacting the New York State Solid
Waste Management Act of 1988 which requires recycling of waste
materials as a component of the New York State Solid Waste
Management Law and requires that municipalities adopt a local law or
ordinance to require that solid waste which has been left for collection
or which is delivered by the generator of such waste to a solid waste
management facility shall be separated into recyclable, reusable or
other components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
As mandated by the New York State Solid Waste Management Act of
1988, the County of Monroe has enacted Local Law No. 4-1991, entitled
"Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Law," which requires, among other
things, that each municipality within Monroe County enact a mandatory
recycling ordinance or local law.
B. The purpose of this article is to comply with the mandate of the federal,
state and county governments for the management, on a town-wide
basis, of all solid waste generated within the Town of Irondequoit and to
authorize the supervision and regulation of the storage, collection and
disposition of all or part of any solid waste generated within the Town of
Irondequoit, emphasizing the source reduction, recovery and recycling
of certain materials in the waste stream. [Amended 7-20-1999 by
L.L. No. 5-1999]
C. Therefore, the Town of Irondequoit, with suggestions from the Solid
Waste Management Commission, will continue to investigate solutions
to the numerous problems created by the volume of solid waste and
from time to time will make suggestions for further modifications,
refinements or additions to this article.
§ 192-3 RECORDS § 192-5
175:385
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING FACILITY OR FACILITIES — Any and all
permitted or specifically exempt facility or facilities for processing,
reprocessing and/or recycling recyclable materials which are specified in
the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. This term
shall exclude incineration facilities, waste-to-energy facilities and landfills.
BULKY REFUSE — Waste materials of large size typically constructed
of sheet metal or wood and/or which cannot be readily collected and/or
disposed of in its original size and shape. Bulky refuse includes but it not
limited to large appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, washing machines,
hot water heaters and dishwashers, household furniture and mattresses,
derimmed vehicle tires up to 16 inches in size, carpeting, foam padding and
linoleum. Other waste materials may be categorized as "bulky waste" in the
future by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
with the approval of the Town Board.
COMPOSTING — The converting of yard waste into usable organic
materials through controlled decomposition within a containment structure.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Uncontaminated solid
waste resulting from the construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling,
repair and demolition of structures, roads, driveways, sidewalks and
gutters, including but not limited to road waste, such as asphaltic
pavement, gravel, stone, soil and concrete, and remodeling waste, such
as bricks, concrete and other masonry material, wood, wall coverings,
plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos insulation, roofing shingles,
unsealed plastic and electrical fixtures and wiring, and tree removal waste,
such as stumps and logs.
CONTAINERS — All containers must be of a sufficient strength and
construction to contain the material to be disposed of in said container and
must comply with all other restrictions on containers as set forth in this
article.
DUMPSTER ENCLOSURE — Structures utilized to enclose dumpsters in
zoning districts other than single family residential districts.
GARBAGE/RUBBISH — Putrescible solid waste, including animal and
vegetable waste, resulting from the handling, storage, sale, preparation,
cooking or serving of foods. Garbage/rubbish originates primarily in home
kitchens, stores, markets, restaurants and other places where food is
stored, prepared or served. Garbage/rubbish includes but is not limited to
food, waste, rags, packing, clothing, sweepings, ashes, crockery, shells and
some wastepaper.
HOLIDAYS — Commerations recognized by law, including Christmas Day,
New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and
Labor Day.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Household waste which but for its
point of generation would be a hazardous waste under 6 NYCRR 371,
as amended or changed. Household hazardous waste includes but is not
limited to used oil, paints, solvents, drain cleaners, pesticides and
herbicides. Hazardous wastes generally exhibit one or more of the following
§ 192-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-5
175:386
characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, carcinogenicity or
toxicity.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation,
association, society, group or other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Solid waste that exhibits the potential to be
used in the place of a virgin material and includes but is not limited to the
following:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily
of aluminum and commonly used for beer, soda, beverage or other food
or drink products and other aluminum products.
A.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Material resulting
from the construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair and
demolition of structures and roads; and material consisting of
vegetation resulting from land clearing and grubbing, including stumps
and logs, utility line maintenance and seasonal and storm-related
cleanup. Such material includes but is not limited to bricks, concrete
and coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos
insulation, roofing and shingles, asphaltic pavement, glass, plastics,
electrical wiring and components, carpeting, foam padding, linoleum
and metals that are incidental to any of the above.
B.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Woodpulp-based material which is
usually smooth on both sides with a corrugated center, commonly used
for shipping boxes, retail store displays, some retail folding carton
packaging and in lighter calipers, fast food packaging. Corrugated
excludes material with wax coating.
C.
GLASS BOTTLES — New and used glass food and beverage containers
which have been rinsed and are free of food contamination, including
clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass bottles. Glass
shall not include ceramics, plate glass, auto glass, Pyrex, leaded glass,
mirrored glass or flat glass.
D.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White and colored office bond, duplicating
paper, computer paper and other high-quality paper.
E.
LARGE APPLIANCES — Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers,
washing machines, water heaters and other large appliances and scrap
metal and excluding air conditioners, microwaves and televisions.
F.
G. MAGAZINES — Magazines, glossy catalogs and other glossy paper.
METAL CANS — Containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin, or
bimetal cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including aluminum
cans.
H.
NEWSPRINT — Common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made
chiefly from woodpulp and used for newspaper. This term excludes
magazines.
I.
§ 192-5 RECORDS § 192-5
175:387
REFUSE — Anything putrescible or nonputrescible that is discarded or
rejected as useless or worthless and is eligible for collection under this
article. Refuse does not include hazardous waste or recyclables.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity
licensed to carry on the business of receiving, collecting, transporting or
disposing of garbage, refuse, construction and demolition material, yard
waste, recyclables and bulk refuse for hire within the Town of Irondequoit.
ROLL-OUT CART — A garbage/rubbish container provided by a person's
refuse collector mounted on an axle with wheels and which has an attached
lid that protects the contents from rain, wind and other elements. The
container is designed to attach to either the side or rear of a collection
vehicle and be lifted by a mechanical cart lifter into the hopper portion of
the collection vehicle so that the contents can be emptied into the collection
vehicle prior to compaction into the body of the collection vehicle. The size
of the cart shall not exceed 100 gallons.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials and other
recoverable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale or other disposition.
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
WASTE STREAM REDUCTION PROGRAM — Source separation, recycling
program, changes to packing portion of the waste stream to reduce solid
PAPERBOARD — Wood-pulp based materials which are generally
smooth on both sides commonly used for retail folding carton
packaging. Typical varieties are solid bleached sulfate (SBS), solid
unbleached sulfate (SUS), thermal mechanical pulp (TMP) and clay
coated news (CCN).
J.
PLASTICS — High-density polyethylene (HDPE) with the recycling
numerical code 2 (primarily milk and water jugs and cooking oil
bottles), low-density polyethylene (LDPE) with the numerical code 4
and polyethylene terepthalate (PET) with the numerical code 1,
primarily one- and two-liter soft drink containers. Such containers are
identified with the New York State Recycling Code, generally on the
bottom of the containers, such as diagrammed below on Appendix A
attached.61
K.
L. WOOD WASTE — Logs, pallets and other wood materials.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, garden debris, brush and small
or chipped branches. Christmas trees shall be treated as brush. Brush
includes sticks and small branches which do not exceed four feet in
length and are tied in bundles.
M.
YARD WASTE FOR COMPOSTING — Includes fallen leaves, grass and
hedge clippings, weeds, the remains of garden plants and materials
which result from normal care of residential lawns, shrubs and gardens.
N.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 192-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-5
175:388
waste generated, activities and enterprises of scrap dealers, processors
and consumers and other programs designed to reduce the volume of solid
waste or enhance reclamation and recovery of solid waste or recyclable
materials otherwise destined for the municipal waste stream. For purposes
of this definition, such waste stream reduction programs shall not include
the processing of waste for incineration or disposal by landfill or other
means.
§ 192-6. License required; application; fee.
A. For business for collecting. No person shall engage in the business of
receiving, collecting or transporting residential and/or commercial
refuse or recyclable materials in the town without first obtaining a
license to carry on such business from the town and paying the fee for
such license as herein provided. Nothing herein contained, however,
shall be construed to prevent any person from transporting for the
purpose of disposal such refuse, bulky refuse, yard waste or recyclables
as is normally generated by such person on his or her own premises or
in his or her own business. Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall
be for a period of one year, renewable each calendar year, to ascertain
that all conditions of this article are being complied with, and subject
however to the revocation thereof as provided herein. An annual fee
shall be charged for licenses issued pursuant to this section. Such fee
shall be determined by the Town Board, by resolution, and may be
adjusted on an annual basis. All licenses will be effective from January 1
to December 31 for the year in which the annual fee was paid for.
B. Application for license. Application shall be upon forms approved by the
Town Board. Each applicant shall state in such application his or her
name, address, legal character (whether corporation, partnership or
individual), name and address of all stockholders, directors or partners,
whether he or she or any stockholders, officers, directors, or partners
have ever been convicted of any crime and such other information, from
time to time, as the Town Board may require. The Town Clerk is hereby
authorized to issue temporary permits to any licensed collector to use
such additional trucks as are necessary for a period not to exceed 30
days for a fee as determined by the Town Board. The license application
for each and every license shall require a route list, the name and
address of a backup service company in the event of equipment or
manpower failures and proof of access to legal disposal facility.
C. Annual fee. An annual fee for licenses issued pursuant to this section
shall be determined in accordance with § 1-18, with an additional fee
for each motor vehicle used and such other sums as may be determined,
from time to time, by the Town Board. [Amended 3-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
§ 192-5 RECORDS § 192-7
175:389
§ 192-7. Bond.
A bond in the sum of $20,000 shall be executed by every person or
corporation engaged in the refuse collection business within the town and
shall be filed with the Town Clerk before such license shall be issued. Such
bond shall be conditioned that said license shall comply with the laws,
codes, ordinances and regulations of the State of New York, County of
Monroe, Town of Irondequoit, and all lawfully issued orders of the Town
Board and that the town will be indemnified and held harmless from any
and all claims for any and all claims for any damages or liabilities, including
attorney's fees, caused by or arising out of any act or omission of the
licensee, his or her agents or employees or by his or her failure to comply
with applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. Said bond
shall be in such form and contain such sureties as shall be approved by the
Town Board and the Town Attorney.
§ 192-8. Conditions imposed on license.
Every license issued by the Town Clerk pursuant to this article shall be
subject to the following conditions and to such other reasonable conditions
as may be imposed by the Town Board. All requirements of licensing must
be complied with by January 31 of each year.
A. Watertight, enclosed vehicle bodies equipped with compaction unit.
Vehicles used by refuse collectors in the collection and transportation of
garbage or rubbish within the Town of Irondequoit shall have
watertight, enclosed bodies, to the extent practicable by existing
technologies, and shall be equipped with a compaction unit. Licensees
shall be allowed to use open service trucks only for emergency use and
also for the purpose of collecting bulk refuse and recyclables. The
determination of emergency conditions shall be in the sole discretion of
the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways.
Vehicles used by refuse collectors in the collection and transportation of
garbage or rubbish within the Town of Irondequoit shall be clearly
identified on both sides with the name and telephone number of the
refuse hauler.
B. Inspection of vehicles used by collectors. All vehicles used by refuse
collectors shall be available for inspection by the Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or any other person or
persons whom he or she may designate as his or her agent prior to the
issuance of any license pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such
vehicles shall pass inspection if they comply with the applicable
provisions of this article and any other such standards promulgated and
issued by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways with the approval of the Town Board.
C. Refuse collector's fees. All refuse collectors shall submit a list of their
fees charged. All prices shall be subject to approval of Town Board.
There shall be no increase in price or additional charge to any
§ 192-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-8
175:390
§ 192-9. Issuance of license; license decal. [Amended 5-2-1995 by
L.L. No. 10-1995]
Upon payment of the license fee and approval by the Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or such other person as may
be designated by the Town Board of the application therefor, the Town
Clerk shall issue a license to the owner, together with a decal which shall
be affixed to a conspicuous and an indispensable part of each and every
vehicle, used in such collections and transportation as set forth in this
article, on which shall be set forth clearly the official number of such license
with the words "Town of Irondequoit Solid Waste Collection License."
§ 192-10. License renewal.
Renewal licenses shall be issued in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as original licenses and any additional requirements the
town may deem necessary in consideration of the health, safety and welfare
of the town, its residents and property.
§ 192-11. Transferability of license.
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be
transferable.
§ 192-12. Insurance.
individual without the consent of the Town Board. This does not apply to
those items refuse collectors are not obliged to pick up by this article.
A. Motor vehicles. All trucks must have a minimum liability insurance
policy for personal injuries in the amount of $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per accident and $100,000 coverage for property damage.
A certificate of insurance must be furnished by each refuse collector
indicating these limits, including contractual liability, and the Town of
Irondequoit is to be named on this policy as an additional insured.
B. General liability.
(1) A refuse collector throughout the term of the license shall maintain
in full force and effect for the benefit of the town and naming the
town as additional insureds and the refuse collector as parties
insured therein comprehensive general public liability insurance,
including, without limitation, umbrella liability coverage against
claims for personal injury, death or damage to property incurring
as the result of receiving, collecting or transporting residential
and/or commercial refuse or recyclable materials in the town with
limits of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of
one person and $3,000,000 arising out of one occurrence and
$100,000 for property damage.
§ 192-8 RECORDS § 192-12
175:391
§ 192-13. Telephone access required; response time.
Each refuse collector must provide forthwith and at all times during the
term of the license provided a telephone number and be prepared to receive
and answer messages for a minimum of eight hours every business day of
the year, from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Each refuse collector shall
respond to each inquiry, complaint or message within 24 hours.
§ 192-14. Ineligibility for license.
No individual, whether owner, officer, partner or director of a corporation,
will be eligible for a license if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the Town Board, renders
the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on with the duties involved with
a refuse collector.
§ 192-15. Proper language and demeanor required of collectors.
No person and/or resident, collector or employee shall be under the
influence of drugs and/or alcohol or use gross discourteous language during
collection or when discussing business over the telephone.
§ 192-16. Changes in ownership. [Amended 7-20-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999]
Any changes in ownership where the license is not affected must be
reported to the Town Board within five days.
§ 192-17. Service refusal prohibited.
No refuse collector shall refuse to render service when asked by any person
located within the refuse collector's primary service area. Terms and
conditions of providing collection service shall be agreed upon between the
individual and the refuse collector, but shall be uniform for all customers
and shall not discriminate for other than valid business reasons. The refuse
collector shall continue to provide service during any dispute with any
person, but shall have the right to appeal to the Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways relative to continuing the service to
any person. The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
(2) The insurance required hereunder shall be issued by an insurance
company licensed to do businessman the State of New York prior to
the issuance or renewal of any license, and thereafter, on or before
expiration of any expiring policy, the refuse collector shall furnish
renewals thereof, together with proof of payment of premiums
therefor, within 60 days after the renewal date. If such insurance is
carried under a blanket policy, the refuse collector may deliver a
certificate in lieu of the original policy. Each policy or renewal shall
contain a provision for written notice to the town at least 30 days
prior to the cancellation or any modification thereof.
§ 192-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-17
175:392
shall render a decision within 30 days of the written presentation of the
appeal to him or her.
§ 192-18. Levels of service. [Amended 7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
All collectors must offer, in addition to their normal full service rate, at
least one optional low-volume rate to their customers. This low-volume rate
must provide for weekly pickup of recyclable, as well as small amounts of,
garbage/rubbish. The pickup of bulky refuse, construction and demolition
waste and yard waste would not be included without an extra charge to
low-volume rate customers. All collectors must provide, annually and upon
request, to each of their current customers, and those wishing to become
customers, a printed menu detailing the different types of service the
collector offers to residential customers.
§ 192-19. Storage of refuse.
A. No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of refuse upon
any premises owned or occupied by him or her except for the purpose of
collection which shall normally occur at intervals not less frequent than
once every seven days, except for holidays, Sundays, vacations or
extraordinary weather or except where caused by or arising out of the
construction or remodeling of a dwelling or other building on the
premises or incidental to the landscaping of said premises or customary
agricultural operations thereon, in which case due care shall be taken
that such accumulation shall not create an unsightly appearance or
unreasonably disturb the comfort and repose of the neighborhood and
shall be removed within a reasonable time or immediately upon
completion of the work causing such accumulation.
B. The provisions of this sections shall not be deemed to prohibit a private
property owner from making and retaining a compost heap on his or her
property for normal gardening purposes or from mulching an area of
his or her property in accordance with customary gardening practices,
provided that said compost heap is contained in a post and fencing or
pallet or manufactured composting container; that the materials
composted are limited to fruits, vegetables, coffee grounds and yard
waste for composting, as defined in this article; that composting
containers are located no fewer than three feet from side or rear yard
property lines; and that the owner makes reasonable efforts to maintain
an attractive appearance and keep odors to a minimum. [Amended
9-26-2000 by L.L. No. 8-2000; 7-27-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
C. The determination of violations related to this provision shall be in the
sole discretion of the Director of Development Services and/or his/her
designee or as designated by the Town Board. [Amended 7-20-1999
by L.L. No. 5-1999]
§ 192-17 RECORDS § 192-20
175:393
§ 192-20. Receptacles. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999;
11-20-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 192-21. Deposit of hazards in right-of-way prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
refuse, hazardous waste or recyclable materials in or upon any portion
of a public right-of-way, street or place or on any property not owned or
occupied by him or her, nor in any refuse container not owned, leased or
rented by him or her within the town.
§ 192-22. Preparation of recyclables for collection. [Amended
7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
Recyclables shall be prepared for collection in accordance with guidelines
provided by the refuse collectors and approved or otherwise established by
the town. Refuse collectors shall provide curb side collection of recyclables.
Recyclables to be picked up must be set out in appropriate containers as
specified by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
or any subsequent and pertinent ordinance or law or as designated by
the refuse collectors and shall not be placed at the curb before 4:00 p.m.
of the day preceding the scheduled pickup day. Empty containers must
be returned and stored behind the front foundation line of the primary
A. Every owner of any residence, building or place of business within the
Town shall provide for, or cause to be provided, and at all times keep
suitable and sufficient receptacles, as defined in § 192-25 of this article,
for receiving and containing garbage and garbage/rubbish that may
accumulate or be used upon said premises. Every owner of any
residence, building or place of business must be able to demonstrate
that the residence, building or place of business is serviced by a refuse
collector or a legal disposal facility. Failure to provide proof of refuse
collection when requested by the Code Enforcement Official will
constitute a violation of this article and subject to penalties for offenses
as outlined in § 192-31. Except as otherwise provided in this article,
refuse receptacles must be stored behind the front foundation line of
the primary structure, and/or accessory structure attached thereto or
within an enclosed building or dumpster enclosure. For the purposes of
this article, properties located on a corner lot, both street frontages
shall be deemed to be front yards.
B. Dumpster enclosure requirement. Dumpsters are required to be
enclosed as per site plan approval or in a manner approved by the
Director of Community Development and/or his/her designee, as to
provide screening from neighboring property. Dumpster lids are to be
closed at all times and shall not spread offensive odors or their contents
to neighboring property. In addition, the dumpster pad shall be kept
clean, and the dumpster shall remain accessible for collection at all
times.
§ 192-20 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-22
175:394
structure or within an enclosed building or dumpster enclosure as required
under this article by the end of the service day.
§ 192-23. Preparation of yard waste for collection. [Amended
5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 10-1995]
§ 192-24. Preparation of bulky refuse.
§ 192-25. Storage receptacles. [Amended 10-18-1994 by L.L. No.
8-1994; 7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999; 11-20-2007 by L.L. No.
6-2007]
A. All brush must be cut to a length of not more than four feet. All
branches/brush under two inches in diameter must be bundled.
Material two inches in diameter and larger may also be bundled. The
bundles must be bound with rope or twine (not wire), should not weigh
more than 50 pounds and should not be more than 16 inches across.
B. In the fall, leaves shall be collected by the refuse collectors. All leaves
must be in containers approved by the Commission of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways. Wheelbarrows, lawn carts and fifty-fivegallon
drums are not considered suitable containers for the collection of
leaves. Leaves must not be mixed with other refuse materials set out for
collection. Leaf collection in the town may begin on or about October 15
of each year and ending on or about December 31 of each year.
C. Grass clippings will not be collected by either the town or by refuse
collectors as part of their regular service.
D. If a resident contracts with a private lawn service or tree removal
service, it is the responsibility of the hired contractor to properly
remove and dispose of material generated by his or her work.
A. Appliances and bulky refuse shall be dismantled in such a way so as not
to pose a threat to public health and safety. For example, refrigerator
doors must be removed from their hinges.
B. Pursuant to the rules of the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, as approved by the Town Board, all bulky
refuse, where practicable, construction and demolition waste shall be
bagged or bundled into packages not weighing more than 50 pounds.
Such materials are to be placed at the curb in an area five feet by five
feet square, by three feet high or an equivalent volume. Amounts in
excess of this quantity will require special collection arrangements
made by the person with a refuse collector.
A. Garbage/rubbish shall be stored in proper containers. Such receptacles
shall be containers of sufficient capacity, and said containers shall have
handles and a tight-fitting cover and shall be watertight and shall have
a capacity of not less than 18 gallons nor more than 32 gallons. All such
receptacles shall be securely closed at all times. However, roll-out carts
§ 192-22 RECORDS § 192-25
175:395
§ 192-26. Collector regulations.
§ 192-27. Responsibilities of collectors.
are acceptable and are not limited by the gallon restrictions herein.
Wheelbarrows, lawn carts, fifty-five-gallon drums, fiber barrels and
wastebaskets are prohibited containers for collection or disposal of
garbage/refuse.
B. No containers may be placed at the curb before 4:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the scheduled pickup day. Empty containers must be
returned and stored behind the front line of the primary structure, and/
or accessory structure attached thereto, or within an enclosed building
or dumpster enclosure, as required under this article, by the end of the
service day.
A. No vehicle used by a refuse collector shall travel into a residential
driveway for the purpose of collecting refuse or recyclables.
B. Under no circumstances shall collections commence earlier than 7:00
a.m., and all collection work shall stop at 6:00 p.m., with the exception
of commercial establishments on Ridge Road East where commercial
collections may commence at 6:00 a.m. and shall stop at 6:00 p.m. No
collections shall be made on Sundays or holidays. [Amended
6-19-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001]
C. Each refuse collector shall issue to his or her customers on an annual
basis, at his or her own expense, written information giving his or her
customers his or her name, address and telephone number, stating the
day upon which collection is made, and said written information shall
contain a summary of services to be rendered by the refuse collector,
conditions for pickup and rates. The town and Monroe County Division
of Solid Waste shall provide information with respect to the
requirements of the recycling and yard waste programs.
D. At least two refuse collectors shall be available to service customers in
all areas of the town. The Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall have the authority to assign a refuse
collector to a particular customer or location if the customer is in an
area of town serviced by one or fewer refuse collectors and is
dissatisfied with their current service. The Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways shall assign the refuse collector
closest to the service area to the account in question.
A. Bulky waste. Refuse collectors shall be responsible for the collection of
bulky refuse up to an amount as would fit into a five-foot-by-five-foot
square and three feet high or equivalent volume. If the amount
generated by the resident exceeds this amount, the resident is
responsible for making alternative collection arrangements within
seven days of generation. There shall be no special charges for the
collection of bulky waste properly prepared as specified in this article if
§ 192-25 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-27
175:396
included in the customer's refuse hauling rate. Materials which are
not properly prepared or which exceed the volume and/or weight
requirements as specified may be subject to additional charges as set
by the refuse collector; provided, however, that the refuse collector
informs the customer of the appropriate preparation requirements as
specified in this article and the additional charges to be assessed
for noncompliance prior to collecting the material. In any event, the
resident is responsible for making appropriate collection arrangements
within seven days of generation.
B. Construction and demolition waste. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
10-1995; 7-20-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
(1) Broken concrete, rocks, sod, dirt and large pieces of wood, more
than two inches and less than six inches in diameter and less than
six feet long, are to be legally disposed of by the homeowner
generating such waste within seven days of the generation of the
debris.
(2) Remodeling, construction and/or demolition debris generated by
the homeowner shall be collected by the refuse collector. Refuse
collectors shall collect up to an amount as would fit into a five-footby-
five-foot square and three feet high or equivalent volume. All
such debris must be in containers not weighing more than 50
pounds each. Amounts in excess of this quantity require special
collection arrangements be made by the homeowner generating
such debris with the refuse collector.
(3) Remodeling, construction, demolition, road waste, and/or like
debris generated from such activities within the town shall be
collected and disposed of by the private contractor performing
such work and generating such debris.
C. Garbage/rubbish. Refuse collectors shall be responsible for the
collection of garbage/rubbish. All garbage/rubbish shall be removed
from the location where receptacles are placed for collection without
spilling. The refuse collector shall in all cases replace the containers
and covers in the location where found.
D. Household hazardous waste. It is the responsibility of residents to
properly dispose of household hazardous waste. Household hazardous
waste shall not be stored or placed for collection with any other type of
refuse.
E. Recyclables. The collection of recyclable materials shall be the
responsibility of the refuse collector. The refuse collector shall in all
cases replace the containers and covers in the locations where found.
Empty containers shall be removed from the curbside or other place of
collection by the occupants of the premises by the end of the day on
which the collection is made from the premises. Refuse collectors shall
offer collection service for all recyclable materials to all residential
§ 192-27 RECORDS § 192-27
175:397
§ 192-28. Collection vehicles.
§ 192-29. Prohibited acts. [Amended 11-20-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
customers for whom they provide waste collection services at the same
times and on the same days as services are provided to their customers
for solid waste collection. Refuse collectors shall not accept for
collection solid waste which has not been source-separated in
conformity with this article.
F. Yard waste. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 10-1995]
(1) Leaves in containers approved by the Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways shall be collected by the refuse
collectors. Residential bundled brush/branches shall be collected
by refuse collectors. Grass will not be collected by refuse collectors
as part of their regular service. Leaf collection in the town may
begin on or about October 15 of each year, ending on or about
December 31 of each year.
(2) Loose leaves on private property and/or the right-of-way adjacent
to private property shall not be raked into the roadway or stored
loose along the road edge for collection. All leaves must be
containerized for collection in accordance with § 192-23B of this
article. Yard waste material which is not properly prepared or
exceeds the volume and/or weight requirements will not be
collected. The resident will be responsible for making alternate
arrangements within seven days of generation.
A. No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage/rubbish
or any other material designated in §§ 192-26 and 192-27 for collection
by refuse collectors shall stand overnight with said matter in or on it.
B. No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage/rubbish
or any other materials designated in §§ 192-26 and 192-27 for collection
by refuse collectors shall be parked or stored in a residential district
when not being used in the actual collection or transportation of said
matter.
C. Vehicles used in the transportation of garbage or rubbish by licensed
haulers within the town, regardless of place of origin, shall be so
equipped as to prevent the leakage or spillage of their contents.
D. Vehicles used in the transportation of garbage or rubbish by refuse
collectors within the Town of Irondequoit shall be licensed by the State
of New York.
E. All vehicles and conveyances used by residents in the transportation of
garbage or rubbish shall be watertight and so covered that no part of
the load shall blow, leak or spill.
§ 192-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-29
175:398
§ 192-30. Enforcement; violation orders. [Amended 8-18-1998 by
L.L. No. 1-1998; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998; 7–20–1999 by L.L.
No. 5–1999; 11-20-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of receiving, collecting or transporting residential and/or
commercial refuse in the Town of Irondequoit without first obtaining a
license in accordance with § 192-6 of this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to adhere
to the provisions of §§ 192-19 through 192-21 of this article, relating to
the storage of refuse.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to prepare
materials for collection in the manners specified in §§ 192-22 through
192-25 of this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to adhere
to the provisions of §§ 192-26 and 192-27 of this article relating to the
collection and disposition of refuse, household hazardous waste and
recyclables.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to adhere
to the requirements of § 192-28 of this article relating to the special
regulations applicable to the use of vehicles in the collection and
transportation of refuse in the Town of Irondequoit.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
other provisions of this article.
G. It shall be unlawful to place, throw, deposit or dump or cause to be
placed, thrown, deposited or dumped any refuse, residential refuse,
building refuse, bulk refuse, commercial refuse, institutional refuse,
waste, construction waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste,
infectious waste and/or recyclable materials in or upon any premises,
street (including the area between the sidewalk and the curb), sidewalk
or park or in any litter basket, recycling bin or container placed in a
right-of-way, park or public place, or provided for a special project or
event. This section shall not apply to refuse placed for collection in front
of the premises in which it originated, to filling for which a permit has
been granted pursuant to Chapter 196 of the Town Code or to the
deposit of litter and recyclables generated on the public right-of-way in
Town litter baskets and street recycling bins by pedestrians and
motorists, the placement of refuse generated in parks or other public
places in provided receptacles, or to the deposit of refuse from special
events or projects in containers placed for the collection of such refuse.
Any motor vehicle used in connection with the commission of a violation
of this section shall be towed in accordance with § 222-29 of the Town
Code.
§ 192-29 RECORDS § 192-30
175:399
A. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, the
Building Inspector, the Director of Community Development, the Chief
of Police or such other department officials or employees of the Town
and any other peace officer as may be designated by the Town Board.
B. Whenever it is found that there has been a violation of this article or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, a violation order
may be issued by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways, the Director of Community Development, the Chief of Police
or their authorized designees to the person, firm or corporation owning,
operating or maintaining the premises and/or the business by which
such violation has been noted.
C. Violation orders shall be in writing and shall generally identify the
property and/or the business and the violation.
D. Violation orders and other orders and notices referred to in this article,
in the case of violations noted on a particular property, shall be served
on the owner or the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents,
lessees, tenant or other person having a vested or contingent interest in
the premises, either personally or by certified or registered mail,
addressed to the last known address, as shown by the last preceding
completed records of the Receiver of Taxes or in the Office of the
County Clerk. The notice shall specify a time (not less than seven days
from receipt of said notice) within which the violation shall be
corrected.
E. Violation orders and other orders or notices referred to in this article, in
the case of violations noted on the person, firm or corporation engaged
in the business of refuse storage, preparation or collection, shall be
served on the owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal
representatives, agents or other person having a vested or contingent
interest in the business, whether personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the last known address.
F. Whenever a notice referred to in Subsection D of this section has been
served upon the owner or the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees, tenant or other person having a vested or contingent
interest in the premises and said noticee shall neglect or fail to comply
with the requirements of such notice or notices within the time
provided therein, the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways and/or the Director of Community Development shall
authorize and complete the work to be done to correct the violation.
The cost thereof shall be paid out of the general Town funds to be
appropriated by the Town Board for such purposes.
G. Should the work be completed pursuant to Subsection F of this section,
the Town shall be reimbursed for the cost, including out-of-pocket
administrative expenses of the work performed or services rendered by
assessment and levy, as authorized by the Town Board, upon the lots or
§ 192-30 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 192-30
175:400
§ 192-31. Penalties for offenses.
parcels of land wherein such work was performed or such services
rendered, and the cost so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on
the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same
time as other Town charges.
H. The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, the
Director of' Community Development, the Chief of Police or their
authorized designees shall have the authority to issue an appearance
ticket subscribed by him or her, directing a designated person to appear
in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time in
connection with the alleged commission of a designated violation of this
article or any other order made thereunder.
A. Any business, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any
applicable provisions of this article shall be subject to the revocation of
the license hereunder. The Town Board shall have the power to revoke
any such license for cause shown after a hearing on 10 days' written
notice to the license holder, specifying the nature of the violation.
B. Violation of any of the applicable provisions of this article shall
severally for each and every offense be a Class A violation, punishable
as provided in § 1-16. The imposition of any one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation of defects within a reasonable
time, and each day that the prohibited condition(s) or violation(s)
continues shall constitute a separate violation. The imposition of the
penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to any other
penalty or enforcement procedure set forth in this article or other laws
of the Town of Irondequoit or any other jurisdiction, including the
application for an injunction to enforce the provisions of this article.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 192-30 RECORDS § 192-31
175:401
Chapter 194
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 76.
Bingo — See Ch. 88.
Games of chance — See Ch. 146.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
§ 194-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Events
Ordinance of the Town of Irondequoit," hereinafter referred to in the
chapter as "Special Events" or "Events."
§ 194-2. License required.
§ 194-3. License application; bond.
A. No person, organization or group shall conduct, exhibit or cause to be
conducted or exhibited any organized activity, including, but not limited
to, parades, road races, walks, festivals, shows, performances, circuses,
outdoor carnivals, medicine shows, acrobatic exhibitions, bazaars or
performances or any concession or refreshment stand in conjunction
therewith without a license as hereinafter provided. Determinations as
to type of activity shall be made by the Town Clerk, Town Attorney and
the Town's insurance agent
B. All Town-sponsored activities are exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.
C. Vendors contracted by the Town to vend at Town-sponsored activities
are required to comply with this chapter as it relates to insurance
requirements.
A. Any person, organization or group desiring to procure a license is
herein required to file with the Town Board a written application for
such license upon the form provided by the town.
B. Such application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the site. If
a corporation, the state of incorporation and the names and
addresses of all officers thereof shall be included. If an outside
contractor or concessionaire is involved, all provisions for the
installation, housing or residence of employees, take down of rides,
concessions, exhibitions, lighting and pertinent devices, including
all power sources and ancillary activity, shall be set forth, including
the storage and parking of equipment and trucks. Furthermore,
§ 192-31 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 194-3
194:402
§ 194-4. Insurance and indemnification requirements.
any outside contractor shall be required to submit the proper
certificate of insurance, and said certificate shall be appended
to the application, and said certificates shall meet all the
requirements of Subsection D.
(2) Provisions made for parking of motor vehicles of patrons and of
workers.
(3) The scope and nature of advertising for the event sought to be
licensed,
(4) The period of time for which the license is required, including setup
and take-down time. There will be no activity of any nature
whatsoever on the licensed site either of preparation and setup,
operation of the activity, nor take-down and cleanup time between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., under any
circumstances.
(5) The kind and character of the festival and the lighting, sound and
power sources to be used.
(6) The place where the festival is to be conducted, with an
appropriate map or survey exhibiting all residential lots within 150
feet of the festival site.
(7) The route over which any equipment and/or materials are to be
transported to and from the place where the festival is to be
conducted.
(8) Such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk or
Town Board.
C. Bond. The application shall be accompanied by a performance bond
determined by the Town Board and the Town Attorney to the Town of
Irondequoit, conditioned upon the strict compliance with the terms of
the license, of this chapter and of all laws of the State of New York. It
shall indemnify the Town against any damage or loss occasioned by
reason of such showing, either directly or indirectly. Said bond must be
first approved as to form by the Town Attorney before filing with the
application.
D. The application shall be accompanied by an appropriate certificate of
liability insurance insuring the licensee and the Town of Irondequoit as
more fully described in § 194-4.
A. This section shall apply to:
(1) All license applicants as set forth in § 194-2.
(2) All applicants for non-town-sponsored activities held on Town
grounds.
§ 194-3 SPECIAL EVENTS § 194-4
194:403
(3) All vendors contracted by the Town to vend at Town-sponsored
activities.
B. The following requirements must be met:
(1) For all activities conducted by the Town and/or conducted on Town
grounds:
(a) Insurance company(ies) providing coverage(s) must:
[1] Carry a minimum "B+ VIII" rating from A.M. Best Co.;
[2] A minimum of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage liability, including products
and completed operations liability coverage, and
automobile coverage (if applicable) is required; and
[3] Be admitted to do business in the State of New York.
(b) For applicants that are self-insured, proof must be shown of
adequate financial responsibility, subject to approval by the
Town Clerk, Town Attorney and the Town's insurance agent.
(2) For all other activities requiring authorization by the Town or
requiring permits, the applicant must provide the following:
(a) Insurance company(ies) providing coverage(s) must:
[1] Evidence adequate insurance with a financially sound
insurance company;
[2] A minimum of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage liability, including products
and completed operations liability coverage, and
automobile coverage (if applicable) is required.
[3] Be admitted to do business in the State of New York.
(b) For applicants that are self-insured, evidence of self-insurance
with adequate financial responsibility must be provided. Such
evidence is subject to approval by the Town Clerk, Town
Attorney, and the Town's insurance agent.
(3) A minimum of 30 days' advance notice of cancellation or
nonrenewal must be given to the Town of Irondequoit, Town Clerk's
Office, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617.
(4) A certificate of insurance must be in the town's possession a
minimum of 30 days prior to the event or first use of Town facilities
or fields.
(5) The following coverages are required:
(a) Commercial general liability.
§ 194-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 194-4
194:404
§ 194-5. Grounds for refusal of license.
The Town Board may refuse to issue a license when, in its judgment, on
the basis of findings made from the information provided in the application,
such issuance will result in a disturbance of the peace and good order of
the Town or constitute a nuisance. The Board shall take into particular
consideration the proximity of the licensed site to residential areas as well
[1] A minimum of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage liability, including products
and completed operations liability coverage, arid
automobile coverage (if applicable) is required.
[2] Contractual liability must include coverage for the
attached indemnification agreement
[3] The Town of Irondequoit shall be named as an additional
insured.
[4] If any sports contests or physical activities are involved,
the certificate and policy must specifically state "The
policy does not exclude liability coverage for bodily injury
to participants or athletic participants.”
(b) Liquor law legal liability (when applicable). If there is to be any
involvement on the part of the licensee in the service of
alcoholic beverages, the certificate must include a minimum of
$1,000,000 combined single limit.
(6) Any certificate of insurance must so state or be accompanied by a
statement from the agent verifying that:
(a) The agent has the authority to bind coverage and issue a
certificate of insurance.
(b) The commercial general liability insurance policy does not
exclude bodily injury liability coverage for injury to
participants or athletic participants.
(c) The policy does cover the indemnification agreement with the
Town.
(7) Additional coverage requirements for vendors only are as follows:
(a) Workers' compensation.
[1] Statutory benefits.
[2] Employer's liability. Unlimited for New York State.
(b) Disability benefits law coverage: statutory benefits.
C. Indemnification agreement. All applicants must sign the
indemnification agreement provided by the town.
§ 194-4 SPECIAL EVENTS § 194-5
194:405
as the impact of noise from the festival itself and its power sources as well
as lighting and advertising in addition to all of the matters set forth in the
application.
§ 194-6. License fee; term.
§ 194-7. Issuance of license; refund of fee; revocation.
§ 194-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, organization or group violating the provisions of this chapter
and the license issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in § 1-16. In addition, any and all persons,
organizations or groups who shall violate any provision of this chapter or
who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act required by this chapter or
the license issued hereunder shall, for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectfully forfeit and pay a penalty of $300 in addition
to the above. The application of the above penalty or penalties or the
prosecution for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not be held
to prevent the enforcement of conditions prohibited by this chapter.
A. The license fee for any license issued under this chapter shall be set in
accordance with § 1-18 and shall be paid to the Town Clerk upon the
filing of the application.
B. Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period of not
more than 10 days. A licensee shall be issued but one license hereunder
per calendar year.
A. The Town Clerk may, upon filing of the application, the bond and other
required data as herein provided and upon payment of the required fee,
authorize the issuance of the license for such festival upon such terms
and conditions as he or she deems appropriate. All licenses shall set
forth in bold print the following: "Noncompliance with any of the terms
and conditions herein shall result in the immediate suspension of the
activity licensed."
B. In the event that the license is refused or the event is canceled, the
entire fee paid shall be refunded except for $25 to cover the
administrative expenses of the Town in processing the application.
C. Revocation. The Town Board shall have the right to order the revocation
of any license granted hereunder in accordance with Town Law § 137,
as amended or changed, upon a finding of a violation of this chapter or
of the terms and conditions of the license as issued.
§ 194-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 194-8
194:406
Chapter 196
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 98.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Flood damage protection — See Ch. 136.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 194-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 194-8
194:407

ARTICLE I
Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment Control During
Construction
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
§ 196-1. Title.
This Article I of this Chapter 196 shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control Law of the Town of Irondequoit of 2007."
§ 196-2. Introduction and purpose.
A. Land disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for
fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of
waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy
living environment for citizens of the Town of Irondequoit. Improper
design and construction of stormwater management practices can
increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing
streambank erosion and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less
water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater
recharge and stream base flow. Regulation of land disturbance
activities by means of performance standards governing stormwater
management and site design will produce development compatible with
the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and
thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from
development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this article is to safeguard public health,
protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the
public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement
of earth on land in the Town of Irondequoit. It seeks to meet those
purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 196-1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-2
194:409
§ 196-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land disturbance activity.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Town of Irondequoit
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that result in land
disturbance.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal separate
stormwater sewer systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as
amended or revised;
(2) Require land disturbance activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) general permit for construction activities or as amended
or revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and to ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.
§ 196-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-3
194:410
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80%
has been established or equivalent measures such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles have been employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect,
or a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent
version, including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional
in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization to
proceed with a project based upon a drawing prepared to specifications and
§ 196-3 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-3
194:411
containing necessary elements, which show the arrangement, layout and
design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbance activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
§ 196-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-3
194:412
WATERWAY or WATERCOURSE — A channel that directs surface runoff to
a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
§ 196-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all land disturbance activities that will
disturb land equal to or greater than one acre unless exempted under
§ 196-8C. This article also applies to land disturbance activities that are less
than one acre of disturbance if such activities are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale that will disturb land equal to or greater
than one acre, even though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
§ 196-5. Compatibility with other permits and town code
requirements.
§ 196-6. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 196 of the Stormwater Law of the State of New
York, the Irondequoit Town Board has the authority to enact laws for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town of
Irondequoit, including the protection and preservation of the property of its
inhabitants. By the same authority, the Irondequoit Town Board may include
A. Compliance with this chapter does not relieve the applicant of the
obligation and responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the
NYSDEC SPDES general permit for construction activities if required.
For projects also applying for coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES
general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement including the date demonstrating submission to the
NYSDEC, a letter of permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to
disturb five acres or greater of land at one time (if applicable) and any
related documents to the Town of Irondequoit's officer for review and
approval.
B. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other federal, state, or
local law, ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the
provisions that are more restrictive or impose more stringent
requirements shall take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other chapters of this Code,
other laws, regulations and/or ordinances, including, by way of example
only and not limited to, Article II of this chapter entitled "Design and
Management of Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Measures".
§ 196-3 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-6
194:413
in any such law provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees
to effectuate and administer such law.
§ 196-7. Standards for construction activities.
§ 196-8. Land disturbance activity approval process.
A. The Town of Irondequoit requires the use of technical standards for
erosion and sediment controls. These are detailed in the Town of
Irondequoit's Design Criteria and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation's Standards and Specifications for Erosion
and Sediment Control. For the design of water quality and water
quantity controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff control
practices), the NYSDEC's technical standards are detailed in the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual.
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
the aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer
must demonstrate equivalence to these technical standards, and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
A. Requirements of application.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for land
disturbance activity which would require the disturbance of land
equal to or greater than one acre shall also include with a
submission an SWPPP that shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town of Irondequoit prior to issuance of the final site plan approval
or a permit.
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which
would require the disturbance of land equal to or greater than one
acre without the review and approval of an SWPPP by the Town of
Irondequoit.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval
all projects that would result in the disturbance of land equal to or
greater than one acre will be required to comply with all applicable
provisions of Article II of this chapter captioned "Design and
Management of Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Measures." As part of the SWPPP, the applicant shall include a
signed statement that all applicable requirements of such Article II
of this chapter have been met to the satisfaction of the Town of
Irondequoit.
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as set forth in § 196-15.
§ 196-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-8
194:414
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete
SWPPP that shall be prepared in accordance with § 196-10.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of land shall
be in accordance with the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land disturbance activities as defined in § 196-3 not subject to
site plan or permit approval shall be required to submit an SWPPP
to the Stormwater Management Officer designated by the Town of
Irondequoit who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Review and approval of application. The Town of Irondequoit shall
review each application and shall designate the approval with the
authorized representative's signature on the plans. All applicable
permits shall be acquired from the Town for EPOD disturbances and
grade and fill permits in accordance with Chapter 235 and other
applicable provisions of the Town Code.
C. Exemptions from article. The following activities are exempt from
review under this article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by Town of Irondequoit.
D. Activities requiring permit.
(1) With respect to any of the following activities which do not
constitute a land disturbance activity as defined in § 196-3, no such
activity will be undertaken within the Town of Irondequoit until a
permit has been issued under the provisions of this article:
(a) Site preparation in the subdivision of land into two parcels.
(b) Site preparation within wetlands.
(c) Site preparation on slopes which exceed 1 1/2 feet of vertical
rise to 10 feet of horizontal distance or in those areas
designated as Steep Slope Protection Districts on the Official
Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps.
§ 196-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-8
194:415
(d) Site preparation within the one-hundred-year floodplain of any
watercourse.
(e) Excavation which affects more than 25 cubic yards of material
or will exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as
measured from the natural ground surface within any parcel or
any contiguous area.
(f) Stripping which affects more than 20,000 square feet of
ground surface within any parcel of any contiguous area.
(g) Filling which exceeds a total of 25 cubic yards of material or
will exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as
measured from the natural ground surface within any parcel or
any contiguous area.
(h) Storage of more than 25 cubic yards of topsoil or other fill
material within any parcel or any contiguous area.
(i) Site preparation activities within fish and wildlife habitat areas
designated on the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
Map.
(j) Construction of or substantial modifications to erosion
protection structures.
(k) Disposal of dredge spoils.
(2) Before any site preparation, land development or construction
activities that require a permit under § 196-8D(1) of this chapter
are undertaken within the Town of Irondequoit, the following shall
apply:
(a) An application for such permit shall be made by the property
owner or his or her authorized agent and shall be made to the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways.
The permit application and all application materials shall be
filed with the Town Division of Planning and Zoning. Copies of
the permit application shall be submitted to the Town
Engineer, the Town Conservation Board and the Monroe
County Soil Conservation District, which shall all submit
recommendations on the application to the Commissioner
within 30 days of the date of filing of such application.
(b) Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Town a fee to cover the cost of permit review
and inspection established in accordance with § 196-15 of this
chapter. The fee shall be deemed a reasonable sum to cover the
costs of administering this chapter and shall in no part be
returnable to the applicant.
(c) The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways shall have the authority to grant or deny all permits
§ 196-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-8
194:416
pursuant to this § 196-8D(2). When the application for a permit
made under the provisions of this chapter is accompanied by
an application for site plan approval and/or EPOD development
permit approval, there shall be one public hearing with the
Town Planning Board to review and act on all such EPOD
applications. The Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall grant or deny an application
for a permit required by this chapter within 60 days of the date
of filing of the application thereof, unless the applicant(s) and
the Commissioner consent to a time extension.
(d) The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways shall not approve a permit application unless it is
determined that the proposed site preparation, land
development or construction activities adequately meet the
standards and criteria set forth in this chapter and are in
compliance with the goals and policies of the Town of
Irondequoit's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program. In
granting a permit, the Commissioner shall fix a reasonable
time limit for the termination of the permit and may attach any
reasonable conditions to such permit which are deemed
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Major modifications of the terms of the approved
permit shall follow the same application, review and approval
procedure as those set forth in this section for the original
permit. It shall be the responsibility of the authorized official to
inspect sites as frequently as necessary to assure compliance
with the terms of approved permits and the provisions of this
chapter and to submit written notification of any violations of
these terms or provisions to the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways. If at any time during the effective
period of a permit or upon its expiration the terms of the
permit are violated, the Commissioner may revoke the permit
and may require that the performance guaranty be forfeited to
the Town. If the applicant is unable to complete the project or
any phase thereof within the specified time period of the
permit, he or she shall, at least 30 days prior to the specified
date of completion, present, in writing, to the Commissioner a
request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the
reasons for such request. The Commissioner shall consider
such request. If, in the discretion of the Commissioner, such an
extension is deemed acceptable and warranted, he or she may
grant a reasonable extension of time in order for the applicant
to complete the work.
(e) A property owner or his or her agent shall initiate a request for
a permit or the modification of a permit to undertake any site
preparation, land development or construction activities within
the Town of Irondequoit described in § 196-8D(1) of this
chapter by filing an application with the Town Division of
§ 196-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-8
194:417
Planning and Zoning. All maps and plans that accompany said
application shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a licensed
engineer, architect or landscape architect. The Town Division
of Planning and Zoning shall specify the number of copies
of the application and any accompanying maps or plans that
must be filed and may modify the requirements concerning any
materials to accompany the application by waiving or adding
such requirements as deemed appropriate based on the
nature, purpose and scope of the proposed activities.
(f) Except for the modification authorized or required by the Town
Division of Planning and Zoning, each application for a permit
required by this chapter shall contain the following material:
[1] An existing feature map(s), at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals 200 feet, indicating the following:
[a] The boundaries of all parcels on which site
preparation activities are proposed to be undertaken.
[b] All structures and roads within a distance of 500 feet
of the parcel on which site preparation activities are
proposed to be undertaken; the structures, identified
by their uses; and the roads, identified by their surface
material and width of surface.
[c] All watercourses within a distance of 500 feet of the
parcels on which site preparation activities are
proposed to be undertaken.
[d] Existing topography at contour intervals of no greater
than five feet within a distance of 500 feet of the
parcels on which site preparation activities are
proposed to be undertaken.
[e] All sewer, water, gas and electric lines and all other
utilities within the parcels on which site preparation
activities are proposed to be undertaken.
[f] Major wooded areas and tree clusters within a
distance of 500 feet of the parcels on which site
preparation activities are proposed to be undertaken.
[g] All vegetation areas on the site proposed for site
preparation activities, including areas of grass, areas
of brush and wooded areas and tree clusters.
[h] The depth to bedrock on the site proposed for site
preparation activities, if determined during site
evaluation.
§ 196-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-8
194:418
[i] The depth to permanent groundwater aquifers on the
site proposed for site preparation activities, if such
depth is determined during site evaluation.
[j] The location and present status of any previously
undertaken and/or permitted excavation, grading or
filling activities on the site.
[2] An operations map(s), at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 200 feet, which presents a complete draining,
erosion and sediment control plan and which indicates:
[a] All excavation, filling and grading proposed to be
undertaken, identified as to the depth, volume and
nature of the materials involved.
[b] All stripping, identified as to the nature of vegetation
affected.
[c] All areas where topsoil is removed and stockpiled and
where topsoil is ultimately placed, identified as to the
depth of topsoil in each such area.
[d] All temporary and permanent vegetation to be placed
on the site, identified as to planting type, size and
extent.
[e] All temporary and permanent drainage, erosion and
sediment control facilities, including but not limited to
such facilities as ponds, sediment basins, drains,
culverts, beams, walls and dams, identified as to the
type of facility, the materials from which it is
constructed, its dimensions and its capacity in gallons.
[f] The anticipated pattern of surface drainage during
periods of peak runoff, during and after completion of
site preparation and construction activities, identified
as to rate and direction of flow at all major points
within the drainage system.
[g] The location of all roads, driveways, sidewalks,
structures, utilities and other improvements.
[h] The final contours of the site in intervals no greater
than two feet.
[i] Proposed truck and equipment accessways within and
to the work site.
[3] A time schedule which is keyed to the operation map(s)
that indicates:
§ 196-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-8
194:419
§ 196-9. Financial guarantees.
The Town of Irondequoit may, at its discretion, require the applicant to
submit a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the Town of
Irondequoit prior to issuance of site plan approval or a permit in order to
insure that the stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control practices are implemented and maintained by the applicant as
required by the approved SWPPP. The financial guarantee may be in the
form of a performance bond, cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit
from an appropriate financial or surety institution which names the Town
of Irondequoit as sole beneficiary. Per annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency. The
financial guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the SWPPP. The financial guarantee shall be
released in full only upon satisfaction of the requirements listed in § 196-12.
At its discretion, the Town of Irondequoit may allow for a partial release
of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development
stages.
[a] When major phases of the proposed project are to be
initiated and completed.
[b] When major site preparation activities are to be
initiated and completed.
[c] When the installation of temporary and permanent
vegetation and drainage, erosion and sediment control
facilities is to be completed.
[d] The anticipated duration, in days, of exposure of all
major areas of site preparation before the installation
of erosion and sediment control measures.
[4] An estimate of the costs of providing temporary and
permanent vegetation and drainage, erosion and sediment
control facilities.
[5] A statement or letter of intent from the applicant or his or
her authorized agent outlining the proposed project and
assuming full responsibility for the performance of the
operation as stated in the application and presented on
appropriate maps or plans.
E. Prohibited activities. The following excavation, filling, grading or
stripping activities are prohibited within the Town of Irondequoit:
(1) Commercial mining of any kind.
(2) On-site processing of excavation materials.
§ 196-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-10
194:420
§ 196-10. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
A. The Town of Irondequoit shall designate a Stormwater Management
Officer who shall accept and review all SWPPPs and forward such plans
to the applicable municipal board. A consultant cannot be appointed as
a Stormwater Management Officer. The Stormwater Management
Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board, engage the services of a New
York State licensed professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee
schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed/certified professional that the
plans conform to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Prior to final permit for final approval of a land disturbance activity, an
SWPPP shall be prepared by the applicant in accordance with the
specifications outlined by the Town of Irondequoit and submitted to the
Stormwater Management Officer designated by the Town of
Irondequoit for review by the appropriate board. This plan must be
prepared in accordance with sound engineering practices by a qualified
professional as defined in § 196-3. The final plan must be signed by a
New York State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will certify
that the design of all stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and
sediment control practices meet the requirements outlined in the Town
of Irondequoit design criteria and the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control and shall be adequate
to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of
the Town of Irondequoit.
C. The requirements to have an SWPPP prepared by a qualified
professional and to have the final plan signed and certified by a New
York State licensed professional engineer (PE) are not applicable to
land disturbance activities that meet technical standards and are five
acres or less occurring on a single-family residence, which is not part of
a larger common plan of development, or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge directly
to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed, unless otherwise directed by
the Stormwater Management Officer.
D. Minimum requirements. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project and contact information that
includes the name, address, and telephone number of all persons
having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference
number and parcel number of the subject property or properties.
§ 196-10 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-10
194:421
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map and a one-inch-equals-one-hundred-feet
topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 100
feet beyond the limits of the proposed development. At a minimum,
the site map should show the total site area; all improvements;
areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s), including
receiving waters (name of the water), streams, ponds, culverts,
ditches, and wetlands, as well as drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of utilities, roads, soils types, forest cover, and significant
natural and man-made features not otherwise shown; locations of
off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas,
proposed concrete cleanout basin(s) and construction entrance;
and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s); and resources
protected under other chapters of this Code or by easements.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation, final grading
and landscaping, and any other activity at the site that results in
soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin and the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas. Consistent with the New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP and a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(5) A description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter and prevent construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in the
stormwater discharges; a description of construction and waste
materials expected to be stored on site, with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented to
reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials, to stormwater; and a
description of spill prevention and response measures.
(6) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and
vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control
and sediment control for each stage of the project, from initial land
disturbance to project closeout, including who will be responsible
for the maintenance and implementation of said features at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is established and preserved. For temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, the seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, depth of
topsoil, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching shall be provided.
§ 196-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-10
194:422
(7) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(8) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control
measures, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins, and provide the dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each throughout all
phases of construction and completion of development of the site.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of
intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
(9) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted to
permanent control measures.
(10) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(11) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that require
maintenance. Furthermore, it shall also provide a schedule of
required maintenance and identify the party responsible for such
work.
(12) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(13) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(14) Assurance that all other applicable environmental permits have
been acquired for the site prior to initial land disturbance. Copies
of the applicable environmental permits shall be provided to the
Town of Irondequoit.
(15) Assurance that the applicant or its "responsible individual" shall be
on site at all times when earthwork takes place and shall inspect
and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices.
(16) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
and maintenance shall be identified in the SWPPP.
(a) All such contractors and subcontractors shall sign a copy of the
following certification statement before undertaking any land
disturbance activity at the site: "I certify under penalty of law
that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and
conditions of the SWPPP. I also understand that it is unlawful
for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of the water
quality standards."
§ 196-10 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-10
194:423
§ 196-11. Inspections.
(b) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description)
of the site; and the date the certification is made. The
certification statement must be included in the SWPPP.
E. Modifications to plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Town of
Irondequoit and shall be approved or disapproved. The applicant
shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance which may have a significant effect
on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of
the United States and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP; or
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control as required by this chapter. Amendments to the SWPPP
may be reviewed by the Town of Irondequoit. A copy of the
newly amended SWPPP must be provided to the Town of
Irondequoit within five business days.
(2) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor or subcontractor that will implement any measure of the
SWPPP. The Town of Irondequoit may request copies of signed
contractor certification statements from new contractors/
subcontractors working on the site.
(3) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Town of Irondequoit by written authorization to the applicant.
A. Town of Irondequoit inspections.
(1) The Town of Irondequoit or designated agent as defined in § 196-3
shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either
approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
applicant that the work fails to comply with the SWPPP. In addition,
the Town of Irondequoit reserves the right to enter the work site at
any reasonable time for purposes of inspection. The SWPPP and the
records of any inspections completed by the owner or its agent
shall be maintained at the site in the site logbook from the date of
initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify Town of
Irondequoit at least 48 hours before the following activities occur:
(a) Start of construction.
§ 196-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-11
194:424
§ 196-12. Duration of SWPPP; Maintenance; Closeout.
(b) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed
and stabilized.
(c) Site clearing has been completed.
(d) Rough grading has been completed.
(e) Final grading has been completed.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Final landscaping.
(h) Closeout inspection.
(2) The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the
obligation under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct
regular inspections as set forth in said permit and/or regulation.
(3) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further earthwork shall be conducted on the
site, except for site stabilization, until the violations are corrected
and approved by the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a "responsible individual," as defined in
§ 196-3 who will oversee the implementation of the SWPPP on a
daily basis. The responsible individual shall be on site at all times
when construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect
and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices. The applicant shall also employ the services of a
qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within
24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or
more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site
logbook and delivered to the Town of Irondequoit within five days
after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices is not applicable to land disturbance activities of five
acres or less occurring on a single-family residence, which is not
part of a larger common plan of development or on an agricultural
property. In addition, these land disturbance activities must not
discharge directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be
located in a total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
§ 196-11 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-12
194:425
A. Duration.
(1) For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES permit, the SWPPP
approved by the Town of Irondequoit shall be in effect until:
(a) The site has been finally stabilized;
(b) A notice of termination (NOT) is submitted to the NYSDEC in
accordance with the general permit; and
(c) A final inspection has been completed by the Town of
Irondequoit.
(2) For projects that do not require an NYSDEC NOT, the SWPPP is in
effect until a final inspection is conducted and the Town of
Irondequoit has issued the applicant written approval.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event no land disturbance
activity, as defined in § 196-3, takes place within two years
following the date upon which the Town's approval of the SWPPP
was issued, no development activity or work of any kind may take
place until such time, if any, as the Town's Stormwater
Management Officer reviews and confirms its previous approval of
the SWPPP. The Town shall establish a fee for such review and
confirmation in accordance with the provisions of § 196-15.
B. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment
control measures which are installed or used by the applicant to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment
shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever
their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The land
disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season when soil disturbance
activities will be finalized or suspended until the following spring, it
may be desirable to reduce the frequency of the required weekly
site inspections to monthly inspections. In order to reduce
inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete stabilization
activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method,
seeding, planting, and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall
frosts and to allow for proper germination/establishment.
Installations and maintenance must be done according to the New
York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 196-12 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-12
194:426
(3) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned
stormwater management facilities, including nonstructural
practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a formal and
enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved by the
Town of Irondequoit and recorded in the office of the County Clerk
as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management
practices, and will outline the procedures and schedule to be
followed to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management practice. In
addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices and include plans for periodic inspections by
the owners, or their designated agent, to ensure proper
performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement shall be
generally consistent with the terms and conditions of the
"Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement," the form of
which is attached to and made a part of this chapter as Exhibit A.62
(4) The Town of Irondequoit, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets
all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
C. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout
requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities.
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation asbuilts
to the Town of Irondequoit.
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100%
of the site.
(4) Removal of all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control
practices.
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/
certified professional that the site has undergone final stabilization
(as defined in § 196-3) and that all temporary erosion and sediment
controls not needed for long-term erosion control have been
removed.
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Town of Irondequoit to stabilize the project site.
62.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 196-12 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-13
194:427
§ 196-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Stop-work order. The Town of Irondequoit may issue a stop-work order
for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall
be required to halt all land disturbance activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the Town of Irondequoit confirms
that the land disturbance activity is in compliance and the violation has
been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. When the Town of Irondequoit determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article, a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action and a
statement to the effect that the failure to commence any such
remedial action within 10 days following the date of service of such
notice of violation shall result in the commencement of
enforcement proceedings.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
C. Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Article I. Failure to
comply with any provision or requirement of this article, or of any
statement, plan, application, approval, permit or certification provided
pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be deemed a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period of
not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for a
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 15 days, or
both; and, upon conviction of a third or each and every subsequent
§ 196-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-13
194:428
§ 196-14. Severability.
The provisions and sections of this chapter and article shall be deemed
to be separable, and if the provisions of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter or article shall be judged
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall
not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter.
§ 196-15. Fees; costs and expenses.
The applicant shall pay to the Town of Irondequoit at the time it submits
its application a one-time fee to be established from time to time by the
Town Board to cover administrative costs associated with the review and
consideration of SWPPPs, SMPs and permits issued pursuant to § 196-8D.
In addition to the foregoing fee:
offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate, additional violation. In
addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation or other
entity convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
D. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. Occupation permits may not be
granted until corrections to all stormwater management practices have
been made and accepted by the Town of Irondequoit.
A. The applicant shall reimburse the Town of Irondequoit for all
reasonable and necessary engineering, administrative and legal
expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the review,
inspection and consideration of a stormwater application, regardless of
whether such application is approved or denied in whole or in part.
B. Simultaneous with the filing of an application and prior to the
commencement of any construction or site work activities, the
applicant shall deposit with the Town Supervisor a sum of money
determined by the Town Board to cover the costs to be incurred by the
Town for engineering, inspection and legal expenses. Such deposit shall
be held in a separate, non-interest-bearing account in the name of the
Town, and the Town Supervisor shall keep a separate record of all such
moneys deposited, on whose behalf the moneys were deposited, and the
project for which the sums were deposited.
C. Upon receipt and approval by the Town Board of itemized vouchers
from an engineer and/or attorney for services rendered on behalf of the
Town pertaining to the application, construction or site work activities,
the Town Supervisor shall cause such vouchers to be paid out of the
§ 196-13 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-15
194:429
moneys so deposited and shall furnish copies of such vouchers to the
applicant at the same time such vouchers are submitted to the Town.
D. The Town Board shall review and audit all such vouchers and shall
approve payment of only such engineering and legal fees which the
Town Board determined to have been reasonable and necessarily
incurred by the Town in connection with the review, consideration and
approval of any application. For purposes of the foregoing, a fee or part
thereof is reasonable in amount if it bears a reasonable relationship to
the average charge by engineers or attorneys to the Town for services
performed in connection with the approval or construction of a similar
development. In this regard, the Town Board may take into
consideration, among other things, the size, type and number of
facilities and of the construction and/or site work activities to be
performed; the topography of the land on which such construction and/
or site work activities are to be conducted and/or facilities to be
located; soil conditions; surface water drainage conditions; the nature
and extent of facilities to be constructed; and any special conditions or
considerations that the Town Board may deem relevant. A fee or part
thereof is necessarily incurred if it was charged by the engineer or
attorney for a service which was rendered in order to protect the
health, safety or other vital interests of the residents of the Town or to
protect public or private property from damage and other factors, to
assure the proper and timely implementation of the purposes and
provisions of this article, to protect the legal interests of the Town,
including, but not limited to, the avoidance of claims and liability, and
such other interests as the Town Board may deem relevant.
E. If at any time during or after the processing of such application or
during or after construction or site work activities there shall be
insufficient moneys on hand to the credit of the applicant to pay the
approved vouchers in full, or if it shall reasonably appear to the Town
Supervisor that such moneys will be insufficient to meet vouchers yet to
be submitted, the Town Supervisor shall cause the applicant to deposit
additional sums as the Supervisor deems necessary or advisable to
meet such expenses or anticipated expenses.
F. In the event that the applicant fails to deposit such funds or such
additional funds, the Town Supervisor shall notify any and all applicable
Town officers and boards of such failure, and any review, approval,
permit or certificate may be withheld by such appropriate officer and/or
board until such moneys are deposited.
G. The issuance of any final approval, permit or certificate of occupancy
shall not occur unless and until all fees incurred by the Town have been
paid in full. Any amounts remaining on account to the credit of the
applicant after such final approval, permit or certificate shall be
returned to such applicant.
§ 196-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-15
194:430
ARTICLE II
Design and Management of Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Measures
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
§ 196-16. Title.
This Article II of this Chapter 196 shall be known as and may be cited
as the "Design and Management of Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Measures Law of the Town of Irondequoit of 2007."
§ 196-17. Introduction and purpose.
§ 196-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in the
watersheds within the Town of Irondequoit. Therefore, the Town of
Irondequoit establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to
provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff
and to, in addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property,
prevent damage to the environment in the Town of Irondequoit, and
comply with the NYSDEC State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal
separate storm sewer systems (MS4s), for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the
regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
projects and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil
erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution
associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will
prevent threats to public health and safety.
§ 196-16 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-18
194:431
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a stormwater management permit.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Town of Irondequoit
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this article.
HOTSPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document issued by a bank which guarantees the
payment of a customer's drafts for a specified period and up to a specified
amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
§ 196-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-18
194:432
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication, which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The most recent version of the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual, including applicable updates, that serves as the official
guide for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract
amount to guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work
according to the contract specifications.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a New York State
licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing,
previously developed land, such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or road/highway, which involves soil disturbance.
"Redevelopment" is distinguished from "development" or "new
development" in that new development refers to construction on land where
there had not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically
applies to construction areas with impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS STATE
POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) — A nationally
approved program with permits issued in accordance with the
Environmental Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges
from certain construction activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
§ 196-18 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-18
194:433
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
WATERWAY or WATERCOURSE — A channel that directs surface runoff to
a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 196-19. Applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to land disturbance activities as defined
in § 196-18, and those activities meeting Condition A, B, C or D below
shall include water quantity and water quality controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 196-27
as applicable unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by
the Town of Irondequoit in accordance with § 196-23:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity
disturbing between one acre and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
that are smaller than one acre if such activities are part of a larger
common plan of development, even though multiple separate and
distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
§ 196-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-19
194:434
§ 196-20. Compatibility with other permits and code requirements.
B. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Irondequoit to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained during and after development of
the site and that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any
local and regional watershed plans.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project as defined in § 196-18, decisions on permitting
and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special
stormwater sizing criteria found in the current New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual. Final authorization of all
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the Town
of Irondequoit. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are
greater than or equal to one acre.
D. The following activities may be exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Town of Irondequoit.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other provision of this chapter, the Code, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be
considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this
article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by this
chapter or any other chapter of this Code, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health and/or the environment
shall be considered to take precedence.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other articles of this
chapter, other chapters of the Code and/or regulations.
§ 196-19 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-21
194:435
§ 196-21. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 9 of the Town Law of the State of New York, the
Irondequoit Town Board has the authority to enact laws for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town of Irondequoit,
including the protection and preservation of the property of its inhabitants.
By the same authority, the Irondequoit Town Board may include in any such
law provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees to effectuate
and administer such law.
§ 196-22. Compliance.
§ 196-23. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
A. No person(s) shall receive any of the building, grading or other land
disturbance approvals or permits required for land disturbance
activities without first meeting the requirements of this article to the
satisfaction of the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator
desiring approval or a permit for a land disturbance activity shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall submit all
required plans, documentation and information as required under this
article to the Town of Irondequoit for review and approval.
C. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, the following items shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval:
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) (see § 196-26).
(2) Maintenance easement(s) (see § 196-27).
(3) Maintenance agreement(s) (see § 196-27).
(4) Any applicable fees (see § 196-33).
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 196-25
through 196-27. The maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet
the requirements of § 196-27, and applicable fees shall be those as set
fourth in § 196-33.
E. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Irondequoit to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained after development of the site and
that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans. Information shall be submitted as a single,
logical package, with all information bound together.
A. All person(s) shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a
written request is filed to waive the requirements in part or whole for
land disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land.
Requests to waive any requirements of this article shall be submitted to
the Town of Irondequoit for approval.
§ 196-21 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-23
194:436
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that has been approved by the Town of
Irondequoit, and the implementation of the plan is required by local
law. These practices are encouraged in order to minimize the
reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in
the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned
through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the manual Better Site Design:
A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community.
Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and
remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
(4) The Town of Irondequoit finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce a) the
generation of stormwater from the site, b) the size and cost of
stormwater storage and c) the pollutants generated at the site.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Town of
Irondequoit may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these
stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town of
Irondequoit that the variance will not result in the following impacts to
downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures.
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation.
§ 196-23 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-23
194:437
§ 196-24. Fee in lieu of; dedication or easement of land.
§ 196-25. General design and performance criteria.
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
D. Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for
stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the
minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures
selected by the Town of Irondequoit. Mitigation measures may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation
(see § 196-24B, Dedication or easement of land, below). These
lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to
provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and
aquatic habitat;
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public
or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities
designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this chapter; and
(3) Monetary contributions (see § 196-24A, Fee in lieu of, below) to a
dedicated fund for stormwater management activities.
E. No waivers or mitigation plans will be considered for land disturbance
activity that disturbs one acre or greater of land.
A. Fee in lieu of. Where the Town of Irondequoit waives all or part of the
minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver
is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided
downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be
required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Town of
Irondequoit. All monetary contributions shall be made to a dedicated
fund for stormwater management activities. The fee structure shall be
based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater
management of the development in question. All of the monetary
contributions shall be made by the applicant prior to the issuance of any
permit or approval for the development.
B. Dedication or easement of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an
applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the Town of Irondequoit for the
granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be
used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility.
The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the Town of
Irondequoit prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is
required, prior to the issuance of the permit.
§ 196-23 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-25
194:438
A. The applicant shall consult the Town of Irondequoit's Design Criteria,
the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the
New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control for standards and specifications related to stormwater
management design criteria. Stormwater management practices that
are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
law. If there is a conflict between any of the standards, the more
stringent standard shall apply. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in this section (§ 196-25) and § 196-26, and the SWPPP shall be
prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas
for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where
such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Town of Irondequoit. In no case shall the impact
on functional values be any greater than that allowed by the Army
Corps of Engineers (COE) or the NYSDEC responsible for natural
resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater
recharge rates by promoting infiltration through the use of
structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, an attempt
shall be made for annual recharge from the postdevelopment site to
mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the
Town of Irondequoit's Design Criteria and/or the New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
may be subject to additional performance criteria or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
§ 196-25 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-25
194:439
§ 196-26. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the
use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices and
pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Town of
Irondequoit to determine if they are subject to additional
stormwater design requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv) as found in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be
used for sizing all stormwater management practices.
A. SWPPP required; implementation.
(1) An SWPPP is required as part of the compliance with this article.
This plan must be prepared by a qualified professional and must
indicate whether stormwater will be managed on site or off site
and, if on site, the general location and type of practices and shall
also include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic
calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of
the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development
of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the
effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. The plan must
be signed by a New York State licensed professional engineer (PE),
who will verify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual. No building
or grading permit or site plan approval shall be issued until a
satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention plan, or a waiver
thereof, has undergone a review and been approved by the Town of
Irondequoit after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The applicant shall employ a responsible individual, as defined in
§ 196-18, who will oversee the implementation of the SWPPP on a
daily basis. The applicant shall also employ the services of a
qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within
24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or
more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site
logbook and delivered to the Town of Irondequoit within five days
after the month's end.
B. All SWPPPs shall provide the following information:
§ 196-25 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-26
194:440
(1) All information listed in § 196-10 of this chapter.
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses. A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, including calculations such as a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates and total
runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration rates, where
applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual; and
documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures,
including a schedule, to ensure their continued function. These
plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater
management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment
and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program
and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures
shall be included in the plan.
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent
basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will
remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. See
§ 196-27 for additional information.
(9) The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the on-site stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the specifications of this chapter. See § 196-27 for
additional information.
§ 196-26 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-26
194:441
§ 196-27. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional, and the
final plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meets the requirements in this chapter.
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the
project, and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native
vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(12) The Town of Irondequoit may also require a concept plan to
consider the maximum development potential of a site under
existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently
intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of
vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or by the soil and water
conservation district and in compliance with landscaping
specifications outlined in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
A. Maintenance easement agreement. The applicant or owner of the site
must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding
on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater
management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Town of
Irondequoit, or its contractor or agent, to ensure that the facility is
maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and
any other provisions established by this chapter and to, if necessary,
implement emergency repairs to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public. The easement dimensions shall be as directed by the Town
of Irondequoit, and the easement agreement shall be recorded in the
office of the County Clerk, with a copy provided to the Town of
Irondequoit.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
§ 196-26 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-27
194:442
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes,
as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with § 196-18.
C. Maintenance agreements.
(1) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned
stormwater management facilities, including nonstructural
practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a formal and
enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved by the
Town of Irondequoit and recorded in the office of the County Clerk
as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management
practices and will outline the procedures and schedule to be
followed to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management practice. In
addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices and include plans for periodic inspections by
the owners, or their designated agent, to ensure proper
performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement shall be
generally consistent with the terms and conditions of the
"Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement," the form of
which is attached to and made a part of this chapter as Exhibit A.63
(2) The Town of Irondequoit, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets
all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater
management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual
inspection to document maintenance and repair needs to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment
of its purposes. These needs may include, but not be limited to, removal
63.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 196-27 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-27
194:443
of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage
pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary
replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found
must be identified in writing, along with the schedule and methods to
be employed to complete the maintenance. The maintenance repairs
and restoration schedule are to be approved by the Town of Irondequoit
prior to commencing the work, and the Town of Irondequoit shall
inspect the facility upon completion of the work. The inspection and
maintenance requirement may be increased by the Town of Irondequoit
as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater
management facility.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records
shall be made available to the Town of Irondequoit during inspection of
the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guarantees for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the applicant or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the applicant, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Town of Irondequoit with an irrevocable letter of credit from an
approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction and until the Town of
Irondequoit acknowledges compliance with all details of the approved
site plan. If the applicant or landowner fails to properly operate and
maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, the Town of Irondequoit may draw upon the account to cover
the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering
and inspection costs, until the Town of Irondequoit acknowledges
compliance with all details of approved site plan.
G. Performance bond/security. The Town of Irondequoit may, at its
discretion, require the submittal of a letter of credit, cash or
performance bond from an appropriate financial or surety institution
which names the Town as the sole beneficiary prior to approval in order
to insure that the stormwater practices are installed as required by the
approved stormwater pollution prevention plan. The amount of the
installation performance security shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved by
the Town of Irondequoit, plus 4% for inspection and 10% for
contingencies. The performance security shall contain forfeiture
provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The installation performance security shall
be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written
certification by a New York State licensed professional engineer that
§ 196-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-27
194:444
§ 196-28. Inspection; right of entry.
§ 196-29. As-built plans; project closeout.
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final construction
is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a New York
State licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the Town of
the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the
approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The Town
of Irondequoit will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice
to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the
provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the
performance security based on the completion of various development
stages can be done at the discretion of the Town of Irondequoit.
A. The Town of Irondequoit or designated agent shall make inspections at
any reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of the
stormwater management facilities. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based
upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of
drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge
to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality
standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with
other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance
and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices. The applicant must notify the Town of
Irondequoit in advance before the commencement of construction. If
any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified of the
nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added
work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Furthermore, when any new drainage control facility is installed on
private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system, or combined sewer, the
property owner shall grant to the Town of Irondequoit the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when
it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is
occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement
of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter.
§ 196-27 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-29
194:445
Irondequoit is required before the release of any performance securities can
occur.
§ 196-30. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so
that it is consistent with the certified as-built plans. Any postconstruction
alterations to the landscape shall receive prior approval from the Town
of Irondequoit. Temporary landscape alterations, such as those associated
with utility excavations and landscaping activities, must be restored to
conditions that are consistent with the certified as-built plans.
§ 196-31. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to
meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the Town of
Irondequoit, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the
design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary
work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that
the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety
or public health, the Town of Irondequoit shall notify the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in
writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have
36 hours to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved
manner. After proper notice, the Town of Irondequoit may assess the
owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties, and
the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against
the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill
and collected as ordinary taxes by the County of Monroe.
B. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
C. Notice of violation. When the Town determines that an activity is not
being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it
shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The
notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action and a
statement to the effect that the failure to commence any such
remedial action within 10 days following the date of service of such
§ 196-29 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-31
194:446
§ 196-32. Severability.
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be separable,
and if the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter.
notice of violation shall result in the commencement of
enforcement proceedings.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
D. Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction and/or maintenance activities. This
stop-work order will be in effect until the Town of Irondequoit confirms
in writing that the activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a
timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any
penalty provided herein or by law, any failure to comply with any
provision or requirement of this Article II, or of any statement, plan,
application, approval, permit or certification provided pursuant to the
provisions of this article, shall be deemed a violation punishable by a
fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed
15 days, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for a conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 15 days, or both; and, upon
conviction of a third or each and every subsequent offense, all of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate, additional violation. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, limited
liability company, association, corporation or other entity convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear
the expense of such restoration.
F. Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits may not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater management practices have been
made and accepted by the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 196-31 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-33
194:447
§ 196-33. Fees; costs and expenses.
The applicant shall pay to the Town of Irondequoit at the time it submits
its application a one-time fee to be established from time to time by the
Town Board to cover administrative costs associated with the review and
consideration of SWPPPs, SMPs and permits issued pursuant to § 196-8D.
In addition to the foregoing fee:
A. The applicant shall reimburse the Town of Irondequoit for all
reasonable and necessary engineering, administrative and legal
expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the review,
inspection and consideration of a stormwater application, regardless of
whether such application is approved or denied in whole or in part.
B. Simultaneous with the filing of an application and prior to the
commencement of any construction or site work activities, the
applicant shall deposit with the Town Supervisor a sum of money
determined by the Town Board to cover the costs to be incurred by the
Town for engineering, inspection and legal expenses. Such deposit shall
be held in a separate, non-interest-bearing account in the name of the
Town, and the Town Supervisor shall keep a separate record of all such
moneys deposited, on whose behalf the moneys were deposited, and the
project for which the sums were deposited.
C. Upon receipt and approval by the Town Board of itemized vouchers
from an engineer and/or attorney for services rendered on behalf of the
Town pertaining to the application, construction or site work activities,
the Town Supervisor shall cause such vouchers to be paid out of the
moneys so deposited and shall furnish copies of such vouchers to the
applicant at the same time such vouchers are submitted to the Town.
D. The Town Board shall review and audit all such vouchers and shall
approve payment of only such engineering and legal fees which the
Town Board determined to have been reasonable and necessarily
incurred by the Town in connection with the review, consideration and
approval of any application. For purposes of the foregoing, a fee or part
thereof is reasonable in amount if it bears a reasonable relationship to
the average charge by engineers or attorneys to the Town for services
performed in connection with the approval or construction of a similar
development. In this regard, the Town Board may take into
consideration, among other things, the size, type and number of
facilities and of the construction and/or site work activities to be
performed; the topography of the land on which such construction and/
or site work activities are to be conducted and/or facilities to be
located; soil conditions; surface water drainage conditions; the nature
and extent of facilities to be constructed; and any special conditions or
considerations that the Town Board may deem relevant. A fee or part
thereof is necessarily incurred if it was charged by the engineer or
attorney for a service which was rendered in order to protect the
health, safety or other vital interests of the residents of the Town or to
protect public or private property from damage and other factors, to
§ 196-33 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-33
194:448
assure the proper and timely implementation of the purposes and
provisions of this article, to protect the legal interests of the Town,
including, but not limited to, the avoidance of claims and liability, and
such other interests as the Town Board may deem relevant.
E. If at any time during or after processing of such application or during or
after construction or site work activities there shall be insufficient
moneys on hand to the credit of the applicant to pay the approved
vouchers in full, or if it shall reasonably appear to the Town Supervisor
that such moneys will be insufficient to meet vouchers yet to be
submitted, the Town Supervisor shall cause the applicant to deposit
additional sums as the Supervisor deems necessary or advisable to
meet such expenses or anticipated expenses.
F. In the event that the applicant fails to deposit such funds or such
additional funds, the Town Supervisor shall notify any and all applicable
Town officers and boards of such failure, and any review, approval,
permit or certificate may be withheld by such appropriate officer and/or
board until such moneys are deposited.
G. The issuance of any final approval, permit or certificate of occupancy
shall not occur unless and until all fees incurred by the Town have been
paid in full. Any amounts remaining on account to the credit of the
applicant after such final approval, permit or certificate shall be
returned to such applicant.
§ 196-33 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-33
194:449

ARTICLE III
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
§ 196-34. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this Article III is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens and protect and enhance the water quality of
watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with
the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by:
§ 196-35. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal
storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 196-41, and any
stormwater discharges to the sanitary sewer, except as permitted by the
Town of Irondequoit.
A. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable;
B. Prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system; and
C. Prohibiting stormwater discharges to sanitary sewers.
§ 196-34 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-35
194:451
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — An activity subject to SPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or a
combination thereof which is an undesired byproduct waste resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources, except garbage.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more
parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to
enter the storm drain system, and any connection to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a
government agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the Town of
Irondequoit.
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by the
Town of Irondequoit.
C.
§ 196-35 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-35
194:452
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-water, surface water and stormwater as may be
inadvertently present. The admixture of sewage with industrial wastes, as
defined above, or other wastes also shall be considered "sewage" within the
meaning of this definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Town of Irondequoit must take all necessary
actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d)-LISTED WATERS: the condition in the Town of Irondequoit's
MS4 permit that applies where the Town of Irondequoit discharges to a
303(d)-listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management
program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to
the 303(d)-listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the Town
of Irondequoit's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements
for control of stormwater discharges has been approved by the EPA
for a water body or watershed into which the Town of Irondequoit
discharges. If the discharge from the Town of Irondequoit did not meet
the TMDL stormwater allocation prior to September 10, 2003, the Town
of Irondequoit was required to modify its stormwater management
program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified
in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Town of Irondequoit's MS4 permit that applies if
a TMDL is approved in the future by the EPA for any water body or
watershed into which the Town of Irondequoit discharges. Under this
condition, the Town of Irondequoit must review the applicable TMDL
to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges.
If the Town of Irondequoit is not meeting the TMDL stormwater
allocations, the Town of Irondequoit must, within six months of the
TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 196-35 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-35
194:453
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual or general areawide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels (i.e., ditches), reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A document
which describes the best management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department of
Environmental Conservation as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean
Water Act. Section 303(d)-listed water are estuaries, lakes and streams that
fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
TOWN OF IRONDEQUOIT — Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this article.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourse and water
bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
§ 196-36. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Town of Irondequoit. This article also applies to
stormwater entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 196-35 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-37
194:454
§ 196-37. Responsibility for administration.
The Town of Irondequoit shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Town of Irondequoit may be delegated in writing by the Supervisor of the
Town of Irondequoit to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 196-38. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 196-39. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination,
pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 196-40. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The Town of Irondequoit, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
records examination and copying, observation, measurements,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge or potential to discharge
and for repair and maintenance to the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
B. Confidentiality of information.
(1) Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the
nondomestic source specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town of Irondequoit that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes
or methods of production entitled to protection as confidential
information according to the criteria set forth in 40 CFR 2.208 and
2.302, as may be amended from time to time.
(2) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose confidential information shall not be
made available for inspection by the public. Stormwater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
§ 196-37 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-40
194:455
§ 196-41. Discharge prohibitions.
(3) Information accepted by the Town of Irondequoit as confidential
shall be made available upon request to any agency meeting the
requirements of Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, including
officers, employees or authorized representatives of the United
States concerned with carrying out the Clean Water Act, bound by
the confidentiality rules in 40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 196-40A, the Town of Irondequoit shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the person, and the person
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the authorized
representative(s), and the Town of Irondequoit shall indemnify the
person against loss or damage to its property by Town of Irondequoit
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property damage asserted against the person by Town of Irondequoit
employees and growing out of the inspection and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the person to
maintain safe conditions.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town of Irondequoit access to the
premises or other interference with the activities of the Town of
Irondequoit shall be a violation of this article. Access to property and/or
records of a nondomestic source may not be refused on the basis that
the Town of Irondequoit refuses to sign any waiver, access agreement,
or similar document.
E. If the Town of Irondequoit has been refused access to a building,
structure or property or any part thereof, and if the Town of Irondequoit
has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of the Town of Irondequoit to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Town of Irondequoit will make an application to a
court of competent jurisdiction for a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The
warrant application shall specify what, if anything, may be searched
and/or seized on the property described. If granted by the court, such
warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Town of Irondequoit
in the company of a uniformed officer of the law enforcement agency
with jurisdiction over the property. In the event of an emergency
affecting public health and safety, inspections may be made without the
issuance of a warrant.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
§ 196-40 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-41
194:456
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such activities
include failing private sewage disposal systems as defined in
§ 196-35, improper management of animal waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the Town's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) SPDES permit
authorization.
(2) Upon notification to a person that it is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Town's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that it no longer causes or contributes
to violations of the Town's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
B. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: waterline flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated and non-sediment-laden pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, airconditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools
(if dechlorinated, typically less than one ppm chlorine), fire-fighting
activities and any other water source not containing pollutants.
Regardless of exemption, best management practices should be
implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Town of Irondequoit as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge but requires a verbal
notification to the Town of Irondequoit prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Town of
Irondequoit.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
§ 196-41 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-41
194:457
§ 196-42. Suspension of MS4 access.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a pipe or line conveying sewage to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained,
in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street,
alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drainage system, or water of
the United States, any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn waste, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations,
so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited
in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
E. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person
shall construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe
or drain so as to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquids or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
ground surface or into any storm sewer or drain or as to endanger any
watercourse or body of water unless a permit for such discharge shall
have been issued by the Monroe County Department of Public Health or
by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of
private sewage disposal systems shall operate, maintain and inspect
such systems in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary Code.
F. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer without written
permission to do so from the Town of Irondequoit.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Town
of Irondequoit may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access into
the MS4 to a person when such a suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment; to the health or
welfare of persons; to the storm drainage system, including but not
limited to pipes, manholes, outfall structures and storm laterals; or to
the waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order, the Town of Irondequoit may take such steps as
§ 196-41 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-42
194:458
§ 196-43. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town of Irondequoit prior to discharge or as a condition
of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or
improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement
proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 196-44. Monitoring of discharges.
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters
of the United States or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have its MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Town of Irondequoit will
notify a violator of the proposed suspension or termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the Commissioner of Public
Works of the Town or his or her designee to reconsider the
suspension or termination of MS4 access by requesting a hearing.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate MS4 access to
premises suspended or terminated pursuant to this section without
the prior approval of the Town of Irondequoit.
A. Applicability. This § 196-44 applies to all facilities that the Town of
Irondequoit must inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or
whenever the Town of Irondequoit has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition
which constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Town of Irondequoit shall be permitted to enter and inspect, at
any time, facilities subject to regulation under this article as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the Town of Irondequoit.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Town of Irondequoit ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling
and examination of the private storm drainage system. Persons or
facility operators must supply copies, if requested by Town of
Irondequoit, of all records kept under the conditions of the SPDES
stormwater discharge permit. Persons or facility operators must
§ 196-42 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-44
194:459
§ 196-45. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
also identify the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
(3) The Town of Irondequoit shall have the right to place or position on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the Town of Irondequoit to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility's discharge to the storm sewer system.
(4) The Town of Irondequoit has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated as necessary and recommended by the
manufacturer to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which
allows for unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or
sampling of the storm drainage system shall be promptly removed
by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the Town of
Irondequoit and shall not be replaced. All costs associated with
clearing such access restrictions shall be borne by the discharger
in full.
(6) Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Town of Irondequoit, in
allowing the Town of Irondequoit access to a facility, which is
permitted under the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation SPDES Program, for the purposes of conducting any
activity authorized or required by the permit are considered a
violation of said program and of this article.
(7) If the Town of Irondequoit has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm
sewer system exists and the Town of Irondequoit is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to further inspect
and/or sample the private stormwater system to verify compliance
with this article or any order issued hereunder or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
Town of Irondequoit may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Best management practices. The Town of Irondequoit will adopt
requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any
activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection
§ 196-44 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-45
194:460
§ 196-46. Watercourse protection.
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for
a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant
with the provisions of this § 196-45. Appropriately designed structural/
nonstructural BMPs shall be included as part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where private sewage disposal
systems are contributing to the Town of Irondequoit being subject to
the special conditions as defined in § 196-35 of this article, the owner or
operator of such private sewage disposal system shall be required to
maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained
and inspected in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary
Code.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Repair or replace private sewage disposal systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewage design standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage
disposal system unless a permit is obtained from the Monroe
County Public Health Director or his authorized
representative.
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly
owned land such that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended
use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property in a manner which prevents illicit
discharges and keeps the watercourse free of trash, debris, yard/lawn
waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 196-45 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-47
194:461
§ 196-47. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person i)
responsible for a facility or operation or ii) responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in the
illegal discharge of pollutants into stormwater, the public or private storm
drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of any
such release. In the event a release of hazardous materials occurs, said
person shall immediately notify the NYSDEC Region 8 Spill Response Team
and/or call the New York State Spill Hotline within the time frame
established by law, as well as notify the Town of Irondequoit's Supervisor,
Commissioner of Public Works or Town Attorney of the occurrence. In the
event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the
Town of Irondequoit's Supervisor, Commissioner of Public Works or Town
Attorney in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Town of Irondequoit, Attention: Supervisor,
postmarked within three business days of the date of the in-person or phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
five years.
§ 196-48. Enforcement.
A. Whenever the Town of Irondequoit finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Town of
Irondequoit may order compliance by written notice of violation issued
by the Town's Commissioner of Public Works to the responsible person.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of illicit connection or discharges.
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
§ 196-47 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-48
194:462
§ 196-49. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by
law, any violation of this Article III is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; a second violation of this article committed
within a period of five years is punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor
more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or
both; and a third or subsequent violation of this article within a period of
five years is punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 196-50. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Town's Commissioner of Public Works. The notice of appeal must be
received by the Town Clerk within 10 days from the date of the notice of
violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Town Board or its designee shall
take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the Town Board or its designee shall be made within 15 days
after such hearing and shall be final.
§ 196-51. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within five days
of the decision of the Town Board upholding the notice of violation, the Town
of Irondequoit, its representatives and/or employees may enter upon the
subject private property with the consent of the owner or with a valid search
and/or seizure warrant and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
§ 196-52. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protection claim objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 10 days after receiving such notice. If the amount
due is not paid by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal or,
if an appeal is taken, within 30 days following the date of the final decision
of the Town Board on such appeal (or such longer period of time as the
Commissioner of Public Works, in his or her sole discretion, may consent
to in writing), the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 196-48 SPECIAL EVENTS § 196-52
194:463
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall
become liable to the Town of Irondequoit by reason of such violation.
§ 196-53. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Town of Irondequoit
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling
the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 196-54. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this article, the Town of Irondequoit may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 196-55. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 196-56. Criminal prosecution.
§ 196-57. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of Irondequoit to seek cumulative remedies.
A. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Any person that has
violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal
prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and, upon conviction, shall
be guilty of a violation and subject to a penalty as set forth in § 196-49.
B. The Town of Irondequoit may recover all attorney fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 196-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 196-57
194:464
Chapter 198
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 56.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
Trees — See Ch. 214.
§ 196-57 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 196-57
198:465

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 1-20-1977 as Ch. 44, Arts. I, II, IV and V, of the 1977
Code]
§ 198-1. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Street, Highway and
Public Places Ordinances of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CURBS — Includes curbs constructed by the Town as a part of a street
improvement or curbs constructed pursuant to a permit issued by the
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or County
Superintendent of Highways.
DRIVEWAYS — Includes all portions of driveways located within the limits
of a highway.
OBSTRUCTION — Includes lumber, wood or logs, building materials and
supplies, abandoned machines, vehicles or implements; fences, buildings
or structures; earth, stone or other material within the boundaries of a
highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — Includes any Town highway under the jurisdiction
and control of the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways of the Town of Irondequoit or a county highway, including
drainage ditches, pipes and appurtenances thereto.
§ 198-3. Administration and maintenance. [Added 5-21-1996 by L.L.
No. 2-1996]
§ 198-4. Obstructions.
A. General. The powers and duties to enforce the provisions of this article
shall be under the administration, direction and control of the
Department of Public Works and/or the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways.
B. Traffic control maintenance. The Department of Public Works and/or
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways shall have
charge of and be responsible for any provisions of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law pertaining to the maintenance of controls of signage of
traffic, parking, pedestrian crossings and any local laws or ordinances
pertaining to the same as it falls within the Town government's
jurisdiction or responsibility.
§ 198-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 198-4
198:467
§ 198-5. Curbs.
§ 198-6. Driveways.
A. Obstruction prohibited. No person shall, without a permit as
hereinafter provided, make, suffer or create an obstruction as defined
in this article within the bounds of any street or highway, nor in any
manner permit an obstruction to interfere with public travel therein.
B. Duty of owner or occupant. Each owner or occupant of lands situated
along a street or highway shall remove all obstructions within the
bounds of such highway, which have been placed there either by himself
or herself or by or with his or her consent and without a permit as
herein provided.
C. Permit. The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways may issue a permit for a temporary obstruction in a highway
upon such terms and conditions as he or she may prescribe, but not to
exceed a thirty-day period unless specifically authorized by the Town
Board. No permit shall be issued by the Town Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways unless a bond in such form as the
Town Attorney shall approve shall be filed with the Town Clerk,
indemnifying the Town of Irondequoit and the Town Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways of and from any and all
claims or causes of action arising in any manner from such temporary
obstruction. Such bond shall be in such amount not less than $2,000 as
the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
shall direct.
A. Interference prohibited. No person shall, without a permit as
hereinafter provided, injure, deface, destroy, remove or otherwise
interfere with any curb within any street or highway.
B. Permit. The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways may grant a permit for the cutting or removal of curbs in
connection with installation of new driveways upon such terms and
conditions as he or she may prescribe. No permit shall be issued by the
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
unless a bond in such form as the Town Attorney shall approve shall be
filed with the Town Clerk, indemnifying the Town of Irondequoit and the
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways of
and from any and all claims or causes of action arising in any manner
from such cutting or removal of curbs in connection with installation of
new driveways. Such bond shall be in an amount of not less than $2,000
as the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways shall direct.
A. Permit required. No driveway shall be installed within the limits of a
highway unless a permit therefor shall be obtained from the Town
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways as herein
provided.
§ 198-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 198-6
198:468
§ 198-7. Sidewalks.
B. Permit. The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways may issue a permit for the installation of a driveway in a
highway on such terms and conditions as he or she may prescribe and
subject to the provisions of this section. No permit shall be issued by
the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
unless a bond in such form as the Town Attorney shall approve shall be
filed with the Town Clerk, indemnifying the Town of Irondequoit and the
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways of
and from any and all claims or causes of action arising in any manner
from such driveway installation. Such bond shall be in such amount not
less than $2,000 as the Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall direct.
C. Special provisions.
(1) The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways shall, in cases where the street or highway has a curb,
require among other conditions the following:
(a) That all new driveways shall have the same curbing radius as
other driveways on the same street or highway.
(b) Pavement and curbing radius shall be removed from all
discontinued driveways abutting the property served by the
new driveway.
(c) Curbing of the same character and type of stone shall be built
across all discontinued driveways.
(d) The joint between curb and pavement shall be properly sealed
with an approved sealer.
(e) The width of the driveway on the pavement side of the walk
shall correspond with and be of the same width as the driveway
inside the walk.
(2) In cases where no curbing exists, the Town Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways may require such additional
installations including drainage pipes as may be necessary to
permit the free flow of drainage water in such streets or highways.
A. Duty of owner or occupant. Each owner or occupant of lands situated
along a sidewalk within the bounds of any street or highway shall keep
and maintain such sidewalk in proper repair.
B. Approval by Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways. No sidewalk shall be constructed within the bounds of any
highway unless the design, construction and grade thereof shall be
approved by the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways.
§ 198-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 198-7
198:469
C. Construction requirements.
(1) Sidewalk lateral grades shall be at least 1/8 inch per foot and shall
not exceed 1/2 inch per foot.
(2) Sidewalk construction shall be done in a manner such as will not
interfere with the established gutter line or in any other way cause
additional water to flow upon private property.
(3) While the work is in progress or until the above is complied with,
any obstructions or grade in excess of 1/2 inch per foot shall be
marked with adequate warning devices, including barriers and
warning lights.
D. Abutting property owners to be responsible for maintenance. Approval
of sidewalk construction by the Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall not be construed to impose any duty
upon such Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways or upon the Town of Irondequoit to maintain such sidewalks,
but such sidewalks shall be maintained by the abutting property owner
or owners.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Added 7-18-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
ASPHALT/CEMENT SHIMS — A temporary repair for sidewalk slabs
that are heaved and deemed to be potentially hazardous. These slabs
will be replaced when working in that area. Until replacement is
possible, periodic inspections will be made ensuring that the temporary
repair is holding and no further heaving has taken place.
CRACKED SLABS — Slabs which have:
HAZARDOUS SIDEWALK — A sidewalk in which there is a difference in
elevation of 1 1/2 inch between a joint or a crack, in the slab or between
slabs, or that a portion of a sidewalk is so badly spalled, broken or
deteriorated as to present a tripping hazard. The existing surface shall
be used in determining whether or not a sidewalk is hazardous.
HEAVED WALK AT TREES — Walk slabs heaved 1 1/2 inches or more
by tree roots. Walks will be removed, roots cut and removed walk slabs
replaced. Walk slabs will be arched around larger trees as needed
to protect the tree. Walk slabs heaved less than 1 1/2 inches may be
repaired by placing an asphalt wedge at the offset joint. This will be a
temporary repair.
Cracks which have resulted in a difference of elevation 1/2 inch or
greater.
(1)
(2) More than one crack in a slab.
(3) Longitudinal cracks of 1/2 inch or wider.
§ 198-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 198-7
198:470
§ 198-8. Removal of trees, shrubs and other plantings.
The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways shall
be authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing
trees, limbs, branches or shrubs, plants, hedges and the like or trees which
are in such close proximity to the highway as to constitute a source of
danger to the users thereof. The Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall notify the owner or occupant of such
premises by letter addressed to the owner or occupant at the address
appearing on the tax records of the Town of Irondequoit of his or her
intention to remove such tree or limbs or branches or shrubs, plants, hedges
and the like, and, upon the expiration of 72 hours from the mailing of
such notice, the Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways may remove such tree or branches or shrubs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways from removing such trees or branches or limbs
or shrubs, plants, hedges or the like within a shorter period if conditions
require it. Unless the owner or occupant shall file objection with the Town
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways prior to the
expiration of the time herein provided, such owner or occupant shall have
no claim of any kind against the Town or Town Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways in connection with the removal of such
trees, branches or limbs or shrubs, plants, hedges or the like.64
§ 198-9. Damaging street or highway improvements prohibited.
No person shall injure, damage, deface or destroy any curb, sidewalk,
gutter, drainage pipes or appurtenances within or appurtenant to a street
or highway; nor shall any person operate construction machinery, tractors
with lugs or other machinery or vehicles upon any highway or over, upon or
ONE SLAB BETWEEN TWO DEFECTIVE SLABS — One sidewalk slab
in good condition located between two or more slabs to be removed
on either side. The good slab shall be replaced except if the good slab
abuts another structure such as a carriage walk, service walk or steps.
SPALLED SLABS — Loose or spalled concrete which has resulted in
surface irregularities greater than 1/2 inch in depth relative to the
sidewalk surface over more than 1/4 of the sidewalk slab.
SETTLED WALK — A sidewalk that has settlement of 1 1/2 inches or
more over a ten-foot span. The depth of settlement will be determined
by measuring parallel to the street on adjacent unsettled walk to the
lowest point of the settled walk. Settled walk will not be considered as
hazardous or a problem if there is drainage out of the settled area.
VERTICALLY MISALIGNED SLABS — A difference of greater than 1 1/
2 inch in elevation of adjacent sidewalk slabs.
64.Editor's Note: Former § 44.26, Deposit of dirt or similar material prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997. Such deposits
are regulated under the State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 198-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 198-9
198:471
across any curbs or sidewalks in such manner as to cause injury or damage
thereto.
§ 198-10. Public service corporation permits.
The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways may,
with the consent of the Town Board, issue to any public service corporation
having facilities within the Town of Irondequoit a permit covering all
operations of such corporation within the Town, authorizing such public
service corporation to do any of the acts for which a permit is required
hereunder in accordance with the conditions of this article and such other
and further conditions as the Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways or Town Board may require.
§ 198-11. Advertising prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall use any public street, highway or public place in this
Town for political or other advertising purposes or otherwise by inscribing
or affixing names, signs or other writings, posters or drawings upon any
of such streets or highways or any improvements, trees or utility poles
situated in the right-of-way of such streets or highways; provided, however,
that these prohibitions shall not be construed to include any street,
directional or traffic signs or markings installed or erected by any
governmental authority.
§ 198-12. Street dances and block parties.
A. Permit required. No person shall use any street or highway within the
Town of Irondequoit for any street dance, block party or similar use or
assemblage without obtaining a permit therefor from the Town Clerk.
B. Permit application. The applicant shall state, in writing:
(1) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(2) The purpose of the permit.
(3) The exact location and date and hours for which the permit is
requested.
(4) Whether any previous application has been filed and, if so, the date
and disposition thereof.
(5) Such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk to
determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior statements
required in this section.
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall make his or
her determination within a reasonable time. He or she may,
however, require notice of the application to be mailed to all
residents directly affected or within 200 feet of the portion of the
§ 198-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 198-12
198:472
§ 198-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class B
violation, punishable as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
street or highway to be used and to afford each of them reasonable
time not exceeding 10 days in which to comment on said
application, either for or against the same.
(2) The Town Clerk may grant, deny or grant a permit modifying the
use requested as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and may require such
conditions and safeguards as in his or her opinion are necessary or
appropriate to provide adequate protection to the public and
access to adjacent properties.
D. Revocation of permit.
(1) Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Clerk, there is reasonable
grounds to revoke any permit issued under this article, the Town
Clerk may do so by advising the permittee in writing or in person.
(2) In case of an emergency or immediate threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, any police officer may summarily revoke any
permit granted under this section.
§ 198-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 198-13
198:473

ARTICLE II
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 4-6-1978 as L.L. No. 1-1978]
§ 198-14. Prior notice required. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997; 10-21-2003 by L.L. No. 12-2003]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Irondequoit or
its Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways for
damages or injuries to person or property sustained by reason of any
highway, bridge, culvert, street or sidewalk being defective, out of repair,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless 48 hours' written notice of such
defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway,
bridge, culvert, street or sidewalk was actually given to the Town Clerk or
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways and there
was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the giving of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained
of; but no such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of
snow or ice upon any highway, bridge, culvert or sidewalk unless 48 hours'
written notice thereof, specifying the particular place, was actually given
to the Town Clerk or Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways and there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice
to be removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a
reasonable time after the receipt of such notice. All such written notices
shall be indexed according to the location of the alleged defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition or the location of accumulated snow or
ice.
§ 198-15. Transmission of notices.
The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways shall
transmit, in writing, to the Town Clerk within five days after the receipt
thereof all written notices received by him or her pursuant to this article
and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law, as amended or changed. The
Town Clerk shall cause all written notices received by him or her pursuant
to this article and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law, as amended or
changed, to be presented to the Town Board within five days of the receipt
thereof or at the next succeeding Town Board meeting, whichever shall be
sooner.
§ 198-16. Supersession of statute.
This article shall supersede in its application to the Town of Irondequoit
Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law, as amended or changed.
§ 198-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 198-16
198:475
Chapter 199
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 192. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 198.
§ 199-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Right-of-Way Law of
the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 199-2. Purpose.
The placement of obstructions in, and the paving of, a public right-of-way
within the Town of Irondequoit is detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. The same also constitutes an attractive
nuisance to children and in many ways imperils their safety. Obstructions
and paving of any sort creates dangerous situations by obstructing the
view of pedestrians or motorists, damaging Town tree root systems, lawns
and the roadway and is also unsightly and depreciates all property values.
The control of the public right-of-way within the Town of Irondequoit is,
therefore, regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 199-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORPORATION — As used herein, shall include public service corporations
such as Rochester Gas & Electric, Rochester Telephone, Time Warner
Cablevision, Sea Breeze Water Authority and the Monroe County Water
Authority.
OBSTRUCTION — Includes but is not limited to lumber, wood or logs,
rocks, pipes, wooden posts, building materials and supplies, abandoned
machines, vehicles or implements, fences, buildings or structures, earth,
stone, vegetation, snow, athletic equipment or other material within the
boundaries of a highway. (Leaf/brush piles may be left on the right-ofway
only the week of the regularly scheduled pickup. For refuse collection
regulations, see Chapter 192.)
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land owned by the state, county or Town which is
occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk, and/or utility lines,
such as electric, gas, oil, water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer. The right-ofway
shall include the road, the sidewalk and grass area.
§ 198-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 199-4
199:476
§ 199-4. Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store or deposit
or erect any obstruction on the right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to promptly remove all obstructions within the right-ofway
adjacent to their property and to restore the right-of-way to its original
condition and design.
§ 199-5. Paving and stoning.
The right-of-way shall not be paved or stoned under any circumstances
without written approval from the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways. Whenever paving or stoning has occurred
without the written approval from the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, it is the responsibility of the property owner
to restore the right-of-way to its original condition and design.
§ 199-6. Permit and notice required.
No person or corporation shall open, disturb or work, or erect fences or
structures, or plant trees, or cause to be opened or disturbed by cutting,
missiling, boring, digging, resurfacing or excavating the surface, soil,
pavement or sidewalk, within any street, highway, sidewalk or right-of-way,
for any purpose whatsoever without having:
§ 199-7. Qualification for permits.
The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways may issue
a permit to any applicant meeting the following qualifications:
A. Secured a permit to perform such work from the Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways.
B. Provided notice to the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways of the specific location of each such excavation.
C. Secured any necessary site plan approvals required by the Town.
A. Such applicant or the applicant's agent shall have filed in the office of
the Commissioner an insurance certificate showing coverage as
determined by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways. The insurance certificate shall name the Town of Irondequoit
as an additional insured and shall include the coverage of completed
operations.
B. Such applicant shall have paid the appropriate fee to the Town as
established by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways.
C. Such applicant shall have completed and signed a right-of-way
application form provided by the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, which shall include a statement that the
§ 199-4 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 199-7
199:477
§ 199-8. Annual maintenance contract permits.
§ 199-9. Permit fees.
Fees for annual maintenance contract permits shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 199-10. Transfer of permits.
The permit holder shall not assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of the
permit to any person or corporation.
§ 199-11. Notice to Town.
Notice to the Town of the location of work requiring such permits shall
be upon forms or facsimiles thereof as developed by the Commissioner
of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways. Notice to the Town for
emergency repairs shall be made no later than one business day after the
start of the work. Notice to the Town for all other work shall be furnished at
applicant has received and will comply with the standards and
specifications of the Town for work within its rights-of-way.
D. Such applicant shall not have had a permit revoked within the past
three years.
E. Franchises.
(1) Such applicant shall have either:
(a) Duly obtained a franchise from the Town Board for the use of
the Town's rights-of-way; or
(b) Signed an agreement, in a form as prepared by the
Commissioner, committing the applicant to retroactively
comply with any franchise legislation duly adopted by the Town
and uniformly applicable to similar users of the Town's rightsof-
way, or to remove the applicant's facilities promptly after
adoption.
(2) These qualifications shall not apply to property owners or their
agents engaged in the construction or maintenance of driveways,
commercial entrances or mailboxes.
A. A-1: shall permit the holder to maintain existing facilities, including
emergency repairs, install new services from mains to existing
structures, widen or resurface existing driveways, open cutting of the
road or other work permitted as single jobs. The permits shall be valid
only for the calendar year in which they are issued.
B. A-2: shall permit the holder to resurface existing driveways or other
work permitted as single jobs. The permits shall be valid only for the
calendar year in which they are issued.
§ 199-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 199-11
199:478
least five business days prior to the start of the work. For these purposes,
"emergency repairs" shall be defined as those unforeseeable repairs to
existing facilities necessary to protect the public from imminent danger or
necessary to assure uninterrupted utility service and shall also be defined to
include new, temporary facilities as necessary to provide continuous utility
service while repairs are made to existing facilities.
§ 199-12. Revocation of permit.
The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways may revoke
any permit issued hereunder for any or all of the following reasons:
§ 199-13. Town standards and specifications.
A. Failure to maintain an insurance certificate showing the required
coverage for the entire duration of any work.
B. Failure to pay fees.
C. Failure to provide the required notice of the location within the
required schedule.
D. Failure to adhere to the Town's standards and specifications for work
within the right-of-way.
E. Other good and sufficient reason.
A. The Town specifications and standards shall be proposed from time to
time by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
and shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the Town Board.
These standards shall deal with such subjects as the materials to be
used, the tools and techniques, the execution of the work, the
restoration of the site and the maintenance and protection of traffic.
B. The following are hereby adopted as a part of the Town's standards and
specifications:
(1) All maintenance and protection of traffic shall be in complete
accord with the New York State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, as it may be amended from time to time by the State of
New York.
(2) All disturbed areas within the right-of-way are to be restored to
their original condition on a schedule to be approved by the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways.
Absent satisfactory evidence from the applicant to the contrary, it
shall be presumed that the facilities, in their undisturbed condition,
were fully operable, safe for public travel and in good condition.
(3) All utilities and facilities in the area of the work are to be located,
protected and (if disturbed or damaged) repaired by the permit
holder.
§ 199-11 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 199-13
199:479
§ 199-14. Scheduling of work.
Work shall be conducted only after specific notice to the Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways as provided in § 199-11 above
and only if no verbal or written notice to the permittee to suspend work
has been provided by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways or designee. Work shall be delayed, at the direction of the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, as necessary
to coordinate it with the work of the Town or with the approvals of related
developments.
§ 199-15. Activities not requiring a permit.
The following activities within the right-of-way shall not require a permit:
§ 199-16. Liability for costs.
In the event that any permit holder fails to do anything required hereunder,
the Highway Superintendent may cause the same to be done, and the cost of
the same shall be charged to the permit holder who shall be liable therefor.
§ 199-17. Authority to serve notice.
The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or his
designee(s), Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Code Compliance Inspector
or Irondequoit Police Department may from time to time require notice
to be served upon owners, as hereinafter provided, to remedy any of the
foregoing conditions which may exist upon the land, in addition to other
Town Code violations which may exist. Compliance is required within seven
days of receipt of notice, or longer if specified by the Commissioner of
Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or his designee(s). If there is an
(4) The highway must be kept clean of mud, dirt and other debris at all
times.
(5) No asphalt may be placed over sidewalks.
(6) Temporary pavement must be immediately placed in all road cuts
until weather conditions permit permanent pavement restoration.
(7) The permittee must maintain the road cut (temporary and
permanent) until the road is overlaid.
C. The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, in
granting a permit, may impose any and all special conditions as may be
reasonably required to protect the interests of the Town and of all other
users of the Town rights-of-way.
A. The application of a liquid seal coating or of a patch to a driveway;
B. Mowing, fertilization and general maintenance; and
C. The collection of yard debris.
§ 199-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 199-17
199:480
immediate danger to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the obstruction may be
removed immediately by the Town without prior notification to the property
owner.
§ 199-18. Form of notice.
Whenever the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
or his designee(s), Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance
Inspector, or Irondequoit Police Department requires the owners of land to
correct violations of this chapter, the notice shall specify the place, manner
and time (not less than seven days from the receipt of said notice) within
which such work shall be completed. The notice shall be served upon such
owner or owners by registered or certified mail addressed to his or her or
their last known address.
§ 199-19. Failure to comply; work done by Town; costs.
§ 199-20. Reimbursement for costs; costs to constitute lien.
Should the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways
authorize work to be done for removal of obstructions and restoration
of the right-of-way to its original condition and design, then the Public
Works/Highway Department shall be reimbursed for the cost, including
out-of-pocket administrative expense of the work performed or services
rendered by direction of the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways, as hereinabove provided, by assessment and levy upon the
lots or parcels of land wherein such work was performed or such services
rendered, and the expenses so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge
on the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
A. Whenever a notice or notices has been or have been served upon such
owner or owners of the respective lots or parcels of land to correct
violations of this chapter, and such owner or owners shall neglect or fail
to comply with the requirements of such notice or notices within the
time provided therein, the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways shall be notified of said violation(s) and
shall authorize the work to be done. The cost thereof, including costs of
restoration of the right-of-way to its original condition and design, shall
be paid out of the general Town funds to be appropriated by the Town
Board for such purposes. The same procedure shall apply to emergency
situations described above.
B. The Commissioner of Public Works, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or
Code Compliance Inspector may issue an appearance ticket subscribed
by him or her directing the owner or owners to appear in a designated
local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with this
alleged commission of a designated offense of this chapter. Each day
that passes without the proper restoration of the right-of-way shall
constitute a separate offense. A violation of this chapter will constitute
a Class B violation.
§ 199-17 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 199-20
199:481
discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time
as other Town charges.
Chapter 204
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 123.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 136.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 199-20 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 199-20
199:482
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 204-1. Authority to approve plats.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Town Law § 271, as amended or
changed, and the resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit
adopted pursuant to Town Law § 276, as amended or changed, the Planning
Board of the Town of Irondequoit in the County of Monroe and State of New
York is authorized to approve plats and to enact rules and regulations in
respect to procedures before it.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — The subdivider and/or an individual, partnership or
corporation holding title to a parcel of land to be developed or subdivided.
Commitments and requirements for development shall be solely between
the town and the "applicant."
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BUILDER — An individual, partnership or corporation who obtains a
building permit for construction of a structure or structures on lots within
the proposed development.
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS/SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS
— The chief executive officer of the Department of Public Works of the Town
of Irondequoit.
CONTRACTOR — An agent acting for the applicant to construct the
required improvements of the project. The contractor shall be responsible
to perform the work in conformance with these requirements, subject to the
approval of town officials.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with one end open for public vehicles
and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
DESIGNER — The professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or
land surveyor, licensed in New York State, retained by the applicant to
prepare the required plans and supervise the construction of the project.
EASEMENT — A right granted to use certain land for a special purpose not
inconsistent with the general property rights of the owner.
FINAL PLAT or FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN — A drawing prepared in
a manner prescribed by this chapter showing a proposed subdivision,
containing, in such additional detail as shall be provided by this chapter, all
information required to appear on a preliminary plat and the modifications,
if any, required by the Planning Board at the time of approval of a
preliminary plat of such proposed subdivision, if such preliminary plat has
been so approved.
§ 204-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-2
199:483
GRADING PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed grades for
stormwater drainage, together with existing grades of land and proposed
finished grades of the project.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land that
may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots, such as grading,
paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and monuments.
INSPECTOR — An agent of the town empowered to inspect the progress of
the project and the compliance of the construction with the specifications.
He or she shall have the power to halt construction should the contractor
and/or applicant not be performing the work in a satisfactory manner.
LOT — A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or building
development that is presently occupied or capable of being occupied by one
principal building or use and by those buildings or uses necessary to the
principal buildings or uses.
PRELIMINARY PLAT or PRELIMINARY PLAN — A drawing prepared in
a manner prescribed by this chapter showing the layout of a proposed
subdivision, including, but not restricted to, road and lot layout and
approximate dimensions, key plans, topography and drainage and all
proposed facilities unsized, including preliminary plans and profiles, at
suitable scale and in such detail as this chapter may require.
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL or PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL — The
approval of the layout of proposed subdivision, as set forth in a preliminary
plat, but subject to approval of the plat in final form in accordance with
the provisions of Subdivision 6 of § 276 of the Town Law, as amended or
changed, and this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — A rough sketch of a proposed subdivision which indicates
generally the proposed layout, contours, street and lot locations, future
proposed development of surrounding area owned or controlled by the
applicant and existing utilities and drainage.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic or a public thoroughfare recognized
or intended to be recognized as such by the Department of Public Works. 65
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A FINAL PLAT — The approval of a final
plat subject to conditions set forth by the Planning Board in a resolution
conditionally approving such plat. Such conditional approval does not
qualify a final plat for recording nor authorize issuance of building
permits prior to the signing of the plat by a duly authorized officer of
the Planning Board and recording of the plat in the office of the County
Clerk in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
A.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The signing of a final plat by a duly
authorized officer of the Planning Board after a resolution granting
final approval to the plat or after conditions specified in a resolution
granting conditional approval of the plat are completed. Such final
approval qualifies the plat for recording in the office of the County
Clerk of Monroe County.
B.
§ 204-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-2
199:484
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area of land used or designated for street
purposes.
SUBDIVISION — A division, for residential purposes, of any part, parcel or
tract of land, whether by lots or by metes and bounds, into two or more in
number for the purpose of conveyance, transfer, improvement, sale or rent.
A "subdivision" shall not include the conveyance, transfer or sale of a part
or portion of a lot, part or parcel of land for the purpose of adding the same
to an existing lot, part or parcel of land, provided that such conveyance,
transfer or sale shall not result in the creation of a nonconforming lot under
the appropriate district regulations of Chapter 235, Zoning, of the Town of
Irondequoit. 66
SUPERINTENDENT OF SANITATION — The Town Officer in charge of
the Sanitation Division of the Department of Public Works of the Town of
Irondequoit.
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly appointed Town Engineer of the Town of
Irondequoit or a consulting engineer retained by the Town of Irondequoit or
such other Town Officer duly designated to perform the duties and exercise
the powers granted to the Town Engineer in this chapter.
A. PUBLIC STREET — A street owned and maintained by the town.
PRIVATE STREET — A street privately owned and which may be
privately maintained.
B.
MAJOR STREET, ARTERIAL STREET OR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A
street carrying or designed to carry fast or heavy traffic or a recognized
part of a through route.
C.
COLLECTOR STREET or FEEDER STREET — A street which carries
traffic from minor to major streets, or vice versa, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation
within such development.
D.
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
E.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street parallel and adjacent
to an arterial street or highway, providing access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
F.
ALLEY — A minor way used primarily for vehicular service to the back
or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
G.
DEAD-END STREET, CUL-DE-SAC or LOOP STREET — A trafficway
which serves only properties bordering it and connects only with the
street where it originates.
H.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
66.Editor's Note: The definition of "Superintendent of Highways," which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. See now the definition of "Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways" in this section.
§ 204-2 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-3
199:485
§ 204-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, as used throughout this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ACP Asbestos cement pipe
ASA American Standards Association
ASTM American Society of Testing
Materials
AWWA American Waterworks Association
cfs Cubic feet per second
fps Feet per second
lf Linear foot
MCWA Monroe County Water Authority
mph Miles per hour
NYSDOT New York State Department of
Transportation
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Act
PC Point of curvature
PI Point of intersection
psi Pounds per square inch
PT Point of tangency
PVC Point of vertical curve
pvi Point of vertical intersection
ROW Right-of-way
USGS United States Geodetic Survey
§ 204-4. Responsibility of involved parties.
A. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that preparation of the
plan is sufficient to meet the standards and requirements herein
incorporated.
B. The town's representatives shall review the proposed plans as to their
compliance with the standards and meeting the best interests of the
town.
C. It is the responsibility of the contractor, acting for the applicant, to
construct the facilities in conformance with the approved plans and the
standards herein included.
D. Periodic inspection shall be provided by the town to serve as a check
that construction is being performed in a satisfactory manner.
§ 204-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-4
199:486
§ 204-5. Applicability.
E. The final results of the project remain the prime responsibility of the
applicant, and until the development is satisfactorily approved by the
town and/or its representatives, said development shall not be accepted
for dedication.
A. All of the regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all
subdivisions hereafter created in the Town of Irondequoit.
B. All of the regulations contained in Articles VIII and shall apply to all
public works improvements within the Town of Irondequoit, whether or
not installed within a subdivision or elsewhere.
§ 204-4 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-5
199:487

ARTICLE II
Plat Approval Procedure
§ 204-6. General requirements for approval.
The Planning Board shall give final approval to a plat before completion
of improvements only if their installation is assured through an approved
irrevocable letter of credit. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued until
road binder and necessary utilities are installed.
§ 204-7. Outline of procedure.
The applicant shall develop his or her proposed plat and present it for final
action by the Planning Board in the following consecutive steps:
§ 204-8. Informal meeting and sketch plan.
The Planning Board may meet informally with the applicant to discuss
the proposed subdivision and make available to him or her its knowledge
of development activities and requirements. A written request for such
informal meeting shall be filed with the Building Inspector. The applicant
shall receive at least five days advance notice of the time and place of the
informal meeting, which shall take place not later than 30 days after filing
of the request. The applicant shall present sketch plans at such informal
meeting, which shall roughly indicate contours, street and lot locations and
future development of the total surrounding area owned or controlled by
the applicant. The applicant shall also show existing utilities, the sizes and
slopes and points of discharge.
§ 204-9. Preliminary plats.67
A. The applicant may present and discuss a rough sketch of his or her
proposed subdivision at an informal meeting with the Planning Board.
B. The applicant shall present a preliminary plan and other required data
for consideration by the Planning Board.
C. The applicant shall submit a formal application for approval of the final
plat upon which the Planning Board shall thereupon approve, modify
and approve or disapprove such plat. No application shall be approved
unless the final plat conforms to the regulations of Chapter 235, Zoning.
A. Submission of preliminary plats. The applicant shall submit a
preliminary plat for consideration. Such a preliminary plat shall be
clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall conform to the definition
provided in this chapter.
B. Coordination with the State Environmental Quality Review Act. The
Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-6 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-9
199:489
Conservation Law, as amended or changed, and its implementing
regulations.
C. Receipt of a complete preliminary plat. A preliminary plat shall not be
considered complete until a negative declaration has been filed or until
a notice of completion of the draft environmental impact statement has
been filed in accordance with the provisions of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act. The time periods for review of a preliminary plat
shall begin upon filing of such negative declaration or such notice of
completion.
D. Planning Board as lead agency under the State Environmental Quality
Review Act; public hearing; notice; decision.
(1) Public hearing on preliminary plats. The time within which the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be coordinated with any hearings the Planning Board may
schedule pursuant to the State Environmental Quality Review Act,
as follows:
(a) If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the preliminary plat is not
required, the public hearing on such plat shall be held within
62 days after the receipt of a complete preliminary plat by the
Clerk of the Planning Board.
(b) If the Planning Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required, and a public hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement is held, the public hearing on
the preliminary plat and the draft environmental impact
statement shall be held jointly within 62 days after the filing of
the notice of completion of such draft environmental impact
statement in accordance with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act. If no public hearing is held
on the draft environmental impact statement, the public
hearing on the preliminary plat shall be held within 62 days of
filing the notice of completion.
(2) Public hearing; notice, length. The hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least five days before such hearing, if no
hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement, or 14
days before a hearing held jointly therewith. The Planning Board
may provide that the hearing be further advertised in such manner
as it deems most appropriate for full public consideration of such
preliminary plat. The hearing on the preliminary plat shall be
closed upon motion of the Planning Board within 120 days after it
has been opened.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, with or without
modification, or disapprove such preliminary plat as follows:
§ 204-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-9
199:490
(a) If the Planning Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the preliminary plat is not
required, such Board shall make its decision within 62 days
after the close of the public hearing.
(b) If the Planning Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed within 45 days following the
close of such public hearing, in accordance with the provisions
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act. If no public
hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement,
the final environmental impact statement shall be filed within
45 days following the close of the public hearing on the
preliminary plat. Within 30 days of the filing of such final
environmental impact statement, the Planning Board shall
issue findings on the final environmental impact statement and
make its decision on the preliminary plat.
(4) Grounds for decision. The grounds for modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board. When so approving a preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall state, in writing, any modifications it deems
necessary for submission of the plat in final form.
E. Planning Board not as lead agency under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act; public hearing; notice; decision.
(1) Public hearing on preliminary plats. The Planning Board shall, with
the agreement of the lead agency, hold the public hearing on the
preliminary plat jointly with the lead agency's hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement. Failing such agreement or if no
public hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement,
the Planning Board shall hold the public hearing on the preliminary
plat within 62 days after the receipt of a complete preliminary plat
by the Clerk of the Planning Board.
(2) Public hearing; notice, length. The hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least five days before such hearing, if held
independently of the hearing on the draft environmental impact
statement, or 14 days before a hearing held jointly therewith. The
Planning Board may provide that the hearing be further advertised
in such manner as it deems most appropriate for full public
consideration of such preliminary plat. The hearing on the
preliminary plat shall be closed upon motion of the Planning Board
within 120 days after it has been opened.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall, by resolution, approve with or
without modification or disapprove the preliminary plat as follows:
§ 204-9 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-9
199:491
§ 204-10. Final plats.68
(a) If the preparation of an environmental impact statement on the
preliminary plat is not required, the Planning Board shall make
its decision within 62 days after the close of the public hearing
on the preliminary plat.
(b) If an environmental impact statement is required, the Planning
Board shall make its own findings and its decision on the
preliminary plat within 62 days after the close of the public
hearing on such preliminary plat or within 30 days of the
adoption of findings by the lead agency, whichever period is
longer.
(4) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board. When so approving a preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall state, in writing, any modifications it deems
necessary for submission of the plat in final form.
F. Certification and filing of preliminary plat. Within five business days of
the adoption of the resolution granting approval of such preliminary
plat, such plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as
having been granted preliminary approval, and a copy of the plat and
resolution shall be filed in such Clerk's office. A copy of the resolution
shall also be mailed to the owner.
G. Filing of decision on preliminary plat. Within five business days from
the date of the adoption of the resolution approving the preliminary
plat, the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Planning Board
shall cause a copy of such resolution to be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk.
H. Revocation of approval of preliminary plat. Within six months of the
approval of the preliminary plat, the owner must submit the plat in final
form. If the final plat is not submitted within six months, approval of the
preliminary plat may be revoked by the Planning Board.
A. Submission of final plats. Final plats shall conform to the definition
provided by this chapter.
B. Final plats which are in substantial agreement with approved
preliminary plats. When a final plat is submitted which the Planning
Board deems to be in substantial agreement with a preliminary plat
approved pursuant to this section, the Planning Board shall, by
resolution, conditionally approve, with or without modification,
disapprove or grant final approval and authorize the signing of such
plat within 62 days of its receipt by the Clerk of the Planning Board.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-10
199:492
C. Final plats when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted;
receipt of complete final plat. When no preliminary plat is required to
be submitted, a final plat shall not be considered complete until a
negative declaration has been filed or until a notice of completion of the
draft environmental impact statement has been filed, in accordance
with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act. The
time periods for review of such plat shall begin upon filing of such
negative declaration or such notice of completion.
D. Final plats not in substantial agreement with approved preliminary
plats or when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted. When a
final plat is submitted which the Planning Board deems not to be in
substantial agreement with a preliminary plat approved pursuant to
this section or when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted and
a final plat clearly marked "final plat" is submitted conforming to the
definition provided by this section, the following shall apply:
(1) Planning Board as lead agency; public hearing; notice; decision.
(a) Public hearing on final plats. The time within which the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on such final plat
shall be coordinated with any hearings the Planning Board may
schedule pursuant to the State Environmental Quality Review
Act, as follows:
[1] If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is not required, the public
hearing on a final plat not in substantial agreement with a
preliminary plat or on a final plat when no preliminary plat
is required to be submitted shall be held within 62 days
after the receipt of a complete final plat by the Clerk of the
Planning Board.
[2] If such Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement is held, the public
hearing on the final plat and the draft environmental
impact statement shall be held jointly within 62 days after
the filing of the notice of completion of such draft
environmental impact statement, in accordance with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act.
If no public hearing is held on the draft environmental
impact statement, the public hearing on the final plat shall
be held within 62 days following filing of the notice of
completion.
(b) Public hearing; notice, length. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least five days before such hearing, if
no hearing is held on the draft environmental impact
statement, or 14 days before a hearing held jointly therewith.
§ 204-10 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-10
199:493
The Planning Board may provide that the hearing be further
advertised in such manner as it deems most appropriate for full
public consideration of such final plat. The hearing on the final
plat shall be closed upon motion of the Planning Board within
120 days after it has been opened.
(c) Decision. The Planning Board shall make its decision on the
final plat as follows:
[1] If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the final plat is not
required, the Planning Board shall, by resolution,
conditionally approve, with or without modification,
disapprove or grant final approval and authorize the
signing of such plat within 62 days after the date of the
public hearing.
[2] If such Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing is held on the
draft environmental impact statement, the final
environmental impact statement shall be filed within 45
days following the close of such public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act. If no public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed within 45 days following
the close of the public hearing on the final plat. Within 30
days of the filing of the final environmental impact
statement, the Planning Board shall issue findings on such
final environmental impact statement and shall, by
resolution, conditionally approve, with or without
modification, disapprove or grant final approval and
authorize the signing of such plat.
(d) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if any, or
the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of
the Planning Board.
(2) Planning Board not as lead agency; public hearing; notice;
decision.
(a) Public hearing. The Planning Board shall, with the agreement
of the lead agency, hold the public hearing on the final plat
jointly with the lead agency's hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement. Failing such agreement or if
no public hearing is held on the draft environmental impact
statement, the Planning Board shall hold the public hearing on
the final plat within 62 days after the receipt of a complete final
plat by the Clerk of the Planning Board.
(b) Public hearing; notice, length. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
§ 204-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-10
199:494
circulation in the town at least five days before such hearing, if
held independently of the hearing on the draft environmental
impact statement, or 14 days before a hearing held jointly
therewith. The Planning Board may provide that the hearing
be further advertised in such manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such final plat. The
hearing on the final plat shall be closed upon motion of the
Planning Board within 120 days after it has been opened.
(c) Decision. The Planning Board shall, by resolution, conditionally
approve, with or without modification, disapprove or grant
final approval and authorize the signing of such plat as follows:
[1] If the preparation of an environmental impact statement
on the final plat is not required, the Planning Board shall
make its decision within 62 days after the close of the
public hearing on the final plat.
[2] If an environmental impact statement is required, the
Planning Board shall make its own findings and its
decision on the final plat within 62 days after the close of
the public hearing on such final plat or within 30 days of
the adoption of findings by the lead agency, whichever
period is longer. The grounds for a modification, if any, or
the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the
records of the Planning Board.
E. Approval and certification of final plats.
(1) Certification of plat. Within five business days of the adoption of the
resolution granting conditional or final approval of the final plat,
such plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as
having been granted conditional or final approval, and a copy of
such resolution and plat shall be filed in such Clerk's office. A copy
of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant. In the case of a
conditionally approved plat, such resolution shall include a
statement of the requirements which, when completed, will
authorize the signing thereof. Upon completion of such
requirements, the plat shall be signed by said duly authorized
officer of the Planning Board, and a copy of such signed plat shall
be filed with the Town Clerk.
(2) Approval of plat in sections. In granting conditional or final
approval of a plat in final form, the Planning Board may permit the
plat to be subdivided and developed in two or more sections and
may, in its resolution granting conditional or final approval, state
that such requirements as it deems necessary to ensure the orderly
development of the plat be completed before said sections may be
signed by the duly authorized officer of the Planning Board.
Conditional or final approval of the sections of a final plat may be
granted concurrently with conditional or final approval of the
§ 204-10 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-10
199:495
entire plat, subject to any requirements imposed by the Planning
Board.
(3) Duration of conditional approval of final plat. Conditional approval
of the final plat shall expire within 180 days after the resolution
granting such approval, unless all requirements stated in such
resolution have been certified as completed. The Planning Board
may extend by not more than two additional periods of 90 days
each, the time in which a conditionally approved plat must be
submitted for signature if, in the Planning Board's opinion, such
extension is warranted by the particular circumstances.
F. Default approval of preliminary or final plat. The time periods
prescribed herein within which a Planning Board must take action on a
preliminary plat or a final plat are specifically intended to provide the
Planning Board and the public adequate time for review and to
minimize delays in the processing of subdivision applications. Such
periods may be extended only by mutual consent of the owner and the
Planning Board. In the event that a Planning Board fails to take action
on a preliminary plat or a final plat within the time prescribed therefor
after completion of all requirements under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act, or within such extended period as may have been
established by the mutual consent of the owner and the Planning Board,
such preliminary or final plat shall be deemed granted approval. The
certificate of the Town Clerk as to the date of submission of the
preliminary or final plat and the failure of the Planning Board to take
action within the prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall
be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required.
G. Filing of decision on final plat. Within five business days from the date
of the adoption of the resolution approving the final plat, the Chair or
other duly authorized member of the Planning Board shall cause a copy
of such resolution to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
H. Filing of final plat; expiration of approval.
(1) The applicant shall file in the office of the County Clerk or register
such approved final plat or a section of such plat within 62 days
from the date of final approval or such approval shall expire. The
following shall constitute final approval:
(a) The signature of the duly authorized officer of the Planning
Board constituting final approval by the Planning Board of a
plat as herein provided;
(b) The approval by such Board of the development of a plat or
plats already filed in the office of the County Clerk or register
of the county in which such plat or plats are located, if such
plats are entirely or partially undeveloped; or
§ 204-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-10
199:496
§ 204-11. Irrevocable letter of credit.69
(c) The certificate of the Town Clerk as to the date of the
submission of the final plat and the failure of the Planning
Board to take action within the time herein provided.
(2) In the event that the owner shall file only a section of such
approved plat in the office of the County Clerk or register, the
entire approved plat shall be filed within 30 days of the filing of
such section with the Town Clerk in each town in which any portion
of the land described in the plat is situated. Such section shall
encompass at least 10% of the total number of lots contained in the
approved plat and the approval of the remaining sections of the
approved plat shall expire unless said sections are filed before the
expiration of the exemption period to which such plat is entitled
under the provisions of Subdivision 2 of § 265-a of the Town Law, as
amended or changed.
A. Any letter of credit furnished in lieu of the installation of the required
improvements shall be in the amount fixed by the resolution of the Town
Board; shall be secured by such deposit of applicant or issued by such
bonding or banking institution, as shall be approved by the Town Board;
and shall be approved by the Town Board and the Town Attorney as to
form, sufficiency and manner of execution. The letter of credit shall
assure the complete installation of the required improvements within
such period, as shall be fixed by the Planning Board. The Planning
Board, with the consent of all parties to the letter of credit, may extend
such period upon written application of the applicant filed with the
Town Clerk prior to the expiration of such period or upon its own
motion at any time prior to a declaration of a default in the letter of
credit by the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Board may modify its requirements with the approval of
the Town Board and upon findings either that the extent of building
development that has taken place in the subdivision is substantially
completed or the subdivision development has been reduced after
approval by the Planning Board so as to warrant reduction in the face
amount of the bond.
C. Except as provided in the preceding subsection, the letter of credit shall
be released only upon complete installation of the required
improvements, the submission of the certified record, (as-built)
drawings, as required herein, and a certificate from the applicant's
engineer that the completed works are in substantial conformance with
the approved plans.
D. If the required improvements are not completely installed within the
period fixed or extended by the Town Board, the Town Board may
declare the letter of credit in default and collect the amount payable
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-10 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-11
199:497
§ 204-12. Offers of cession.
The applicant shall tender offers of cession in a form certified as satisfactory
by the Town Attorney of all land included in streets, highways or parks not
specifically reserved by him, but approval of the plan by the Planning Board
shall not constitute an acceptance by the town of the dedication of any
street, highway, park or other public open space.
§ 204-13. Improvement districts.
§ 204-14. Inspection.
The installations, improvements and development of any subdivision shall
be subject to inspection at all stages by representatives of the Planning
Board, and for such purpose, free access shall be accorded and requested
information shall be promptly submitted.
thereunder. Upon receipt of such amount, the town shall install such
improvements as are covered by the letter of credit and are
commensurate with the extent of building development that has taken
place in the subdivision, but exceeding in cost, the amount of such
proceeds.
A. Between the interval of approval of the preliminary plat and approval of
the final plat, the applicant shall petition the Town Board for the
creation of the following districts or extensions thereto when required:
(1) Sanitary Sewer Districts.
(2) Water Districts, if necessary.
(3) Hydrant Districts, if necessary.
B. In order to preserve the continuity and format of the application of the
districts to the various governing authorities, the applicant's engineer
and attorney shall prepare the necessary documents and maps, and the
Town Clerk shall be responsible for publication and filing requirements.
§ 204-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-14
199:498
ARTICLE III
Plan Documentation
§ 204-15. Sketch plans.
§ 204-16. Preliminary plats.
A. The applicant may present to the Planning Board a sketch plan not
more than one inch equals 100 feet showing the parcel of land to be
developed; the proposed subdivision of lots with affiliated road systems;
adjoining property owners' names; a location plan showing the general
location in relationship to the town; the schematic provision of sanitary,
water and storm drainage facilities within the development; existing
and adjacent utilities showing size, slope, depth, etc.; rough contours;
and any other features which may govern the logical development of
the proposed subdivision.
B. The purpose of this sketch plan is to allow an informal discussion
between the Planning Board or its representatives and the applicant to
describe the project, along with any anticipated problem areas and
unusual features that can be expected in the development and to
reduce the changes that may be necessitated in review of the
preliminary plan.
C. After the completion of the review and informal meeting or meetings,
the applicant may then proceed to have the preliminary plat prepared.
A. A preliminary plat shall be considered as a prefinal plan providing
sufficient details or substantiation of the design to permit proper review
by the Planning Board. A final plat shall contain all information as
subsequently described and also shall contain any revisions or redesign
necessitated by the review and approval of the preliminary plat.
B. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board a preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision, complete topography of the area at two-foot
intervals, unless otherwise specified for profiles and cross sections.
C. These shall be submitted in triplicate, one Mylar and two black and
white paper prints, at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch, and
shall contain the following information:70
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the tract in
which the subdivision is located.
(2) The name and address personally signed, in India ink, of the record
owner, applicant and designer of the preliminary plat.
(3) A deed description and map or survey of the tract boundary made
and certified by a licensed surveyor to be a closed and balanced
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-15 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-16
199:499
traverse and showing the location of property lines, existing
easements, buildings, watercourses and other essential features.
(4) The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names
of owners on record for adjacent acreage.
(5) The locations and size of any existing sewers, water or gas mains,
culverts and drains or other underground utilities on the property
to be subdivided.
(6) A key plan showing the location of the tract.
(7) Sanitary sewers detailed as follows:
(a) A plan view location of all proposed sewers and/or any plan and
profile of all sewers showing all special features, such as
inverted siphons, extra-strength pipe, sewer bridges, stream
crossings, etc.
(b) Unique features that may be required, such as a pump station
or shallow sewer. When there is a question of the sewer being
sufficiently deep to serve any residence, the elevation and
location of the basement floor or slab shall be plotted on a
profile of the sewer which is to serve the house in question.
(c) Details of all ordinary sewer appurtenances, such as manholes,
drop manholes, inspection chambers and inverted siphons, as
well as of any special appurtenances or structures, such as
regulators, sewer bridges, pumping stations, etc.
(d) Detailed plans of all sewer sections except standard pipe,
clearly shown as such. Details of cradling and encasement
must also be shown.
(e) A summary of design data for all sewers and for pumping
stations or any similar facilities.
(8) Storm drainage and sewers detailed as follows:
(a) All details required for the collection and disposal of surface
drainage shall be the same as that required for sanitary
sewers.
(b) Details of any unusual features regarding catch basins, open
channels, culverts, conduits, ditches and headwalls.
(c) General details as to show the ultimate disposal or point of
discharge of stormwater.
(d) A summary of design data for all storm drainage.
(e) Approval granted by the Monroe County Department of Public
Works, pursuant to § 239-k of the General Municipal Law, as
§ 204-16 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-16
199:500
§ 204-17. Final plats.71
The applicant shall submit the final plat and street profiles clearly and
legibly drawn in India ink on Mylar. These shall be original drawings or
prints on tracing cloth at a scale not more than 100 feet to one inch. In
addition to the tracing cloth drawing, there shall be submitted four copies of
amended or changed, if the subdivision is located within the
county's jurisdiction.
(9) Locations, names and existing widths of present and proposed
streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and
other public open spaces.
(10) The width, location, grades and street profiles of all proposed
streets or other public ways.
(11) Typical cross sections of the proposed grading of the roadways and
sidewalks and topographic conditions and additional cross sections
at points where cut or fill exceeds three feet or multiples of three
feet between grids.
(12) Zoning regulations for the area with zoning district boundaries
affecting the area and all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated
to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
(13) The date, scale and true North point.
(14) All proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and building
setback lines.
(15) The proposed location of and type of sidewalks; the location and
species of street trees; the location, size and types of curbs and
gutters; the location and size of water, gas and telephone, cable TV
and electrical mains and lines and the character, width and depth of
pavement and subbase.
(16) All necessary easements to service public areas.
(17) When and if the subdivision covers only a portion of the applicant's
entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future street system of
the entire area showing all prospective sewer and drainage
facilities, with sizes, slope, location and area served.
D. All preliminary plats must be submitted in accordance with one of the
following sizes or multiples of these sizes: 17 inches by 22 inches; 22
inches by 34 inches; or 34 inches by 44 inches.
E. A suitable border line shall be placed on all drawings with a margin of
not less than 1/2 inch on all sides.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-16 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-17
199:501
the plans and profiles. The final plat shall incorporate all of the information
as required of the preliminary plat and shall also include:
A. The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the
tract in which the subdivision is located; the name and address of the
record owner and applicant; the name, license number and seal of the
registered professional engineer and surveyor or other designer.
B. Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements and areas
dedicated to public use.
C. Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and length of
every street, lot line, boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon
the ground.
D. The length and bearing of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii,
length of curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances and
tangent bearings shall be given for each street. All dimensions of the
lines of each lot shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. The
property boundaries, location, scale and North points shall also be
shown.
E. All offers of dedication with the certificate of approval of the Town
Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
F. Lots numbered.
G. Monuments.
H. Figures showing the manhole stationing, size of sewers, surface and
sewer invert elevations at manholes and the grade of all sewers
between two adjacent manholes on the profiles.
I. Certification from the applicant's engineer that all sewers are
sufficiently deep to serve adjacent basements, except where otherwise
noted on the plans.
J. Record (as-built) drawings, certified by the applicant's engineer,
showing that sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, manholes,
house lateral stubs and all other underground facilities were
constructed by the applicant in accordance with the approved final plat
or in accordance with waivers thereof approved by the Planning Board
and to be submitted after subdivision is completed.
K. Certification of approval by the appropriate public authority, when and
where required, as well as such other certificates, affidavits,
endorsements or other agreements as may be required by the Planning
Board, in the enforcement of this chapter, to include, but not limited to,
the following:
(1) All Town Department heads concerned.
§ 204-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-17
199:502
§ 204-18. Required documents.
The following documents shall be submitted to the town:
(2) Agencies of the County of Monroe under §§ 239-k, 239-1, 239-m
and 239-n (of Article 12-B) of the General Municipal Law.
(3) The State of New York Department of Transportation (if
applicable).
(4) The Monroe County Health Department.
(5) The Monroe County Water Authority or Sea Breeze and Vicinity
Water District.
(6) Rochester Gas and Electric Corporation.
(7) Rochester Telephone Corporation.
(8) Other utilities.
L. Planting. Adequate tree planting may be required of the applicant.
Street trees shall be a minimum of 35 feet and a maximum of 50 feet on
center. Tentative tree species shall be indicated on the preliminary plan
and shall be species which are not susceptible to salt spray and thrive
within the anticipated climatic conditions of the location. Trees shall be
northern-grown or locally grown and certified disease- and pest-free.
Trees shall not be less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter at the base at time
of planting. They may be planted on the owner's property only. Trees
must be adequately supported by guy wires until firmly rooted.
A. Ten copies of the final plat drawings.
B. Storm drainage computations.
C. Development grading plan.
D. Estimated construction schedule.
E. Engineers estimate for the letter of credit.
§ 204-17 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-18
199:503

ARTICLE IV
Layout Requirements
§ 204-19. Compliance required.
In the layout, development and improvements of a subdivision, the applicant
shall comply with all standards, specifications, codes, local laws and
ordinances of the town; and in addition, he or she shall meet, as minimums,
the standards of design and principles of land subdivision set forth.
§ 204-20. Streets and roads.
§ 204-21. Building lines; utilities.
A. Street system.
(1) The development plan shall conform to such plan or plans for the
town as shall have been adopted by the town.
(2) Local residential streets in a new development shall be so laid out
as to discourage through traffic, but provision for the extension and
continuation of major streets into and from adjoining areas is
required. If the subdivision abuts a present or proposed primary or
major thoroughfare, marginal interceptor streets running parallel
to the thoroughfare shall be provided.
(3) At all times, the street layout should be logically related to the
topography of the land.
(4) If the lots resulting from the original development are large enough
for resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
suitable access and street openings for such an eventuality shall be
provided.
B. Street intersections. Multiple intersections involving the junction of
more than four roadways shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care for
both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
C. Other requirements.
(1) Reserve strips controlling access or egress are prohibited. New
streets shall be provided through to the boundary lines of the
development, especially if it adjoins acreage.
(2) Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with
existing named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets;
subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Street names shall
be cleared with the Post Office officials and such other authorities
designated by the Town Board to avoid duplications or use of
similarly sounding names.
§ 204-19 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-21
199:505
§ 204-22. Parkland reservation.
A. Building lines. The minimum building setback shall be controlled by the
provisions set forth in Chapter 235, Zoning, of the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Utilities.
(1) If sewer, water, gas, electrical or other public utility facilities are to
be located within street rights-of-way, their location and installation
shall be coordinated so that they may be added to, repaired or
enlarged at minimum cost.
(2) If easements are used at the rear of lots to provide such facilities an
easement shall be required having a minimum width of at least 30
feet; where lots back up to each other, a fifteen-foot easement from
each lot shall be required.
A. Before the approval by the Planning Board of a plat showing lots, blocks
or sites, with or without streets or highways, or the approval of a plat
already filed in the office of the County Clerk of Monroe County if such
plat is entirely or partially undeveloped, such plat shall also show, in
proper cases and when required by the Planning Board, a park or parks
suitably located for playground or other recreational purposes. If the
Planning Board determines that a suitable park or parks of adequate
size cannot be properly located in any such plat or is otherwise not
practical, the Planning Board may require as a condition to approval of
any such plat a payment to the town of a sum to be determined by the
Town Board, which sum shall constitute a trust fund to be used by the
town exclusively for neighborhood park, playground or recreation
purposes, including the acquisition of property.
B. In addition to all specific requirements enumerated in this chapter, the
Planning Board shall be guided by and shall conform to all of the
provisions contained in § 277 of the Town Law, as amended or changed,
and in case of a conflict between this chapter and any applicable
provisions of the Town Law, the Town Law shall govern.
§ 204-21 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-22
199:506
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
§ 204-23. Street grading.
All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street profile and
cross-section plans as submitted and approved with the preliminary plat.
They shall be inspected and checked for accuracy by the Town Department
of Public Works.
§ 204-24. Pavement.
§ 204-25. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street.
§ 204-26. Stormwater and surface drainage.
All storm sewers and drainage facilities, such as gutters, catch basins,
bridges and culverts, shall be installed and the land graded for adequate
drainage as shown on the grading plan submitted and approved with the
final plat.
§ 204-27. Sewers.
All necessary mains and laterals for connection from the lots to the public
sewage system as shown on the final plat shall be installed by the applicant
only after approval has been granted by the appropriate authorities having
jurisdiction.
§ 204-28. Water.
§ 204-29. Monuments.
A. All pavement for rural streets or roads, local residential streets and
collector streets or roads shall be installed as shown on the final plat.
B. All pavements shall conform to the current road construction
specifications of the town.72
A. All water mains and lines as shown on the final plat shall be installed
from each lot to the public water supply main. The applicant shall
obtain approval from either the Monroe County Water Authority or the
Sea Breeze and Vicinity Water District, depending on location of the
subdivision.
B. Sizes of mains and number and location of hydrants shall also be
approved by the Fire Marshal of the Town of Irondequoit.
A. Monuments shall be set in the boundary of highway rights-of-way73 at:
72.Editor's Note: Said specifications are on file in the town offices.
§ 204-23 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-29
199:507
(1) Intersecting streets.
(2) Points of curvature.
(a) Long curves, at PC and PT.
(b) Short curves at PI, where practical.
B. Adjacent monumented points shall be intervisible.
C. Monuments shall be placed on one side of the street only and at only
one corner of intersecting streets.
D. Monuments shall be tied into the Monroe County Geodetic Survey
Monumentation Network, as established under Local Law No. 6 of 1971
of Monroe County.
E. Monument location information.
(1) Field notes of ties to monuments or a tie sheet shall be submitted to
the Town Engineer after installation of monuments. Copies of the
same shall be available at the Town Hall.
(2) Where it has been found to be impractical to locate a monument at
points previously chosen and on file, an alternative solution shall be
established by the surveyor, subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer.
F. Monument design standards.
(1) Monuments shall be of granite or concrete and not less than four
inches in diameter or square, and not less than 42 inches long or
from the top of the underlying rock.
(2) If concrete, the monument may be precast or cast in place. In either
case, concrete monuments shall be reinforced with steel rods, and
a plug, brass plate or pin shall be the point of reference.
(3) If the monument is of granite, a drill hole shall serve as the point of
reference. A reinforcing rod or other metal shall be placed adjacent
to the monument to allow for recovery by magnetic devices.
(4) All monuments shall be protected by a casing and cover of a design
and construction acceptable to the Town Engineer. A typical
example is an adjustable monument box by Neenah Foundry,
Catalog No. R1968, Type 36-B, or an approved equal.
G. Lots within subdivisions.
(1) During construction, lots may be staked with wood hubs.
73.Editor's Note: Placement on the combined right-of-way line/property line would preclude
future conflicts with utilities and sidewalks while facilitating future surveys.
§ 204-29 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-29
199:508
§ 204-30. Street signs.
Permanent street signs complying with the same specifications of the
Department of Public Works showing the names of the intersecting streets
shall be erected at each intersection.
§ 204-31. Electric utility; fire alarm signal devices.
(2) After construction and fine grading is completed, the corners of
each lot shall be staked with iron pins or pipes having a maximum
diameter of one inch and at least 24 inches long.
(3) If concrete walks exist or are included in new sitework
development, chisel marks shall be made on the walk surface and
referenced to adjacent pins or pipes.
H. Letters of credit.74
(1) The location of monuments to be placed within the subdivision shall
be with guidance by the Monroe County Department of
Engineering Survey Office. Before a subdivision plat is filed with
the County Clerk, the owner or applicant shall include in his or her
letter of credit an amount sufficient to cover the cost of furnishing
and placing, by the professional land surveyor, all monuments as
shown on the plat.
(2) Upon completion of the installation of the monuments, final staking
of lots and receipt of the professional land surveyor's certification,
the amount retained in the letter of credit shall be released. The
certification by the professional land surveyor shall be in the
following (or similar) wording: "I hereby certify that all monuments
were placed as shown on the Plat of ______________ Subdivision
(Section) ____________________ as filed in the Monroe County Clerk's
Office in Libre __________ of Maps, page ______, in compliance with
the specifications of the Town of Irondequoit.
A. In every subdivision, provision shall be made for a satisfactory electric
utility supply system. All necessary wires serving the subdivision and
the streetlighting system shall be underground, rather than on poles,
standards or towers.
B. Provision shall also be made for fire alarm signal devices, including
necessary ducts and cables, or other connecting facilities.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-29 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-31
199:509

ARTICLE VI
Financial Guaranties
§ 204-32. Letter of credit.75
The letter of credit shall be submitted by the applicant to the town. The total
value of this item shall be determined as follows:
A. Improvements and letter of credit.
(1) Prior to an action by the Planning Board approving a final plat, the
applicant shall be required to complete, in accordance with the
Planning Board's decision and to the satisfaction of the appropriate
town departments, and to file with the Town Board a letter of credit
in an amount estimated by the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, with the approval of the Town
Attorney, to secure to the town the satisfactory construction and
installment of the required improvements. A period of one year, or
such other period as the Planning Board may determine
appropriate, within which improvements must be completed shall
be specified by the Planning Board and expressed in the letter of
credit.
(2) Such letter of credit shall comply with the requirements of § 277 of
the Town Law, as amended or changed, and shall satisfy the Town
Board as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. The letter of
credit shall provide that an amount determined adequate by the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, with
the approval of the Town Attorney, shall be retained for a period of
one year after the date of completion of the required improvements
to assure their satisfactory condition.
(3) All required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his or
her expense without reimbursement by the town or any district
therein, unless alternatively provided for in accord with provisions
of § 277, Subdivision 1-a, of the Town Law, as amended or changed.
Said improvements shall include the following, as well as those
improvements listed in said section and in the Town of Irondequoit
Minimum Specifications for Dedication76 and in other sections of
this chapter:
(a) Streets and streetlighting facilities.
(b) Street signs.
(c) Curbing and gutters.
(d) Grass curb strips.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
76.Editor's Note: Said Specifications are on file in the town offices.
§ 204-32 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-32
199:511
§ 204-33. Maintenance bond.77
The applicant shall provide a maintenance bond guaranteeing the project
against faulty workmanship on materials for a period of not less than two
years and up to three years after acceptance by the town. The amount
of the maintenance bond shall be 10% of the total construction amount,
but not less than $5,000. Individual portions of the project, i.e. sanitary
sewer systems and water systems, can be bonded after their individual
acceptance by the town. The maintenance bond for the pavement, gutters
and/or sidewalks shall not be accepted until the entire project is ready for
dedication.
§ 204-34. Lot cleanup security deposit. [Amended 1-3-1985 by Ord.
84-778]
Prior to issuance of the building permit, the permittee (builder) shall
provide a certified check in an amount set by the Town Board per lot upon
which he or she intends to build. This security shall be retained until that
portion of the land extending through the right-of-way to edge of gutter,
and any lot drainage channels are satisfactorily cleaned up and graded in a
manner acceptable to the Building Inspector after the house is constructed
(e) Sidewalks.
(f) Street shade trees.
(g) Monuments.
(h) Stormwater runoff systems.
(i) Sanitary sewage collection systems or approved alternate,
such as on-site sewage disposal systems.
(j) Water supply systems, if water is available, or private wells.
(k) Parks and recreation facilities.
(l) Electric, gas, telephone and utility lines.
(m) Plantings and ground covers.
(n) Driveway aprons.
B. A contingency factor (generally 10% of the amount in Subsection A.)
C. Professional fees of the applicant's engineer.
D. Estimated inspection fees as determined by the Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways.
E. Cleanup expenses established as provided in § 1-18.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-32 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-34
199:512
and if not complied with shall be forfeited within 30 days after issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, but due to weather or emergency conditions,
the time may be extended by order of the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 204-35. Release of letter of credit.79
The procedure required for the release of funds shall be a follows:
A. Submission of periodic construction estimates by the contractor to the
applicant is required.
B. Inspection of improvements. The town shall employ the Town's
Engineer to act as agent of the Planning Board for the purpose of
assuring the satisfactory completion of improvements required by the
Planning Board. If the Planning Board or its agent finds, upon
inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the Planning Board's recommendations
or the approved construction detail sheet(s), the applicant and the
financial institution will be severally and jointly liable for the costs of
completing said improvements according to the specification.
C. The letter of credit shall remain in full force and effect until a request is
made by the applicant to the Town Supervisor for a release from the
letter of credit. The Supervisor shall then submit the request by letter
to the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways for
his or her recommendation. Before the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways makes a recommendation, he or she shall
receive a signed statement from the applicant's engineer to the effect
that the work is complete according to plans and specifications and the
work has been inspected by a licensed professional engineer. Upon
receipt of said recommendation, the Supervisor may authorize release
of up to 90% of the total letter of credit. Before the final 10% of the
letter of credit can be requested by the applicant, a maintenance bond
covering up to three years and equal to 10% of the project cost shall be
posted, and any roads shall be dedicated to the Town of Irondequoit.
When this is done, the Supervisor shall again submit letters to the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways for his or
her recommendation, after which the Supervisor submits his or her
sign-off letter to the Town Board indicating final release of said letter of
credit.
D. In the event of default of compliance with the conditions of this chapter
and any other applicable laws, such letter of credit shall be forfeited to
the town. The town shall return to the applicant any amount that is not
needed to cover the costs of restoration, administration and any other
expenses incurred by the town as a result of the applicant's default.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-34 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-35
199:513
§ 204-36. Release of retainage.
The release of retainage shall be considered after the systems have been
tested and approved by the town and upon the submission and acceptance
of the maintenance bond.
§ 204-37. Release of maintenance bond.
Release of the maintenance bond shall be authorized, in writing, by the
Commissioner of Public Works upon final inspection of the project site by
town authorities. This inspection shall be completed at least one month
before the expiration of the bond.
E. The release of the security for cleanup (Subsection E of § 204-32) shall
be authorized upon final inspection of the development when it is ready
for dedication.
§ 204-35 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-37
199:514
ARTICLE VII
Waivers and Modifications
§ 204-38. Grounds for decision.
Where the applicant finds that because of unusual circumstances of shape,
topography or other physical features of the proposed subdivision or
because of the nature of adjacent developments extraordinary hardship
may result from strict compliance with this chapter, he or she may request
waiver of the portion of the regulations causing the hardship so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided
that no such waiver shall be granted which will have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of this chapter or any other pertinent rules,
regulations, ordinances or local laws of the Town of Irondequoit.
§ 204-39. Conditions.
In granting waivers and modifications, the Planning Board may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 204-40. Fees. [Amended 8-4-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5; 1-3-1985 by
Ord. 84-780]
A. Fees for the following phases of development shall be paid for all
subdivision and development work within the Town of Irondequoit.
These fees are in addition to any other fees or charges required by law
or regulation. The fees shall be set in accordance with § 1-18.
(1) Single-family subdivision:
(a) Concept phase application.
(b) Preliminary phase.
[1] Application.
[2] Advertising.
[3] Engineering review.
(c) Final phase.
[1] Application.
[2] Advertising.
[3] Engineering review.
[4] Construction.
(2) Multifamily development
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-38 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-40
199:515
(a) Concept phase application.
(b) Preliminary phase.
[1] Application.
[2] Advertising.
[3] Engineering review.
(c) Final phase.
(d) Application.
(e) Advertising.
(f) Engineering review.
(g) Construction.
(3) Commercial, industrial, etc.
(a) Concept phase application.
(b) Preliminary phase.
[1] Application.
[2] Advertising.
[3] Engineering review.
(c) Final phase.
[1] Application.
[2] Advertising.
[3] Engineering review.
[4] Construction.
B. All application and advertising fees shall be paid in full prior to
acceptance of the application.
C. Engineering review fees shall be paid in full or posted in a letter of
credit which shall be filed with the town prior to commencement of any
site work.
D. Construction inspection fees shall be posted in a letter of credit which
shall be filed with the town prior to commencement of any site work.
E. Subdivision fees shall be as follows, in addition to those listed above:
(1) Preliminary plat filing.
(2) Review.
§ 204-40 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-40
199:516
(3) Inspection.
(4) Final approval.
F. The fee for review and inspection and final approval shall be paid
following the formal final approval by the Planning Board and prior to
commencement of work.
§ 204-40 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-40
199:517

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 204-41. Sanitary systems; sewage lift stations.
A. Sanitary sewers.
(1) Minimum requirements shall be as established by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, pursuant to
Environmental Conservation Law § 17-0301, as amended or
changed, and Title 8 of said law (Environmental Conservation Law
§ 17-0801 et seq., as amended or changed).
(2) Sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter, except
in those areas where the route within the development is part of
the Master Sewer Plan. In these areas, the sewer shall be of the
diameter called for in the Master Sewer Plan.
(3) Manhole spacing shall be a maximum of 300 linear feet
(4) The depth of the sewer shall provide for basement drainage (or slab
construction) of all homes within the development. Where, because
of topographic conditions, this provision cannot be met, the Plan
shall incorporate a note specifying those lots which cannot be
served in compliance with this requirement.
(5) Elevations. Where storm drains are parallel the sanitary sewer
system, a minimum of two feet of vertical clearance between the
two systems shall be provided to permit the satisfactory installation
of laterals.
(6) Cleanouts shall be provided every 85 linear feet of the lateral and
at the right-of-way (ROW) or easement line, at grade level with
brass caps.81
(7) Sanitary manholes for sewers eight inches to 12 inches in diameter
shall be a minimum of four feet zero inches inside diameter; for
sewers over 12 inches diameter, a minimum five feet zero inches
inside diameter manhole is required.82
(8) All sanitary sewers require a minimum of six inches of crushed
stone bedding.83
B. Sewage lift stations.
(1) Specific geographic and/or topographic areas may require the use
of sewage lift stations to transmit contributory flows to the trunk
sewer system. Lift stations shall incorporate the following design
requirements:
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-41 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-41
199:519
§ 204-42. Storm drainage systems.
Storm drainage systems shall be generally designed and provided to
adequately convey anticipated runoffs occurring from storms which occur
with a frequency of once in 10 years, as indicated in nomographs prepared
by the Monroe County Planning Council.
(a) Compliance with design criteria of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
(b) Provision of a telephone alarm system which is electrically
operated, with backup battery power.84
(c) Provision of outside piping connections to be used in case of
power or mechanical equipment failure.
(d) Provisions for standby power generators.85
(2) Provisions are to be compatible with existing lift stations in the
town, and shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Works.86
A. Removal of spring and surface water. The applicant shall be required by
the Planning Board to provide adequate drainage systems to carry any
spring or surface water that may exist either previous to or as a result
of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street
right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual unobstructed easements of
such widths as designated in this chapter.
B. Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream. A
culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Town Engineer shall
approve the design and size of the facility based on anticipated runoff
under ultimate development bases on accepted engineering criteria
and parameters.
C. Responsibility for drainage downstream. The applicant's engineer shall
also study the effect of each subdivision on the existing downstream
drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision; this study shall
be reviewed by the Town Engineer. Where it is anticipated that the
additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will
overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Board
shall notify the Town Board of such potential condition. In such case the
Planning Board shall not approve the subdivision until provision has
been made for the improvement of said condition.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-41 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-42
199:520
D. Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding or land deemed by
the Planning Board to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for
residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger
to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land
within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be
endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or improved in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board to remedy said hazardous
conditions.
E. Flood hazard prevention. The applicant shall be required to control soil
erosion of land surface and drainage channels and the prevention of
inundation and excessive groundwater seepage by comprehensive site
grading and the establishment of adequate elevations of buildings,
building openings and roadways above the observed, anticipated or
computed water levels of storm sewers, streams, channels, floodplains,
retention basins and swales.
F. Runoff computations.
(1) Runoff shall be established from the rational formula as follows:
Q = AcI
Where:
Q = Runoff (cfs)
A = Acreage of the
drainage basin
involved
c = Coefficient of
runoff (minimum for
subdivision
development 0.40)
I = Intensity of
rainfall in inches per
hour
(2) Minimum times of concentration can be assumed at 15 minutes.
(3) Nomographs to determine factors for the computation of the runoff
shall be those as developed by the Monroe County Planning
Council.
(4) The applicant's engineer shall submit the following information
regarding the design of storm drainage facilities with the final map
(scale of 1:24,000).
(a) A USGS section map (scale of 1:24,000) with the outline of the
development and the drainage basin.
§ 204-42 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-42
199:521
(b) A tabular form (see Appendix B for typical format87) showing
computed runoffs and design capacities of the drainage
system.
(5) Points of discharge. Storm drainage shall be discharged to
recognized USGS drainage courses. This may require applicants to
obtain downstream easements from adjoining property owners to
permit this drainage across their properties. The applicant shall be
required to construct and maintain temporary silt settling basins at
the point of discharge into the stream. The basin shall be operable
until the completion of the subdivision.
G. Storm drains. Storm drains shall conform to the following
specifications:
(1) Minimum pipe sizes shall be 12 inches in diameter.
(2) Minimum velocity when flowing full shall be three feet per second.
(3) Maximum manhole and catch basin spacing shall be 300 linear feet.
(4) Builders (where necessary) shall provide backwater valves on all
laterals where the storm drain is at such an elevation to permit
gravity drainage from the basements adjacent to the system.
(5) All outfall pipes must be reviewed by the Town Engineer and
Commissioner of Public Works.
H. Storm laterals. Storm laterals, if required, shall be six inches in
diameter. Sump pumps and roof runoff shall not be permitted to tie into
the storm laterals directly unless requested by the Commissioner of
Public Works. Splash pads shall be required for storm outlets.
I. Catch basins. Catch basins shall be placed at all low points and
intersections with maximum spacing of 300 feet. Catch basin leads shall
only be connected to the storm drains at manholes except in those areas
where the storm drain is 24 inches in diameter or greater.
J. Storm manholes.
(1) The inside diameter of storm manholes shall be determined as
follows:
Storm Drains
(inches)
Inside Manhole
Diameter
(feet)
12 to 18 4
21 to 30 5
36 to 42 6
87.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-42 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-42
199:522
Greater than 42 Individual structures
will be required.
(2) A schedule of manhole diameters shall be provided on the final plat.
K. Drainage easements. The minimum width for drainage easements shall
be 20 feet.88
(1) Enclosed conduits and appurtenances. An easement not less than
20 feet in width, sufficient to contain the enclosed conduit and
appurtenances thereof and to provide working space for personnel
and equipment for the service thereof, shall be indicated on the
map of the development and designated as follows: "Drainage
Easement to Town of Irondequoit." Drainage easements, insofar as
possible, shall be placed along or adjacent to lot boundary lines in a
parallel or straight alignment.
(2) Easements for natural watercourses.
(a) Natural primary watercourses which traverse a development
shall be preserved by an easement of sufficient width,
including overbanks, which will adequately pass the projected
design flow. The gross allowable depth of flow shall not create
a flood hazard to existing or proposed development and
improvements. The channel and overbank widths, together
with a minimum twenty-foot continuous maintenanceway on
each side, shall constitute the floodway encroachment limits,
as further defined under the EPOD District regulations of
Chapter 235, Zoning.
(b) In natural tertiary and secondary watercourses which contain
insufficient waterway area to convey the flow from the ultimate
development, but which may prove deficient only at infrequent
intervals and location, and where minor improvements could
provide an adequate channel and still preserve, in the main,
the natural channel beauty or fish and wildlife values, the
applicant shall make such minor channel improvements as are
required to provide a channel which would otherwise meet the
conditions of this chapter. Additional widths of scenic areas
and areas of natural wetlands which, for economic reasons or
limited suitability, would not warrant improving for urban
development, may be dedicated by the applicant in addition to
those above. Areas offered for dedication to the town as
drainage easements, if considered of special interest to the
town by the Planning Board, may be considered by the
Planning Board as dedication for the municipal purposes of
§ 278 of the Town Law, as amended or changed, and its
authority thereunder.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-42 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-42
199:523
§ 204-43. Water mains.
Water mains shall conform to the specifications of the Monroe County
Water Authority or the Sea Breeze and Vicinity Water District and local fire
districts.
§ 204-44. Lot grading.
(c) Easements for constructed channels and appurtenances. Earth
channels constructed within the development shall have
sufficient easements dedicated to contain the top width of the
channel, plus a minimum twenty-foot wide continuous
maintenanceway, one side for channels less than 20 feet in
width at water surface. A twenty-foot wide continuous
maintenanceway shall be provided on both sides of a channel
with a water surface width greater than 20 feet. The
easements for constructed channels shall be indicated on the
map of the development and designated as follows: "Drainage
Easement to Town of Irondequoit."
A. The Planning Board shall, wherever possible, establish the preservation
of all natural features which add value to residential developments and
to the community, such as large trees or groves, watercourses and falls,
beaches, historic spots, vistas and similar irreplaceable assets. No tree
with a diameter of eight inches or more as measured three feet above
the base of the trunk shall be removed, unless such tree is within the
right-of-way of a street as shown on the final plat or where impractical
to retain. Removal of additional trees shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board.
B. Lot grading shall conform to the following specifications:
(1) Finished lot grading shall provide for the effective removal of
stormwater runoff to the drainage system.
(2) The finished grade at the house line shall permit a minimum of
2.0% grade to the drainage system.
(3) Drainage to side or rear lot swales shall be permitted, provided
that:
(a) Swales are of a proper cross section to permit ease of
maintenance by the individual owner.
(b) Where necessary, easements are provided for access and/or
maintenance.
(4) A lot grading plan shall be submitted with the final plat for the
development, showing the following items:
(a) Existing contours.
(b) Spot elevations at key locations.
§ 204-42 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-44
199:524
§ 204-45. Roads, sidewalks and gutters.
(c) First floor elevations.
(d) Directional arrows for drainage.
A. Pavement widths. Standard pavement widths shall comply with the
typical cross sections shown in the Appendix D.89 Additional widths may
be required by the Planning Board upon findings that the same are
required for public safety and convenience, parking in commercial or
public use areas, old roads which do not provide the proper widths and
where, as a consequence, additional dedication is necessary.
B. Horizontal alignment.
(1) Except for local residential streets and rural streets and roads,
there shall be a tangent of at least 100 feet measured at the center
line between reverse curves.
(2) Proper sight distances shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the center line,
the sight distance shall be 400 feet for primary roads or major
thoroughfares; 200 feet for collector streets or roads and 100 feet
for local residential streets and rural streets and roads.
(3) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of streets
measured along the center line; there shall be a clear sight triangle
of 75 feet from points of intersection. Visibility for purposes of
traffic safety shall be provided within the triangular area formed by
intersecting street lines and the diagonal connecting the end points
of these lines. The distance as measured along the intersecting
street lines shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the point of
intersection for arterial and collector streets and 50 feet for minor
streets. No visual obstructions shall be permitted in this area,
including, but not limited to:
(a) Structures.
(b) Plantings with a mature height of more than three feet.
(c) Earth fill for any purpose.
(4) Right-angle intersections shall be used wherever practicable,
especially where local residential streets and rural streets and
roads empty into major or collector thoroughfares, and there shall
be no intersection angle measured at the center line of less than
75º.
(5) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of 30 feet for local residential streets and rural
89.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-44 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-45
199:525
§ 204-46. Future connections; waiver.
Where land areas are reserved for future connections to adjacent parcels,
all improvements, i.e., sanitary, storm, water, roads, etc., shall be
constructed to the common property line. This requirement may be waived
by the Planning Board.
§ 204-47. Standards and substitutions.
The materials included herein are intended to establish the necessary
degree of excellence required for installation within the town. Where other
materials may be proposed in substitution for those herein called for, the
applicant or his or her agent shall submit a written request to the Town
Engineer for approval. When new materials may be made available, their
use may be permitted in limited test sections with the restriction that,
streets and roads and 45 feet for intersections, including collector
streets or roads and primary roads or major thoroughfares.
(6) Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet in length and must be
designed with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of
at least 100 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 120
feet.
(7) Intersecting minor and secondary streets leading from the same
subdivision shall not empty into the same side of a major
thoroughfare at intervals less than 800 feet.
(8) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on primary roads
or major thoroughfares shall be 500 feet; for collector streets or
roads, 300 feet; and for local residential streets and rural streets
and roads, 150 feet.
C. Road grades. Road grades shall conform to the following specifications:
(1) Minimum grade shall be 0.50% for all streets.
(2) Maximum grade shall be:
(a) Primary and major thoroughfares and collectors: 5%.
(b) Local residential: 8%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used wherever the change in grade exceeds
1%.
(4) At intersections, leveling areas shall extend at least 100 feet from
the center line of intersection at maximum grade not to exceed 3%.
D. Concrete gutters or curbs. Concrete gutters or curbs shall be provided
along the edges of all roads to be dedicated to the town.
E. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall conform to the specifications and details
herein included.
§ 204-45 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-47
199:526
should these materials prove unsatisfactory through the test period, as
established by the Town Engineer, they shall be removed and replaced with
those herein called for at no expense to the town.
§ 204-48. Sanitary sewers.90
A. Main sewer.
(1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) main sewer. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
sewer pipe for use as nonpressure lines in conveying sewage
wastes shall be supplied in accordance with ASTM D-3034 and/or
the latest revisions thereto. Eight-inch and twelve-inch pipe shall
be supplied in lengths of 13 feet. All tests required by the above
specifications shall be conducted in the continental United States,
and the town's authorized representative shall have access to
witness these tests at the purchaser's expense. Minimum strength
classification shall be SDR 35.
(2) Ductile iron pipe (DIP) main sewer. Ductile iron pipe (DIP) sewer
pipe for use as nonpressure lines in conveying sewage waste shall
be supplied in accordance with AWWA C-151/ANSI A21.51,
thickness Class 50, with ANSI A21.4 cement mortar lining and seal
coating inside, bituminous coating outside and ANSI 21.11 push-on
joints.
B. Sewer lateral pipe. For polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe for use in
conveying domestic sewage from the property line to the sewer main,
strengths shall be ASTM D-3034/SDR 35 and ASTM D-2241/SDR 21.
C. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) force main. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer
pipe for use in conveying domestic sewage under pressure, shall be
supplied in accordance with ASTM D-2241/SDR 21, pressure-rated
pipe, 200 psi pressure rating, with elastometric gasket bell ends and
PVC fittings and adapters.
D. Manholes.
(1) All manholes shall be of precast reinforced concrete sections
manufactured in accordance with ASTM Specification C-478. Riser
sections shall have super O-joints and gaskets conforming to ASTM
C-443, except the taper of the joints shall be 2º with a tolerance of
1/32 inch. Manhole bases may be preformed or poured in the field.
The roof slabs shall be precast of structural concrete, reinforced to
withstand a concentrated wheel load of eight tons, plus onehundred-
percent impact. Either tapered, conical or slab tops will be
permitted for the top section.
(2) Interior and exterior surfaces of all sanitary manholes shall be
sealed with heavy-duty coal tar coating which complies to ASTM
D-450, Type B, as approved by the Town Engineer.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-47 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-49
199:527
§ 204-49. Storm drains.
§ 204-50. Catch basins.
§ 204-51. Manhole ladders.
Manhole ladders or steps shall be provided in all sanitary and storm
manholes and shall be constructed of one of the following materials:
§ 204-52. Manhole and catch basin frames and covers.
A. Reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be supplied in
conformance with ASTM Specification C-76, Wall B. Joints shall be of
the compression-type II.91
B. Corrugated metal pipe. All pipe shall be coated inside and outside.
Joints shall be made with connecting bands and rubber gaskets to
ensure tight joints. Thickness gauges shall be dependent on the load
conditions, except that 16-gauge shall be the minimum allowable
thickness.
A. Catch basins shall be constructed per the detail of masonry brick
conforming to ASTM C-32, with mortar consisting of one part portland
cement to 1 1/2 parts sand.
B. Precast catch basins shall also be considered upon request to the
Commissioner of Public Works.
C. Catch basin leads shall be ten-inch, fully coated and perforated
corrugated metal pipe, 14-gauge with bands and gaskets.
A. Noncorrodable, aluminum magnesium alloy ladders, as made by Fraser
and Jones, Solvay, New York, or an approved equal, with intermediate
supports at five-foot intervals.
B. Forged aluminum with a drop-front design and grooved tread surface.
A. Sanitary manhole frames and covers. Sanitary manhole frames and
covers shall be round Neenah R-1726 or Woodward M-138, or an
approved equal. The word "Sanitary" shall be cast into the top of the
cover. The inside diameter for clearance shall be a minimum of 23
inches.
B. Storm manhole frames and grates. Storm manhole frames and grates
shall have a minimum clear opening of 23 inches and shall be Neenah
1728 or Woodward M-138 with vented lids, or an approved equal.
C. Catch basin frames and grates. Catch basin frames and grates shall be
Neenah R-3205 or Woodward W-447, or an approved equal, for concrete
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which established the criteria for asbestos cement
pipe, and immediately preceded this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code;
see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-49 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-52
199:528
§ 204-53. Water mains.
All materials and methods of installation shall conform to either the Monroe
County Water Authority or the Sea Breeze and Vicinity Water District
specifications for the applicable service area.
§ 204-54. Concrete gutters, curbing and sidewalks.
§ 204-55. Road materials.92
gutter installation, with a minimum finished width of 16 inches of clear
opening. The frames and grates for granite curbing installation shall be
Neenah 3251, or an approved equal. Area frames and grates shall be
Neenah 3210A standard grate.
A. Concrete required gutters and sidewalks shall:
(1) Be a minimum of 4,000 psi twenty-eight day compressive strength
made of No. 1 and No. 2 Dolomite stone.
(2) Incorporate an air entraining admixture of the mix conforming to
ASTM Specification C-2060.
B. Samples from each two truckloads of concrete delivered and placed on
the site shall be taken and tested. Results of these tests shall be
submitted to the town. After placement and curing, the surface shall be
sealed with two coats of Koppers concrete sealer, or an approved equal.
C. Curbing (where required). Stone curb shall be an approved granite
from acceptable sources. Granite shall be of the Rockport Grey granite
type, or an approved equal, and shall conform to New York State
Department of Transportation item No. 714, Type S. Each stone shall
have a width of five inches, a minimum length of three feet and a depth
of from 17 inches to 19 inches.
A. Base course, The base course shall consist of 12 inches of clean run-ofbank
gravel in two six-inch lifts conforming to New York State
Department of Transportation Item No. 304-2.02, Type 2 gravel or nine
inches of crusher-run Dolomite stone conforming to New York State
Department of Transportation Item No. 304-2.02, Type 2, crusher run
stone, in two lifts, 4 1/2 inches each. Before placing the base course,
the contractor shall receive the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Works for the quality of the material and the condition of the subbase.
B. Binder course. The binder course shall consist of asphaltic concrete
conforming to New York State Department of Transportation Item No.
403.13, Type 3.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-52 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-55
199:529
§ 204-56. Equivalents for all materials.
C. Surface course. The surface course shall consist of asphaltic concrete
conforming to New York State Department of Transportation Item No.
403.1901, Type 7F.
A. The mention of apparatus, articles or materials by name and such
specific description of the same, as is made herein, is intended to
convey to the contractor's understanding the degree of excellence
required. The Town Engineer shall be the sole judge of the
qualifications of the offerings and will determine all questions
regarding the conformance of any offer with the specifications.
B. The contractor will furnish the exact equipment called for in the plans
and specifications, unless the contractor files with the town the name
and complete description of each article which he or she proposes to
substitute, if the substitution is approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 204-55 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-56
199:530
ARTICLE IX
Installation and Construction Procedures
§ 204-57. General provisions.
A. Interpretation of drawings. The contractor shall abide by and comply
with the true intent and meaning of all drawings and of the
specifications taken as a whole. If the contractor believes that the
construction indicated on the project drawings will not, when executed,
produce safe and substantial results or if it appears that there is any
discrepancy in the drawings, it is his or her duty immediately to notify
the applicant's engineer, in writing, and to thereafter proceed only upon
written order.
B. Protection of property and work.
(1) The contractor shall so conduct his or her operations as to damage
no more than is absolutely necessary, trees, garden plots,
shrubbery, pipe lines, conduits, buildings and other structures. The
contractor shall use all necessary precautions to protect the work
and adjacent structures of all kinds during construction, and shall
so conduct his or her operations so that at no time shall the work or
such structures be endangered.
(2) Responsibility and damage. The applicant shall be responsible for
all parts of his or her work, temporary or permanent, until the
project is accepted by the town, and he or she shall thoroughly
protect all work, finished or unfinished, against damage from any
cause, as all work is at the contractor's risk until the same is
accepted by the applicant. The use of part or all of the work by the
town, as provided for in these specifications, shall not relieve the
applicant of his or her responsibility. The contractor shall be
responsible for damage to life and property due to his or her
operations and shall provide all necessary guards, rails, nightlights,
etc.
C. Permits. The applicant and/or contractor shall secure all necessary
permits from the town and any other authority which may have control
over any structures involved before construction begins.
D. Existing utilities or structures. Before construction begins near any
existing utility or structures, the contractor shall notify the appropriate
utility owner of his or her intention, and their instructions as to the
protection of their property must be followed. Before commencing
work, the contractor shall determine the exact locations of any
structure or underground utility in order that the contractor's project
will not damage or disrupt these facilities.
E. Facilities for inspection. The contractor shall furnish all reasonable
facilities and aid to the inspectors and safe and convenient footways,
scaffolds, ladders, etc., that may be needed for the examination and
§ 204-57 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-57
199:531
§ 204-58. Trench excavation.
inspection of any part of the work. Inspectors may stop work when the
contractor has no responsible agent on the project, or if he or she feels
that the contractor is not performing the work in the best interests of
the town. Disorderly, intemperate and incompetent persons shall not
be allowed on the project; the employees who neglect or refuse to
follow the inspector's instructions shall be permanently removed from
the project.
A. Excavation. Under this term shall be included all excavations in
trenches and pits, together with all backfilling and embankments that
may be needed for the laying of the utilities and appurtenances or that
may be necessary for the laying, changing and construction of any other
water, gas or drain pipes, sewers, conduits, culverts, drainage ditches
or watercourses, either under or over the proposed pipes, or for any
other incidental work that may be ordered by the engineers, and all
shall be done in accordance with the federal safety standards of OSHA.
B. Width of trenches. The trenches shall be of such width as may be
required by the approved design to ensure proper and workmanlike
laying and handling of the pipes and appurtenances, proper tamping
and backfilling when laid. In all cases, trenches shall be kept as narrow
as possible. The contractor shall be responsible to provide sheeting/
bracing or other requirements to ensure the safety of his or her workers
in conjunction with the proper installation of the pipe.
C. Depth of trenches. The trenches for the main shall be in general
excavated to such a depth to install the main to the grade established in
the field after said main is properly bedded with suitable material.
D. Tunneling. All work shall be done in open trenches or excavations, no
tunneling shall be done except in these areas specifically called for on
the approved plans and then only with experienced personnel under the
guidelines of OSHA.
E. Blasting. Whenever necessary to resort to blasting for making the
excavations, the trench shall be covered on the top and sides with heavy
timbers or mats to prevent fragments of rock from being thrown out, or
rock may be drilled and shot before excavating if the rock is at a
minimum depth of four feet to provide enough cover for safety. Only
experienced, skillful and trustworthy workers shall be employed in the
handling and uses of explosives, or have access thereto. All blasting
operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with existing
ordinances, regulations and specifications relative to rock blasting and
the storage and use of explosives.
F. Bailing and draining. The contractor shall furnish a sufficient pumping
plant and shall provide and maintain, at his or her own expense,
satisfactory drainage whenever needed in the trench and other
excavations during the progress of the work and at its completion for
§ 204-57 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-58
199:532
§ 204-59. Pipes.
final inspection. No structures shall be laid in water. Water shall not be
allowed to flow or rise upon any concrete or other masonry. All water
pumped or bailed from the trench or other excavation shall be conveyed
in a proper manner to a suitable point of discharge.
G. Bottom of trench. The bottom of the trench shall be carefully graded
and formed according to the specification of the material manufacturer
and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer before any pipes are laid
therein. When other instructions are not given, the trenches shall
always be excavated in a straight line. In hard pan, boulder formations,
loose rock or solid rock, the excavation shall extend at least six inches
below the bottom of the pipe, and a carefully compacted bed of selected
earth or sand or crushed stone placed in the bottom of the trench up to
the level of the bottom of the pipe. It is the intention of this specification
to achieve not less than Class B pipe bedding.
H. Suitable bedding and safety backfill material. It shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to utilize material excavated from the
trench in order to achieve this end. Should the nature of the soil down
to the required depth be such that the contractor is unable to meet the
above requirements by selecting pipe bedding and backfilling with
reasonable care from the excavated material, he or she shall provide
the following bedding materials if so ordered by the town's Inspector:
(1) A sand, stone or concrete cradle when the trench bottom does not
provide sufficient bearing capacity.
(2) A sand cradle shall be provided when the trench is excavated in
rock, boulders or hard pan and none of the material above this level
is suitable for bedding the pipe but is acceptable as backfill when
placed carefully.
(3) Sand encasement shall be ordered by the Town Engineer when the
trench is excavated in rock, boulders or hard pan and none of the
material above this level is suitable for bedding or backfilling the
pipe.
A. Line and grade. All pipes and appurtenances of whatever character
shall, when set, conform to the alignments and grades required by the
Town Engineer; and as the work proceeds, all of the required special
castings and other fixtures that are indicated upon the plans or that
may be required during the progress of the work shall be installed in
their proper positions.
B. Laying pipe. The contractor shall use suitable tools and appliances for
the safe and convenient handling and laying of the pipes and all
appurtenances. All pipes and castings shall be carefully examined by
the contractor for defects and no pipe or casting which is known to be
defective shall be laid. If defective pipe or castings should be
§ 204-58 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-59
199:533
§ 204-60. Manholes.
discovered after being laid, these shall be removed and replaced with
sound pipe or castings. The pipes shall be cleaned before they are laid
and shall be kept clean until they are accepted with the completed
work. All pipe ends shall be capped, except during the actual
pipelaying.
(1) Sewers shall be built to straight lines and grades between angle
points or manholes. Batter boards and/or grade lines shall be
provided at sufficient intervals (maximum of 25 feet) for the proper
installation of the pipe. Sewer pipe shall be laid upgrade with
spigots placed in the direction of the flow. All pipes shall be fitted
together to form a smooth, even invert. Pipes disturbed after laying
shall be taken up and relaid. Any necessary pipe cutting shall be
done by skilled workers with sharp tools.
(2) After the pipe has been placed and adjusted to line and grade, the
bed shall be trimmed to support the pipe for its entire length.
Material used for bedding shall be rammed under the bottom and
the haunches of the pipe. The trench shall then be completely filled
to above the top of the pipe with similar material carefully
compacted into place to hold the pipe in position.
C. Cutting pipe. Whenever it may be necessary to cut any straight pipe for
any purpose, cutting shall be done to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer by skilled workers with proper tools, in such manner as will
not cause any cracking of the pipe.
A. Sanitary manholes. Manholes shall be constructed at the locations
shown upon the map, or as designated by the Town Engineer. The
vertical pipe sections shall be cast in such lengths that the top of the
roof slab shall be not more than 15 inches below the finished surface
grade, and a minimum height within the manhole of not less than four
feet clear from the bench to the underside of the roof slab shall be
allowed. The slabs shall be formed to fit into the ends of the vertical
pipe and shall have a full bearing for its entire circumference. The slab
shall be set in a bed of cement mortar. All manhole joints shall be
purged on the outside and coal tar coated.
B. Drop manhole.
(1) Wherever the invert of the entering sewer is more than two feet
above the invert of the outlet sewer, it shall be connected with an
outside drop with a cleanout pipe half bricked up. Where possible,
the drops shall be constructed with vertical drop pipes; otherwise,
the drop may be offset. When drops are placed, the entire
excavation around the drop pipe shall be filled with concrete
extending not less than two feet along the main sewer.
§ 204-59 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-60
199:534
§ 204-61. Laterals and water services.
(2) The cleanout opening in the barrel of the manhole shall be cut in
after the manhole wall pipe is in place, and the joint between the
cleanout pipe and the manhole wall shall be thoroughly sealed with
non-shrink cement mortar and coal tar coated.
C. Shallow sewer manholes. Where any manhole is five feet three inches
or less from the invert to the bottom of the roof slab for an eight-inch
sewer, the contractor is to provide a manhole as shown in Appendix H.93
D. Sealing of manholes. All sanitary manholes shall be sealed on all
interior and exterior walls and joints with two coats of coal tar manhole
sealer to achieve a minimum dry thickness of 11 mills, and shall be
tested along with all sewers for infiltration and exfiltration.
E. Storm manholes. Storm manholes shall be constructed to a minimum
inside diameter of four feet zero inches.
(1) Where shallow manholes occur, they shall not be corbelled to finish
grade but remain at the same diameter.
(2) A brick invert shall be required only on manholes where 18 inches
or less of storm drain pass through. The inside surfaces shall not
require a seal coat, although the inside shall be finished in a
smooth and neat fashion. Exterior surfaces shall be sealed as
specified in Subsection D above.
(3) Manhole frames shall be adjusted to finish grade and properly set
in mortar.
F. Catch basins. Catch basins shall be constructed to the dimensions as
shown in the Appendix F.94
G. Frames and covers. The frame shall be firmly set in a bed of not less
than one full inch of cement mortar adjusted to the finished grade. The
cover shall fit tightly in the frame and rest on the frame for its entire
length so that it does not rattle when vehicles pass over it. The manhole
frame may be set directly on the concrete roof slab, provided that the
top will be at the proper grade; otherwise, the frame shall be set on up
to three courses of brick masonry laid around the roof opening to bring
the cover up to grade. Such brick masonry shall be given a one-half-inch
plaster coat on the inside and outside and then coal tar coated.
A. Laterals and water services shall be installed to the right-of-way (or
easement) lines for all lots. The laterals shall be tightly capped. Each
service shall be located with a two-inch-by-four-inch witness stake
extending a minimum of one foot above finished grades. The stakes
shall be painted the following colors to denote the service they locate:
93.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-60 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-61
199:535
§ 204-62. Hydrants and valves.
Hydrants and valves shall conform to requirements of the Monroe County
Water Authority or the Sea Breeze and Vicinity Water District.
§ 204-63. Backfilling and finishing.
Type of Service Color
Sanitary lateral Red
Storm lateral Black
Water service Blue
Gas service Yellow
Electric By the electric company
Telephone By the telephone company
B. At the time that the development is offered to the town for dedication,
an accurate record plan showing the locations of all laterals and all of
the respective witness stakes must be visible. Each cleanout and end
cap must be located with three ties. Wye branches locations shall be
measured from center of manhole covers.95
A. Generally. When for any reason the work is left unfinished, all trenches
and other excavations shall be filled. The roadways and sidewalks shall
be left unobstructed, with their surface in a safe and satisfactory
condition. In all pipe trenches, whether in paved streets or not, the
backfill shall be carefully tamped around the pipes. On unpaved streets,
the backfill above the pipe shall be carefully consolidated and
compacted in order to prevent settlement. Whenever practicable, the
trench shall be tamped sufficiently to prevent any settlement of or
damage to adjacent structures, whether pipe lines or conduits or other
structures, and no trench shall be backfilled before it is inspected by
the Town Engineer or Town Inspector.
B. Backfill immediately after approval. In this operation, no stones shall be
thrown in. Only the finest selected earth material shall be deposited
under and around the pipes and appurtenances, covering them by hand
for a depth of at least 12 inches above the pipe. This earth shall be
thoroughly tamped or rammed as it is being thrown in (particularly
around and under the haunches of the pipe) so as to fill the lower
portion of the trench thoroughly throughout and give said pipe a solid
bearing for its entire length. The material must not be thrown down
from above faster than the workers below can properly distribute and
compact it. Approval of the state, county and town highway authorities
shall be obtained if the completed backfill is in an area under their
jurisdiction.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-61 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-63
199:536
§ 204-64. Test of underground utilities.
C. Restrictions as to materials. No rock or frozen earth shall be put in the
trench until the refilling has reached at least two feet above the top of
the pipe lines, and then not unless especially permitted by the Town
Engineer. All spaces between suitable pieces of rock shall be thoroughly
filled with earth by backfilling in alternate layers of rock and earth.
Needless humps after refilling trenches in unpaved streets and humps
and hollows in the temporary surfacing of paved streets will not be
tolerated, and if any such are found, they shall be immediately
remedied by the contractor.
D. Cleaning up.
(1) As the work progresses or as directed by the Town Engineer, all
rubbish or refuse, unused materials and tools, shall be removed at
once from along and near the area in which the lines and other
structures have been built.
(2) Rough cleanup along the route shall immediately follow installation
procedures. Large spoil banks will not be permitted in a developed
area.
(3) Final cleanup and rough grading and landscaping shall proceed
immediately after the installation, testing and approval of the
facilities.
(4) In all cases, the project site shall be restored to a condition equal to
or better than that which previously existed to meet the approval of
the Town Engineer.
E. Surplus material removal. Where there is a surplus of material not
required in refilling the trenches, it shall be promptly removed by the
contractor at his or her expense and deposited at points approved by
the Town Engineer, unless such surplus materials are claimed and
removed by the applicant.
A. General provisions. Upon the satisfactory completion of the installation
of the underground utilities, the contractor shall proceed to test each of
the installed facilities as herein specified. The tests shall be conducted
in the presence of the Town Engineer or Inspector. Records and data of
these tests shall be submitted to the town.
B. Sanitary sewers.
(1) All sewers shall be flushed and lamped and then a ball one inch less
in diameter than the sewer shall be passed through the pipe.
(2) An exfiltration test shall be placed on the completed system
(including laterals to the property line) with a water loss not to
exceed 100 gallons per inch diameter of pipe per mile per day.
§ 204-63 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-64
199:537
§ 204-65. Roads, gutters and sidewalks.
(3) In areas where sewer grades preclude an exfiltration test or where
a high groundwater table exists, an infiltration test shall be
conducted wherein water entering the system shall not exceed the
limits specified in Subsection B(2) of this section.
C. Storm drains. All drains shall be flushed and lamped to ensure that no
obstacles are obstructing the flow of the pipe.
D. All storm and sanitary sewers must be televised on a VHS tape and a
copy of the tape given to the Commissioner of Public Works for review.96
E. Water mains. Water mains shall conform to requirements of the Monroe
County Water Authority or Sea Breeze and Vicinity Water District.97
F. Defective areas. In those areas where satisfactory results of applied
tests cannot be obtained, the defective portion of the system shall be
located and replaced with new material and not repaired. That portion
of the system shall then be retested until satisfactory results are
obtained. Use of repair clamps shall not be permitted.98
A. General provisions. The contractor shall not proceed to construct any of
these items until the underground system has been installed, tested and
approved. Careful attention shall be given to obtaining maximum
compaction in backfilled areas. The type of soil prevalent in this town
precludes ultimate compaction in a short period of time. Therefore,
final paving of the road surface shall be delayed for a period of seven
months or at least until a winter season has passed since the completion
and approval of the underground system. The road shall be constructed
to the shape and dimensions shown in the Appendix D.99 A greater road
width may be required by the Planning Board in those areas where high
traffic volumes are required.
B. Roads and gutters.
(1) Subbase. Excavation to the subgrade elevation may commence
immediately after the approval of the underground system.
Subgrade elevations are to be established from stakes set at
intervals not to exceed 50 feet. The subgrade shall be graded to
remove all unsatisfactory or unstable material. Where material is
removed below the subgrade elevation, suitable granular material
shall be brought in. The entire subgrade surface shall be
thoroughly compacted with a ten-ton steel-wheeled roller. No
movement shall be observed in the subgrade material as the roller
passes.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
99.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-64 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-65
199:538
(2) Base material. Approved material shall be uniformly deposited and
compacted in two equal layers with a ten-ton steel-wheeled roller
or vibratory compactor equivalent to a 400 Royco Roller. Rolling
shall begin at the sides and continue toward the center and shall
continue until there is no movement of the course ahead of the
roller. After compaction, the top surface of this course shall not
extend above the theoretical elevation for this course, and when
tested with a straightedge 16 feet in length, any depression over 1/
4 inch below the theoretical grade line shall be satisfactorily
eliminated.
(3) Concrete gutters shall be formed to the shape and dimensions
shown on Appendix D.100 Gutters shall be constructed in eight-foot
sections. A steel plate 1/8 inch thick shall separate adjoining
sections. Joints shall then be poured full with an approved
bituminous joint filler material. Gutters shall, after proper curing,
be sealed with two coats of clear sealer applied at the rate of 0.10
gallons per square yard. The gutters, prior to the placement of the
final pavement surface, shall be flooded to ensure satisfactory
drainage to the catch basins. In those areas where pockets occur,
the gutter sections shall be removed and replaced to proper grades
to ensure positive drainage. Formless or slip form construction
shall be permitted, provided that the gutters conform to the
standard town detail.
(4) Binder material. Binder material shall be placed and compacted to
a finished layer two inches thick. The binder shall be thoroughly
compacted from the outside edges inward with a ten-ton steelwheeled
roller so that no movement or wearing of the material is
observed ahead of the roller.
(5) Surface course.
(a) Preparation for placement of the surface course shall begin
after a thorough investigation of the binder and base areas has
been made by the Town Engineer or Commissioner of Public
Works. All depressions shall be properly filled in to bring them
up to proper elevation. The binder course shall be cleaned of
all dirt or foreign material.
(b) The surface course of asphaltic concrete shall be placed to a
compacted thickness of one inch. A ten-ton steel-wheeled roller
shall be used. No movement or weaving shall be observed
ahead of the roller.
(6) Seasonal restrictions on use of asphaltic concrete material. No
asphaltic concrete material shall be placed prior to May 15 or after
October 15 without the written approval of the Town Engineer.
C. Curbs.
100. Editor's Note: Said Appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-65 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-65
199:539
§ 204-66. Monuments.
The monuments shall be installed in those areas shown on the final plat and
as located in the field by a licensed land surveyor. They shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of § 204-29.
§ 204-67. Grading.
(1) The curb shall be set true to line and grade on an approved
foundation course with a seven-inch reveal on the face. The
foundation course shall consist of four inches of two-thousand-fivehundred
Class D concrete mixed dry and placed in an approved
manner.
(2) All spaces under the curb shall be carefully and thoroughly rammed
so that it shall be completely supported throughout its entire
length.
(3) The trench for the curb shall be excavated for a width equal to the
curb width, plus six inches, and to a depth to allow a four-inch base
of concrete under the curb.
(4) Curb sections shall be fitted together as closely as possible, but not
closer than 1/4 inch nor more than 1/2 inch to form a joint.
(5) The joints in the curb shall be carefully filled with cement mortar,
rodded in place and mixed as herein provided. The top and exposed
front shall be neatly pointed flush with the curb surfaces and
satisfactorily cleaned of all excess mortar.
(6) After the curb has been set, the trenches shall be backfilled with
concrete to a depth of at least nine inches above the base of the
curb.
D. Sidewalk construction.
(1) Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed to the sizes and locations
shown in the Appendix E.101 A four-inch stable crushed stone base
shall be placed and compacted to the approval of the Town
Engineer.102
(2) The concrete shall then be placed in twenty-five-foot sections, with
dummy joints every five feet. An approved bituminous joint filler
shall be used to fill in the construction joints. The surfaces of the
sidewalk shall be broom finished to provide a rough surface. The
entire surface of the sidewalks shall receive two coats of clear
concrete sealer applied at the rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard.
101. Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-65 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-67
199:540
§ 204-68. Final cleaning.
During the time period between initial installation and testing and
acceptance for dedication, debris and/or sediment can accumulate in the
storm or sanitary systems. The applicant shall be responsible to flush and
remove this debris from the system, in the presence of the Town Engineer,
prior to the final inspection for dedication.
A. General grading. The Planning Board shall require sufficient assurance
from the applicant before final approval is granted that during the
course of grading, both rough and finish, sufficient precautions have
been taken to prevent soil erosion or damage to surrounding
properties. Guarantees shall be in the form of, but not limited to, the
following requirements:
(1) No earthmoving or pan work shall be done when winds in excess of
35 miles per hour are present, unless there is no downwind
development.
(2) Sufficient dust-control measures during construction in the form of
either calcium chloride or water-tank trucks shall be used to
preclude damage or nuisances to surrounding areas.
(3) After rough grading has been done and before houses are started,
by order of the Town Engineer only, the contractor shall be
required to seed the area with a mixture containing at least 70%
common rye grass to protect against blowing dust and soil erosion.
Grass shall be delivered to the site in bags clearly marked with the
supplier's guaranteed analysis.
(4) No cuts or fills shall be permitted in areas where the natural slope
would be substantially increased. Where sliding could result,
unless sufficient provisions to preclude erosion and sliding have
been designed, approval, in writing, of the Town Engineer shall be
required.
B. Final grading.
(1) Upon satisfactory completion of the utilities and roads, the entire
area within the right-of-way shall be raked and finished to an
acceptable appearance, and approval, in writing, by the Town
Engineer shall be required.
(2) The contractor shall be responsible to fine grade the right-of-way at
least once. In those areas where home building has started,
unsightly cleanup and depressions shall then become the
responsibility of the builder.
(3) Debris and spoil banks created during the development (not home
building) of the site shall be entirely removed and disposed of from
the site.
§ 204-67 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-69
199:541
§ 204-69. Signs.
Street and traffic signs shall be supplied by the Town Department of Public
Works and shall be set in locations designated by the Department.
§ 204-70. Requirements for approval and dedication.
A. In order to dedicate any streets, highways and other public rights-ofway
to the Town of Irondequoit and to obtain final approval for
completion of a development, the following procedures must be
complied with:
(1) Completion of construction. All construction within the right-of-way
shall be completed, in addition to final inspections and approvals of
construction by the appropriate town departments involved.
(2) Monuments. Fixed monuments shall have been set in their required
locations.
(3) Underground system. The underground system shall have been
cleaned of all objectionable and foreign materials.
(4) Final grading. The final grading shall have been completed within
the right-of-way.
(5) Street and traffic signs. All street and traffic signs shall be properly
set in their designated locations.
(6) Records. Records and testing results shall be supplied to the
Planning Board and Department of Public Works.
(7) 103Record maps. Record maps shall be prepared by the applicant's
engineer and three prints and a reproducible (sepia) approved or
equal shall be submitted to the town. The record map shall contain
the following information:
(a) The locations and inverts of all sanitary and storm drains,
water mains and appurtenances. Top of cover elevations must
be shown for all manhole covers and catchbasins.
(b) The locations of all valves, catch basins, cleanouts, and
hydrants. Three ties must be shown for each valve, curb box
and cleanout.
(c) The locations at the property line of each individual lot (three
ties to each):
[1] Sanitary lateral cleanout.
[2] Storm lateral cleanout.
[3] Water service curb box.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-69 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-70
199:542
B. Maintenance bonds. The submission and acceptance of the
maintenance bonds for the utilities, roads, gutters and sidewalks shall
be required. Portions of the systems may have been approved and in
use three years after their acceptance with the termination of that
portion of the bond.
C. Release of final moneys. Upon completion of the above, the Town Board,
upon recommendation from the Town Engineer, shall authorize release
of moneys retained pursuant to the letter of credit.
D. Release of lot cleanup security deposit. Release of the lot cleanup
security deposit shall be made upon completion of construction and
cleanup of the site, as approved and attested to by the Building
Inspector. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 204-70 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-70
199:543

ARTICLE X
Numbering of Buildings
[Added 9-18-1990 by Ord. No. 90-75]
§ 204-71. Purpose.
In order that police, fire, ambulance and other public safety agencies may
quickly and accurately respond to a street address in the event of an
emergency, the following requirements shall be complied with.
§ 204-72. Display required.
Principal buildings used and/or to be used and/or constructed for
residential, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial or storage purposes
shall bear or display at least one set of street numbers assigned to it. In the
case of new construction, no certificate of occupancy will be issued unless
the owner and/or applicant certifies to the town that such street numbers
have been installed as provided in this Article.
§ 204-73. Design of numbers. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994; 8-17-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999]
Such street numbers shall be Arabic in format and depict the mailing
address number which is to be securely mounted to the structure's
storefront entrance or the main entrance of the structure facing the street
of the residence. In the cases of corner lots, the house number shall coincide
with the street within the mailing address. For the purposes of this article,
"mailing address" is defined as the home address or where the owner's or
occupant's telephone is listed. No numbers are to be placed on doors. No
numbers in script format shall be permitted. In the case wherein a group
of structures or buildings carry the same address, street numbers must
be visible at the principle entry point to all residential, commercial and
industrial complexes.
§ 204-74. Location and visibility. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994; 8-17-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999]
All street numbers shall be mounted to provide an unobstructed view at
a height of no less than five feet from the ground at the foundation, but
no higher than 15 feet from the ground at the foundation. Numbers shall
be legible as to a contrasting background arrangement, spacing, size and
uniformity of the whole so that the numbers may be read with ease during
daylight hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision, as he or she
views the numbers from the center line of the facing street. Numbers
five inches in height are presumed to be in compliance with this article
unless the town can establish otherwise. Trees, shrubs, vehicles and other
obstructions shall not block said street numbers. Where the setback of
a structure is great enough, or landscaping or other structures on the
property prohibit legibility of the numbers from the centerline of the facing
§ 204-71 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 204-74
199:545
street, numbers shall be mounted on a separate support in the front yard
not more than 30 feet from the front property line.
§ 204-75. Temporary signs for new structures.
Builders or applicants of new structures shall post a temporary sign on the
site conforming to § 204-73 of this chapter displaying the assigned street
address and lot number, if applicable.
§ 204-76. Determination of number.
Final authority for determining and assigning the number or numbers to be
used upon any particular premises is vested in the Assessor.
§ 204-77. Failure to display. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994]
The failure to display complete street numbers or the use of any number out
of logical sequence for the street toward which it faces or the failure of a
number to meet the elevation or visibility requirements of this Article shall
be considered a violation of this Article.
§ 204-78. Appearance tickets. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994]
In case the owner of residential property does not place said street numbers
within 14 days after service of the notice to do so or in the case of the owner
of commercial or industrial property does not place said street numbers
and/or remove all other numbers within 90 days after service of the notice
to do so, the Building Inspector, Commissioner of Public Works or Fire
Marshal may issue an appearance ticket, subscribed by him or her, directing
the owner(s) to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated
future time in connection with the alleged commission of a designated
offense of the Article.
§ 204-79. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of this Article shall constitute a Class C violation
punishable as provided in § 1-16. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects at any such time. Each
separate offense shall constitute a separate, additional violation.
§ 204-74 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 204-79
199:546
Chapter 206
SWIMMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats and boating — See Ch. 91.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 167.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
§ 206-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Bathing and Swimming Ordinance of
the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 206-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate bathing and swimming in certain
waters in or adjacent to the Town of Irondequoit and the beaches
appurtenant thereto for preserving the public peace, good order and safety.
§ 206-3. Hours restricted.
No person shall swim or bath in open water exposed to the public within
or bounding at any place in the Town of Irondequoit between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 206-4. Undressing in automobiles.
No person over 12 years of age shall undress in any automobile while it is
upon any public street or highway or any other street or right-of-way or any
portion thereof which the public have a right to use or upon lands adjacent
thereto within the Town of Irondequoit for the purpose of putting on or
taking off a bathing suit.
§ 206-5. Beach regulations.
A. Applicable area. The provisions of this section shall apply only to that
portion of the beach along Lake Ontario which is not privately owned,
being that area of the beach located within 15 feet of the high-water
mark between those areas commonly known as the "Summerville
Beach" and "Windsor Beach" and being bounded on the west by the
United States Coast Guard Lifesaving Station at Summerville and being
bounded on the east by the east line of Tone Terrace and extending
northerly to the high-water mark of Lake Ontario, and shall be effective
throughout the entire calendar year.104
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-79 SWIMMING § 206-5
206:547
§ 206-6. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Irondequoit shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 206-7. Penalties.
Chapter 210
TAXATION
B. Loitering. No person shall within the hours during which bathing and
swimming are prohibited in the waters of Lake Ontario adjacent to the
beaches above described, except in an emergency, be present upon,
loiter on, congregate on or use any portion of the beach, except
established walks.
C. Garbage and rubbish. The deposit of rubbish, garbage, paper, cans and
bottles on any portion of the beach, except in receptacles provided for
such purpose, is prohibited.
D. Beverages. No person shall bring onto the beach or have in his or her
possession thereon any liquor, beer or alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverages.
E. Playing equipment. No person shall bring upon the beach any hardball,
baseball or other ball, except large soft beach balls or floating water
balls, nor shall any person engage in ballplaying of any kind, except
with large soft beach balls or floating water balls.
F. Disorderly conduct. No person shall use profane language, engage in
lewd or licentious acts or otherwise interfere with the orderly use of
such beach by other persons.
G. Peddlers and vendors. Public vendors and peddlers shall be excluded
from the beach area for purposes of selling or distributing any food, ice
cream or beverages.105
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class C violation, punishable as provided in § 1-16.106
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of such chapter.
105. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 167, Peddling and Soliciting.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 206-5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 206-7
206:548
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 5-18-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978]
§ 210-1. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Senior Citizen
Tax Exemption Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 210-2. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide a partial exemption from taxation
imposed by the Town of Irondequoit upon real property situated within the
Town of Irondequoit owned by persons 65 years of age or over, pursuant to
the authority vested in the Town by § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law of
the State of New York, as amended or changed.
§ 210-3. Incorporation of statute. [Amended 12-7-1989 by L.L. No.
2-1989; 12-17-1991 by L.L. No. 11-1991; 1-19-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
The provisions of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York, as amended or changed, through the effective date of this article,
together with any further acts of the Legislature amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto, shall apply to and govern the determination of the
exemption from taxation permitted by this article to the extent specified in
this article as if such § 467 had been more particularly set forth herein and
as the same may be determined from time to time by Town Board resolution.
§ 210-4. Limitation upon exemption. [Amended 7-5-1979 by L.L. No.
3-1979; 11-20-1980 by L.L. No. 6-1980; 9-2-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982;
10-6-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983; 10-3-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985;
12-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; 12-17-1991 by L.L. No. 11-1991;
1-19-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
No exemption from taxation shall be granted hereunder if the income of
the owner or the combined income of the owners of the real property
from the income tax year immediately preceding the date of the application
for exemption exceeds the sum set by the Town Board, except that if the
aforesaid income is more than said amount set by the Town Board, then
such real property shall be exempt to the extent provided in the schedule
on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 210-5. Exemption not to be denied. [Added 12-7-1989 by L.L. No.
2-1989]
Any person otherwise qualifying under this article shall not be denied his or
her exemption under this article if he or she becomes 65 years of age after
the appropriate taxable status date and before December 31 of the same
year.
§ 210-1 SWIMMING § 210-5
206:549

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 4-3-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986; amended in its entirety
3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 210-6. Increase in exemption.
Pursuant to the authority of Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property
Tax Law, the partial exemption from taxation, special ad valorem levies and
service charges provided by § 485-b is hereby increased to the maximum
allowable by Subdivision 2 of § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 210-7. Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board.
A. Purpose. This section is enacted for the purpose of establishing an
Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board pursuant to Real Property
Tax Law § 485-b, Subdivision 9. The Town Board has determined that
the Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board should be established
and directed to present to the Town Board a plan identifying the types
of business that should be offered limited business exemption tax
credits and the geographic areas in the Town where the limited
business incentive should be offered.
B. Creation. The Town Board hereby creates an Industrial and Commercial
Incentive Board. The Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall
be comprised of seven members. These members shall include the
Chairperson of the Planning Board, one member of the Town staff and
five Town residents selected by the Town Board.
C. Term. Members of the Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall
serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. Members shall elect their own
Chairman and establish such administrative policies and procedures as
is necessary to effectuate the purpose of the Real Property Tax Law
§ 485-b, Subdivisions 9, 10 and 12.
D. Powers. The Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall have all
the powers and duties set forth in the Real Property Tax Law § 485-b,
Subdivisions 9, 10 and 12.
E. Draft plan. The Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall
present the Town Board with a draft plan containing the information
required by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b, Subdivision 9(b), including,
without limitation, recommendations as to the types of business that
should be offered the limited business investment tax credit and
recommendations as to the geographic areas within the Town where
the limited business investment tax credit should be offered. Such draft
plan shall be presented within 60 days of the first Board meeting.
F. Final plan. After consultation with the Town Board regarding the draft
plan, the Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall make any
revisions it deems appropriate to that plan before presenting the Town
§ 210-6 SWIMMING § 210-7
206:551
Board with a final plan complying with the provisions of Real Property
Tax Law § 485-b, Subdivision 9(b), and this article.
G. Implementation. Upon receipt of the final plan, the Town Board may,
but shall not be required to, adopt a local law implementing the
recommendations contained in the final plan identifying the type of
business that should be offered the limited business investment tax
credit and the geographic areas within the Town where the limited
business investment tax credit should be offered.
H. Amendments. The final plan shall be subject to periodic review as
determined by the Town Board. Upon specific request of the Town
Board, the Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall present the
Town Board with a draft amended plan complying with the provisions of
Real Property Tax Law § 485-b, Subdivision 9(b), and this article.
§ 210-7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 210-7
206:552
ARTICLE III
Exemption for Persons With Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 10-6-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 210-8. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Persons
With Disabilities and Limited Incomes Tax Exemption Law of the Town of
Irondequoit."
§ 210-9. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide a partial exemption from taxation
imposed by the Town of Irondequoit upon real property situated within the
Town of Irondequoit owned by persons with disabilities whose income is
limited by such disabilities, and used as the legal residence of such persons,
pursuant to the authority vested in the Town by § 459-c of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed.
§ 210-10. Incorporation of statute.
Provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York,
as amended or changed, through the effective date of this article, together
with any further acts of the legislature amendatory thereof or supplemental
thereto, shall apply to and govern the determination of the exemption of
taxation permitted by this article to the extent specified in this article as if
such § 459-c had been more particularly set forth herein and as the same
may be determined from time to time by Town Board resolution.
§ 210-11. Eligibility. [Amended 3-21-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
To be eligible for the exemption authorized by such § 459-c and
implemented by this article, the maximum income of the owner or the
combined income of the owners of the real property from the income tax
year immediately preceding the date of the application for exemption shall
not exceed the sum set by the Town Board, except that if the aforesaid
income is more than said amount set by the Town Board, then such real
property shall be exempt to the extent provided in the schedule on file in
the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 210-8 SWIMMING § 210-11
206:553

ARTICLE IV
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-2-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 210-12. Title.
This article shall be entitled "A local law providing a change in the amount
of veterans' exemption and to permit veterans to reapply for the exemption
of Real Property Tax Law § 458."
§ 210-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to adjust the amount of the veterans'
exemption to the assessed valuation of property on which the exemption
was granted following a revaluation or update of assessments, as authorized
by Real Property Tax Law § 458, Subdivision 5, Paragraph (a), and to permit
veterans to reapply for the exemption under Real Property Tax Law, § 458,
as authorized by Paragraph (b) of Subdivision 5 of § 458 of the Real Property
Tax Law.
§ 210-14. Change in assessed property value; recomputation of
exemption.
§ 210-15. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on March 1, 2000.
A. If the total assessed value of real property for which an exemption has
been granted pursuant to § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law has been
increased or decreased as a result of a revaluation or update of
assessments in the Town of Irondequoit, and a material change in level
of assessment has been certified by the State Board of Real Property
Services for the assessment roll on which such property is assessed, the
Assessor shall increase or decrease the amount of such exemption by
multiplying the amount of such exemption by such change in level of
assessment.
B. In accordance with Paragraph (a) of Subdivision 5 of such § 458, if the
Assessor receives the certification from the State Board after the final
assessment roll has been filed, the Assessor shall certify the amount of
the recomputed exemption to the officer having custody and control of
the roll who is directed and authorized by such statute to enter the
recomputed exemption on the roll.
C. A veteran who had received an exemption under such § 458 and who
had opted for the alternate exemption of § 458-a of such law may
reapply for the exemption under § 458, as authorized by Paragraph (b)
of Subdivision 5 of such § 458, if such veteran applies within one year
from the effective date of this article.
§ 210-12 SWIMMING § 210-15
206:555

ARTICLE V
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-2-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ 210-16. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Alternative
Veteran's Exemption Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 210-17. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide a partial exemption from taxation
imposed by the Town of Irondequoit upon real property situated within the
Town of Irondequoit owned by veterans, pursuant to the authority vested in
the Town by § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York,
as amended or changed.
§ 210-18. Incorporation of statute; exemption granted. [Amended
2-28-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
A. Provisions of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York, as amended or changed, through the effective date of this article,
together with any further acts of the New York State Legislature
amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto which become law, shall
apply to and govern the determination of the exemption from taxation
permitted by this article as if such § 458-a had been more particularly
set forth herein and as the same may be determined from time to time
by Town Board resolution.
B. For purposes of this exemption, the maximum exemption allowable
under Subdivision 2, Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as incorporated hereby, will
be $36,000, $24,000 and $120,000, respectively, as each of the same
may hereafter be amended pursuant to any further acts of the New York
State Legislature amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto which
become law and, when so amended, as authorized by resolution of the
Town Board.
§ 210-16 SWIMMING § 210-18
206:557

ARTICLE VI
Home Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 7-18-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; amended in its entirety
7-18-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 210-19. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Home
Improvement Tax Exemption Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 210-20. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide a partial exemption from taxation
imposed by the Town of Irondequoit upon real property situated in the
Town of Irondequoit where there would be an increase in the assessed
value attributable to reconstruction, alterations or improvements made to
residential property, pursuant to the authority vested in the Town by § 421-f
of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York (RPTL), as amended
or changed.
§ 210-21. Incorporation of statute.
Real Property Tax Law § 421-f, as amended or changed, through the
effective date of this article, together with any further acts of the
Legislature amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, shall apply to and
govern the determination of the exemption of taxation permitted by this
article to the extent specified in this article as if such § 421-f had been more
particularly set forth herein and as the same may be determined from time
to time by Town Board resolution.
§ 210-22. Eligibility; exemption schedule.
A. To be eligible for the exemption authorized by RPTL § 421-f and
implemented by this article, the following criteria must be met:
(1) The property for which exemption is sought must be a one- or twofamily
residence.
(2) The greater portion of the residence (as measured by square
footage) after the capital improvement must be at least five years
old.
(3) Construction of the capital improvement must be commenced after
the date this article is enacted.
(4) The initial exemption percentage will be received only after the
certificate of occupancy is obtained.
(5) Unless limited by this article, the exemption applies to
reconstruction, alterations or improvements; it does not apply to
ordinary maintenance or repairs, only to any additional value
attributable to new construction.
§ 210-19 SWIMMING § 210-22
206:559
§ 210-23. Termination of exemption.
Although the exemption normally ends after five years, it will end sooner if
the property is sold within the exemption period. If the property is sold, the
exemption is not transferable to the new buyer. The exemption will end the
day the house is sold, and the new owner will be required to pay the taxes
which would have been exempted through the end of the Town's tax year
(December 31).
§ 210-24. through § 210-29. (Reserved)
(6) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement must
exceed the sum of $3,000 and is limited to $80,000 in increased
market value.
B. The value of an improvement qualifying for exemption should receive
the following exemption percentages for a total of a five-year period:
Year Exemption Percentage
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
§ 210-22 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 210-24
206:560
ARTICLE VII
Parcel Combination
[Adopted 3-20-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 210-30. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Parcel
Combination Procedure Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 210-31. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide property owners the ability to merge
contiguous parcels into one parcel, which will enable them to utilize their
property to its highest and best use.
§ 210-32. Parcel combination procedure.
The following requirements must be met before parcels can be considered
for combination into one parcel:
A. All requests for parcel combination must be accompanied by a review
fee of $25.
B. All parcels must be located entirely within the Town of Irondequoit, the
same zoning district and also within the same school district.
C. All parcels must be contiguous.
D. All taxes on the properties in question must be paid.
E. Names of owners on each parcel in question must be the same.
F. The Town Assessor must receive a letter identifying the parcels to be
combined, which must be signed by all owners of the properties. The
letter shall include the Tax Map number and the owners' names of each
parcel to be combined.
G. Proof must be submitted that there are no outstanding taxes due on the
properties in question.
H. Proof must be submitted from the Building Department that there are
no outstanding zoning violations on the properties in question.
I. The Director of Planning and Zoning shall also review each request for
and sign the approval of the merger.
J. If both the Town Assessor and the Director of Planning and Zoning
approve the combination, the Town Assessor shall submit a "Parcel
Combination Request Form" to the Monroe County Real Property Tax
Service Agency for final approval.
K. The Town Assessor must submit to the Monroe County Real Property
Tax Service Agency copies of proof of payment of all property taxes.
§ 210-30 SWIMMING § 210-33
206:561
§ 210-33. Parcel combination letter.
Each request for parcel combination must be accompanied by a letter from
the resident(s) of each parcel. The letter shall be in the following form:
Date: ________________________ To: The Monroe County Mapping
Department Re: Request for the merger of the following parcels I am
requesting that the Irondequoit Assessing Office process my request that
the parcels listed below be merged into one parcel. (Main parcel number
to remain is checked below by the Town Assessor.)
Tax No. Location Lot No. Acreage
____________ ___________ ________ _______
____________ ___________ ________ _______
____________ ___________ ________ _______
I am the owner of the above listed property and do hereby swear that the
statements contained in this application are true. I understand that this
request is permanent and if I wish to separate them in the future, I will
have to go through a formal subdivision process and be required to meet all
current zoning laws and restrictions. I also understand that once combined
the parcel(s) may not be able to be subdivided because it/they may not
meet the current subdivision requirements.
OWNER:
Print Name
______________________ Signature _________________
Print Name
______________________ Signature _________________
Print Name
______________________ Signature _________________
STATE OF NEW YORK )
COUNTY OF MONROE ) SS:
On the _______________ day of ______________, ____, before me, the
undersigned, personally appeared ___________________ personally known to
me or proved to me on the basis of satisfactory evidence to be the
individual(s) whose name(s) is (are) subscribed to the width instrument and
acknowledged to me that he/she/they executed the same in his/her/their
capacity(ies) and that by his/her/their signature(s) on the instrument, the
individual(s), or the person upon behalf of which the individual(s) acted,
executed the instrument.
_____________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
BELOW THIS LINE FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Approved _______________________________ date __________, 2001
§ 210-33 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 210-33
206:562
(Assessor) Map Attached
Approved _______________________________ date __________, 2001
Paid Tax Bills
Attached
(Planning and Zoning)
§ 210-33 SWIMMING § 210-33
206:563

ARTICLE VIII
Lake Ontario and Connected Waterways Assessment Relief
[Adopted 8-15-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
§ 210-34. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Irondequoit determines that high
floodwaters during the spring and summer of 2017 on Lake Ontario and
Irondequoit Bay have caused significant damage to private property. On
May 12, 2017, the Town of Irondequoit entered into a state of emergency
as a result of the threat to public and private property, and public safety,
presented by the high floodwaters. The Town Board finds that the damage
to property occurred after March 1, 2017, the date by which under state
law a properties assessed value is based. As a result, a large number of
property owners have experienced significant loss to the value of their
homes, yet have a real property tax liability that is based on the value of
their home before flooding occurred. The Town Board is authorized by Part
B of Chapter 85 of the 2017 Laws of New York State to enact a local law to
provide assessment relief to homeowners impacted by high floodwaters.
§ 210-35. Election of assessment relief.
The Town of Irondequoit hereby elects to provide assessment relief for
real property that lost at least 10% of its improved value due to sustained
floodwater levels throughout 2017. The Assessor of the Town of Irondequoit
is hereby authorized to reduce the assessed value attributable to the 2017
tax roll to reflect loss of improved value to real property from floodwaters,
as prescribed by Part B of Chapter 85 of the 2017 Laws of New York
State (the Lake Ontario and Connected Waterways Assessment Relief Act).
Any exemptions which the property may be receiving shall be adjusted as
necessary to account for such reduction in total assessed value.
§ 210-36. Provisions.
A. The percentage loss in improved value for the purposes of this article
shall be determined by the Assessor, determined in manner provided by
this article.
B. To receive such relief pursuant to this article, the property owner shall
submit a written request to the Assessor on a form approved by the
New York State Commissioner of the Department of Taxation and
Finance. Such request shall attach any and all reports prepared by, but
not limited to, an insurance adjuster, real property appraiser or broker
that describe in reasonable detail the damage caused to the property by
the flooding and the condition of the property following the flooding and
may be accompanied by any other supporting documentation.
C. Upon receiving such a request, the Assessor shall make a finding as
percentage of lost improved value the property as a result of flooding,
§ 210-34 SWIMMING § 210-36
206:565
and thereafter the Assessor shall adopt or classify the percentage loss
of improved value within one of the following ranges:
Loss of Improved Value
(percentage)
Reduction of Improved
Assessed Value
(percentage)
At least 10% but less than 20% 15%
At least 20% but less than 30% 25%
At least 30% but less than 40% 35%
At least 40% but less than 50% 45%
At least 50% but less than 60% 55%
At least 60% but less than 70% 65%
At least 70% but less than 80% 75%
At least 80% but less than 90% 85%
At least 90% but less than 100% 95%
100% 100%
D. The Assessor shall mail written notice of such findings to the property
owner and any other participating municipality, as that term is defined
in the Lake Ontario and Connected Waterways Assessment Relief Act.
Where the Assessor classifies the loss within a lower range than the
property owner believes is warranted, the property owner may file a
complaint with the Board of Assessment Review. Such board shall
reconvene upon 10 days' written notice to the property owner and
Assessor to hear the appeal and determine the matter, and shall mail
written notice of its determination to the Assessor and property owner.
The provisions of Article 5 of the Real Property Tax Law shall govern the
review process to the extent practicable.
E. Where it is determined that a property has lost at least 10% of its
improved value, as that term is defined in the Lake Ontario and
Connected Waterways Assessment Relief Act, due to flooding, the
assessed value attributable to the improvements on the property on the
impacted assessment roll shall be reduced by the appropriate
percentage specified in Subsection C of this section, provided that any
exemptions which the property may be receiving shall be adjusted as
necessary to account for such reduction in the total assessed value.
F. A failure on the part of an Assessor to act on an application for
assessment relief for a property that would otherwise be eligible for
such assessment relief, shall be considered a clerical error under
Paragraph (c) of Subdivision 2 of § 550 of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law.
G. This article shall not diminish any other legally available right of any
property owner or party who may otherwise lawfully challenge the
valuation or assessment of any real property or improvements thereon.
§ 210-36 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 210-36
206:566
All remaining rights hereby remain and shall be available to the party
to whom such rights would otherwise be available notwithstanding this
article.
§ 210-36 SWIMMING § 210-36
206:567
Chapter 214
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 110.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 142.
Town property — See Ch. 164, Art. I.
§ 210-36 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 210-36
206:568
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 214-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the planting of trees within
the highways and public places of the Town of Irondequoit, to enhance the
visual and aesthetic appearance of the community, to encourage a sense of
open space and to provide for the protection, care and preservation of trees.
§ 214-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE
— Detailed specifications and standards of practice regarding such
arboricultural activities as planting site and tree selection, site preparation
and tree planting, maintenance, removal, replanting and replacement.
COMMERCIAL TREE SERVICE — Any person that provides tree services
for consideration, including but not limited to tree trimming, tree cutting,
limb removal, pruning, thinning, cabling, topping, root pruning, and stump
grinding. "Commercial tree service" shall not include landscaping functions
on lawns, yards, shrubs, gardens, patios, and related grounds; any work
performed by the owner or occupant of the property; nor any work
performed by a utility company or municipality.
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Commissioner of Public
Works/Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Irondequoit or his/her
authorized representative.
HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular and/
or pedestrian traffic.
MASTER TREE LIST — A listing of suitable and desirable types and species
of trees able to thrive in Town highways and other public places of the Town.
PERSON — Any person, film, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — All grounds owned by the Town of Irondequoit or under
its control or supervision, whether owned, leased, or under contract of the
Town, including but not limited to highways.
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit, lying within the County of Monroe, State
of New York.
TOWN FORESTRY PLAN — An annual written review and description of
Town forestry goals, objectives and such related activities as updating
the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice and the master
tree list, conducting street tree surveys, planting trees and sponsoring
educational programs for the public.
§ 214-1 SWIMMING § 214-2
206:569
TOWN FORESTRY PROGRAM — A comprehensive, multiyear program
promoting the purpose of this chapter.
TOWN TREE — Any tree now or hereafter growing in a public place,
including but not limited to any Town highway.
TREE DEBRIS — Any material generated by, produced by, or otherwise
due to commercial tree service activities, including sticks, branches, limbs,
stumps, and trunks, and other similar woody vegetation.
§ 214-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 214-2
206:570
ARTICLE II
Tree Regulations
§ 214-3. Tree Board established.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in Chapter 12 of the
Irondequoit Code, the Town of Irondequoit Conservation Board, together
with the Commissioner of Public Works, shall have the power to:
§ 214-4. Town forestry plan.
The Town forestry plan, after adoption by the Town Board, shall constitute
the official Town forestry plan for the Town and, unless otherwise
designated therein, shall be administered by the Town Conservation Board.
The Town forestry plan shall define the annual goals and objectives of
the Town forestry program and shall include a current statement of
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice and a current master
tree list and street tree inventory. Nothing contained in the Town forestry
program, Town forestry plan, or the arboricultural specifications and
standards of practice shall abridge the authority of the Commissioner of
Public Works as provided for under New York State law.
§ 214-5. Maintenance of Town trees.
A. Develop and recommend a Town forestry program to the Town Board.
B. Develop and recommend an annual written Town forestry plan to the
Town Board, as described in § 214-4 of this chapter.
C. Develop and recommend arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice to be adopted by the Town Board.
D. Provide advice and consultation regarding trees to any Town board or
department.
E. Receive, review, and make recommendations to the Commissioner of
Public Works on applications from property owners pursuant to § 214-7
for tree plantings, pruning and removals on a public right-of-way.
A. The Town or its authorized agent shall have the right to perform all
necessary maintenance to preserve and protect Town trees in a safe
and healthy condition, including t:rinnning, spraying, watering, staking,
treating for disease or injury, and removal.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose liability
upon the Town, the Town Board, the Conservation Board or individuals,
companies or corporations hired by the Town, nor to relieve the owner
of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant
that he/she planted in the right-of-way of a public street or that is on
his/her property from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel
or vision upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place within
the Town.
§ 214-3 SWIMMING § 214-6
206:571
§ 214-6. Prohibited actions.
No person shall cut, carve, injure, paint, harm, remove, damage or
otherwise deface any Town tree; attach or fasten any advertisement, notice,
wire, nail, poster or other sign; allow any brine, oil, gasoline, or other
substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip on or into
the soil around the base of a tree which could injure such tree.
§ 214-7. Application to plant or remove Town tree.
No person, except the Town or its agents acting on the Town's behalf
or as authorized pursuant to § 214-9, shall plant, remove, replant, and/
or replace a tree or shrub in a public place without first submitting an
application to the Town Commissioner of Public Works and obtaining his or
her approval therefor. The applicant shall pay for all costs associated with
said tree planting, tree removals, or tree replacements. All work authorized
pursuant to this section shall comply with the arboricultural specifications
and standards of practice adopted by the Town Board.
§ 214-8. Removal of frees from private property.
§ 214-9. Public service corporation permits.
The Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways may,
with the consent of the Town Board, issue to any public service corporation
having facilities within the Town a permit covering all operations of such
corporation with the Town, authorizing such public service corporation
to trim or remove trees if necessary. Such operation shall be done in
accordance with the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice
adopted by the Town Board and such other or further conditions as the
Town Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or Town
Board may require.
§ 214-10. Enforcement.
A. Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to cut
down and remove any trees upon their property (including those within
a highway or right-of-way) that are dead, harbor insects or disease, or
which are so damaged as to be a public nuisance and in danger of
falling, thereby causing damage to person or property of others. The
Commissioner of Public Works, on his or her own action or upon the
recommendation of the Conservation Board, may order the removal of a
tree or shrub for the reasons stated above.
B. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning real property to
prune any trees thereon in such a manner that they will not obstruct or
shade street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks,
obstruct the visibility of traffic signs, obstruct or hinder the flow of
traffic or obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be 10 feet
over sidewalks and 14 feet over all streets.
§ 214-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 214-10
206:572
A. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have control of all Town trees
and may review and enforce complaints for injury to same. Violation of
any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in § 1-16 of the Town Code.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Commissioner of
Public Works and/or the Town Board to take such other and further
actions and to avail itself and the Town of any right or remedy available
to it under this chapter or otherwise under the Town of Irondequoit
Code or other applicable law deemed necessary or appropriate to abate
any violation of this chapter and/or any public nuisance so as to ensure
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 214-10 SWIMMING § 214-10
206:573

ARTICLE III
Commercial Tree Services
§ 214-11. License required.
§ 214-12. Application procedure.
§ 214-13. Fees and insurance.
A. All commercial tree services operating within the Town are required to
be licensed according to this chapter. The Commissioner of Public
Works shall be authorized to issue licenses for commercial tree
services.
B. A list of all licensed commercial tree services shall be available upon
request to the public and may be posted on the Town website.
C. All licensed commercial tree services must comply with the
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the
Town Board.
A. An application for a commercial tree services license (hereinafter
"commercial tree services license") shall be made by the owner of the
commercial tree service business on forms provided by and filed with
the Town Clerk and must include proof of insurance in compliance
with§ 214-13. The Commissioner of Public Works is charged with
approving or denying applications.
B. If an application for a license is denied or an existing license is revoked,
the applicant or holder of the revoked license may, within 10 calendar
days of notice of denial or revocation, request reconsideration by the
Commissioner of Public Works by providing him or her with any
additional, relevant information. The Commissioner of Public Works
shall, within 10 calendar days of receipt of the reconsideration
materials, issue a final notice of denial or revocation setting forth the
grounds upon which the license was either denied or revoked. Such
final notice shall be transmitted by certified or registered mail.
A. An annual fee shall be charged for licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter. Such fee shall be determined by the Town Board, by resolution,
and may be adjusted on an annual basis.
B. Commercial tree services must meet the following insurance
requirements:
(1) A minimum of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage liability, including products and completed
operations liability coverage, and automobile coverage with a
financially sound insurance company admitted to do business in the
State of New York is required.
(2) The Town of Irondequoit shall be named as an additional insured.
§ 214-11 SWIMMING § 214-13
206:575
§ 214-14. Expiration of license; renewal.
Commercial tree services license shall expire annually on December 31
after the date of issuance. Renewals shall be issued pursuant to the same
procedures set forth in § 214-12.
§ 214-15. Tree debris.
Commercial tree services are prohibited from placing tree debris in any
highway or other public place within the Town.
§ 214-16. Revocation and suspension of license.
§ 214-17. License to be in possession of person performing work.
The commercial tree services license issued pursuant to this chapter or a
photocopy signed by the licensee shall be in the actual possession of the
(3) All applicants must sign an indemnification agreement provided by
the Town. Contractual liability insurance must include coverage for
said indemnification agreement.
(4) A minimum of 30 days' advance notice of cancellation or
nonrenewal must be given to the Town of Irondequoit, Town Clerk's
Office, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, New York 14617.
(5) Applicants must also provide proof of other coverage required by
law, including workers' compensation and disability benefits.
A. The Commissioner of Public Works may revoke a commercial tree
services license for the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on a commercial tree service.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Any violation of the arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice adopted by the Town Board.
(5) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving dishonesty or
moral turpitude.
(6) Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. If the licensee has one or more employees, agents or contractors, the
revocation hereunder shall apply to all employees, agents or
contractors.
§ 214-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 214-17
206:576
person performing commercial tree services at all times while performing
such work.
§ 214-18. Enforcement.
Violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 1-16 of the Town Code.
§ 214-17 SWIMMING § 214-18
206:577
Chapter 219
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 225.
Operation of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 219-1. Authority to impound.
§ 219-2. Storage and charges. [Amended 1-3-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this chapter, the Commissioner
of Public Works/Town Superintendent of Highways may store such vehicle
in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in
charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the Police
Department of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred
in effecting such removal, owing and storage as per the schedule
maintained by the Town Board.
§ 219-3. Notice of removal.
The Commissioner of Public Works/Town Superintendent of Highways shall
without delay report the removal and the disposition of any vehicle removed
as provided in this chapter to the Police Department, and it shall be the duty
of such Police Department to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of
the vehicle or person having the same in charge and notify him or her of
the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be
required to redeem the same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
town during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the
Commissioner of Public Works/Town Superintendent of Highways.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this town
where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may
be removed by the Commissioner of Public Works/Town Superintendent
of Highways.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
town where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle
may be removed by the Commissioner of Public Works/Town
Superintendent of Highways.
§ 214-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 219-4
219:578
§ 219-4. Penalties for offenses.
The penalties for the violation of this chapter are contained in Title IX,
Article 45, and Subdivision (h) of § 1180 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, as amended or changed.
Chapter 222
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 198.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 219.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 225.
Operation of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 219-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 219-4
219:579

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 222-1. Definitions.
§ 222-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works, in coordination with the Police
Department, shall install and maintain traffic control devices when and
as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the
provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional
traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide
traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject
to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law, as amended or changed.
§ 222-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or
changed.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or
changed, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Town Board in accordance with
provisions of the Town Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law or by an
officer or agency authorized by the Town Board to adopt regulations
pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
§ 222-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-3
219:581

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 222-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 222-51), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 222-5. Speed limits. [Amended 4-17-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Town is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 222-52), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, shall be as indicated in said schedule.
§ 222-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 222-53), attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the
areas described in said schedule, during school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 222-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 222-54), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 222-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 222-55), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 222-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 222-56), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 222-10. (Reserved)107
107. Editor's Note: Former § 222-10, Prohibited right turns on red signal, was repealed
9-18-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018.
§ 222-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-11
219:583
§ 222-11. Right turns on red signal. [Amended 9-18-2018 by L.L.
No. 9-2018]
Upon passage of a resolution and/or order by the Town Board, the Chief
of Police and the Highway Superintendent are authorized to install or
remove signage to prohibit the making of a right turn when facing a
steady red signal (stop indication) on any state highway, county road, Town
highway or Town street. Unless a sign is installed pursuant to this section
or otherwise prohibited by any other provision of law, traffic facing a steady
circular red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right
turn after stopping as required by New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Such traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk at the intersection and to other traffic lawfully using
the intersection.
§ 222-12. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 222-59), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 222-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 222-60), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 222-14. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 222-61), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 222-11 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-14
219:584
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 222-15. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 222-16. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 222-62), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 222-16.1. Parking prohibited during Fourth of July Celebration.
[Added 6-11-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIIA (§ 222-62.1), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 222-16.2. Additional traffic and parking restrictions on Town
streets and highways. [Added 4-25-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
In addition to any authorization pursuant to federal, state or local law in
which the Town, or any authorized officer thereof, may prohibit, regulate,
restrict, direct or otherwise control traffic and/or parking, the Town may,
upon the written order of the Supervisor or Chief of Police, when he or
she deems it to be in the interest of public safety, or in connection with
any parade, festival, sporting, recreational, entertainment or other special
event conducted in the Town, for any period of time (not to exceed, however,
96 consecutive hours) close off any Town streets and highways, or portions
thereof, to all but local traffic, divert or regulate traffic on, from and/
or to any such highway or street, and prohibit and/or restrict parking,
standing, stopping or unloading thereon, as the case may require, and all
pedestrians and drivers of motor vehicles shall conform to and comply with
such regulations and restrictions. Any such written order of the Supervisor
or Chief of Police shall state clearly the street(s) and highway(s) which is
the subject of such order, the date and time upon which such order shall
become effective and the date and time when the same shall expire and
be of no further force or effect. A copy of such order, if issued by the
Supervisor, shall promptly be filed with the Chief of Police, and, if issued by
the Chief of Police, shall promptly be filed with the Supervisor. A copy of
each such order shall also promptly be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Any such written order shall be implemented by the Police Department and
shall include, but not be limited to, the posting of appropriate signage on
all affected streets and highways in a clear and conspicuous manner no less
than 24 hours in advance of the implementation of any such order.
§ 222-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-17
219:585
§ 222-17. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 222-63), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 222-18. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 222-64), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 222-19. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 222-65) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 222-20. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 222-66) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 222-21. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII
(§ 222-67) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 222-22. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 222-68) at any time between the hours listed in said
schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 222-23. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 222-69), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 222-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-24
219:586
§ 222-24. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 222-70), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 222-25. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 222-71), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 222-26. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 222-72), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 222-27. Handicapped parking; fines.
A. For the purpose of facilitating access to public places for handicapped
persons, there shall be regulated use of designated handicapped
persons:
(1) Established pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1602, 1603
and 1660-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed;
(2) Established pursuant to § 1203-c of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as
amended or changed; and
(3) Established at the Town Hall, Irondequoit libraries and any senior
citizens center as so designated by the Town.
B. It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any designated handicapped parking space unless:
(1) The vehicle bears either a permit issued under § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed, or a registration
issued under § 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed; and
(2) In addition to the above, such vehicle is being used for the
transportation of a severely disabled or handicapped person.
C. Any person who parks in spaces clearly marked for use by the
handicapped in accordance with this section without a special
municipal parking permit or whose motor vehicle is not registered in
accordance with § 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed, and being used for transportation of a handicapped person
shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense, which shall increase
to $100 if not paid within 30 days from the date a summons is issued;
and a fine of $100 for the second offense occurring within a period of
two years within the Town of Irondequoit, which shall increase to $200
if not paid within 30 days from the date a summons is issued.
§ 222-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-27
219:587

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles and Winter Parking
§ 222-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — The paved portions of all highways, roads
and streets, including all shoulders, whether paved or unpaved, within the
Town.
VEHICLES — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including licensed vehicles,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
§ 222-29. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 222-30. All-night parking.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all highways within the
Town of Irondequoit between 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 9:00 a.m. from
November 1 to April 15.
§ 222-31. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Commissioner
of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways may store such vehicle to be
stored in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or
person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to
the Irondequoit Police Department or its designated agent of the amount
of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal,
towing and storage as per the schedule established by the Town Board.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Town during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or the
Irondequoit Police Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this Town
where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may
be removed by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways or the Irondequoit Police Department.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Town where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle
may be removed by the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways or the Irondequoit Police Department.
§ 222-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-32
219:589
§ 222-32. Removal of vehicles.
Any vehicles left abandoned or permitted to remain parked unattended in
violation of this article shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the
safe or proper regulation of traffic. The Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways or any police officer may remove or cause
to be removed any such vehicles to any location without any liability for
damages to the vehicle. The owner or person in charge of such vehicle
shall be required to reimburse the Town for the actual and necessary
costs of removal and storage thereof before he or she is entitled to regain
possession of said vehicle. Such reimbursement shall be in addition to any
penalty for violation of this article.
§ 222-33. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent
of Highways or the Irondequoit Police Department, as the case may be,
to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle or the person
having the vehicle in his or her charge and to notify him or her of the
removal and disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article
and of the amount which will be required to redeem the same. The failure
of the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways or the
Irondequoit Police Department to ascertain the name of the owner of the
vehicle or the person having charge of the vehicle or to notify him or her
shall not in any way prevent the enforcement of this article or the towing of
the vehicle or fixing of any fine.
§ 222-34. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or any sections
or subdivision thereof shall be guilty of an offense punishable by fine of
not less than $25 and not exceeding $250. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate additional offense.
§ 222-32 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-34
219:590
ARTICLE V
Shopping Center Traffic Control
§ 222-35. Irondequoit Plaza.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of the Irondequoit Plaza, located at
Hudson and Titus Avenues, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit
does hereby authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of
Irondequoit to:
§ 222-36. Culver Ridge Shopping Center.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request of Culver Ridge Shopping Center,
Inc., located at 2255 Ridge Road East, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of
Irondequoit does hereby authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the
Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-37. Empire Plaza.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request pertaining to Empire Plaza located
at 380 Empire Boulevard, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Order that a lane at least 30 feet wide be kept open adjacent to the
stores for the movement of traffic.
C. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area subject to the restrictions set forth in § 1603 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Order that a lane at least 30 feet wide be kept open adjacent to the
stores for the movement of traffic.
C. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area subject to the restrictions set forth in § 1603 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
§ 222-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-37
219:591
does hereby authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of
Irondequoit to:
§ 222-38. K-Mart Plaza.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request of K-Mart Plaza located on East
Ridge Road, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby
authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-39. Dixon Manor Apartments.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1602 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request of Meran Corporation/Stephan D.
Natapow, principals of the Dixon Manor Apartments located at 2336-2362
Culver Road and 32-55 Bursen Court Irondequoit, New York, the Town of
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Order that a lane at least 30 feet wide be kept open adjacent to the
stores for the movement of traffic.
C. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area subject to the restrictions set forth in § 1603 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at Kmart
Plaza and fines for violation thereof to wit: No person shall park a
vehicle in an individual parking space designated for parking for
handicapped persons and identified by an official traffic-control device
without displaying a permit issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 99 East Ridge
Road. Termination can take place 30 days after proper notification to
cognizant Town authorities.
§ 222-37 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-39
219:592
Irondequoit does hereby authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the
Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-39.1. United States Post Office. [Added 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1602 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Don De Marco, Manager, Customer
Services, United States Post Office, 425 East Ridge Road, Irondequoit, New
York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby authorize and delegate to the
Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-40. Georgetown Plaza.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Georgetown Associates, 248 Buell
Road, Rochester, New York, regarding the Georgetown Plaza located at
1000 East Ridge Road, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit
does hereby authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of
Irondequoit to:
A. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Dixon Manor Apartments and fines for violation thereof to wit: No
person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space designated
for parking for handicapped persons and identified by an official trafficcontrol
device without displaying a permit issued in accordance with
§ 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
B. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the apartments located at
2336-2362 Culver Road and 32-55 Bursen Court. Termination can take
place 30 days after proper notification to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
said United States Post Office and fines for violation thereof to wit: No
person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space designated
for parking for handicapped persons and identified by an official trafficcontrol
device without displaying a permit issued in accordance with
§ 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
B. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the United States Post Office
located at 425 East Ridge Road. Termination can take place 30 days
after proper notification to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
§ 222-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-40
219:593
§ 222-41. (Reserved)
§ 222-42. Sycamore Green Housing Project, 52 Strathmore Circle.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request of the Related Companies, Inc.
(re: Sycamore Green Housing Project) located at 52 Strathmore Circle,
Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby authorize and
delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Georgetown Plaza and fines for violation thereof to wit: No person shall
park a vehicle in an individual parking space designated for parking for
handicapped persons and identified by an official traffic-control device
without displaying a permit issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 1000 East
Ridge Road. Termination can take place 30 days after proper
notification to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Sycamore Green Housing Project and fines for violation thereof to wit:
No person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space
designated for parking for handicapped persons and identified by an
official traffic-control device without displaying a permit issued in
accordance with § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 52 Strathmore
Circle. Termination can take place 30 days after proper notification to
cognizant Town authorities.
§ 222-40 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-43
219:594
§ 222-43. Wegmans.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Wegmans located at 2111 Hudson
Avenue, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby
authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-44. Atrium Mall.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and
in accordance with the written request of Atrium Mall located on East
Ridge Road, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby
authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Wegmans and fines for violation thereof to wit: No person shall park a
vehicle in an individual parking space designated for parking for
handicapped persons and identified by an official traffic-control device
without displaying a permit issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 2111 Hudson
Avenue. Termination can take place (30) days after proper notification
to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Atrium Mall and fines for violation thereof to wit: No person shall park a
vehicle in an individual parking space designated for parking for
handicapped persons and identified by an official traffic-control device
without displaying a permit issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
§ 222-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-44
219:595
§ 222-45. Kings Park.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Eastman Kodak Company, 100 Kings
Park Irondequoit, New York 14617, owners of Kings Park located at 100
South Kings Highway, the Town Board hereby authorizes and delegates the
Chief of Police authority to:
§ 222-46. Westage at the Harbor.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Westage at the Harbor, 5400 St. Paul
Boulevard, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby
authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 1780 Ridge
Road East. Termination can take place 30 days after proper notification
to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Designate safety zones in any such area.
C. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
D. Make special provisions with relation to stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles registered pursuant to § 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
as amended or changed or those possessing a special vehicle
identification parking permit issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Westage at the harbor and fines for violation thereof to wit: No person
shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space designated for
parking for handicapped persons and identified by an official traffic-
§ 222-44 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-46
219:596
§ 222-47. Wegman's Market, 2200 Ridge Road East.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Wegman's Market, 2200 Ridge Road
East, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby authorize
and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
§ 222-48. Tops Market, 1455 Ridge Road East.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Tops Market, 1455 Ridge Road East,
Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby authorize and
delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
control device without displaying a permit issued in accordance with
§ 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of the plaza located at 5400 St. Paul
Boulevard. Termination can take place 30 days after proper notification
to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Wegman's Market, 2200 Ridge Road East and fines for violation thereof
to wit: No person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space
designated for parking for handicapped persons and identified by an
official traffic-control device without displaying a permit issued in
accordance with § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of Wegman's Market located at 2200
Ridge Road East. Termination can take place 30 days after proper
notification to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
§ 222-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-48
219:597
§ 222-49. Tops Market Addition, 1381 Ridge Road East.
Pursuant to the authority granted under §§ 1603 and 1660-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed, and in
accordance with the written request of Tops Market Addition, 1381 Ridge
Road East, Irondequoit, New York, the Town of Irondequoit does hereby
authorize and delegate to the Chief of Police of the Town of Irondequoit to:
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Tops Market, 1455 Ridge Road East and fines for violation thereof to
wit: No person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking space
designated for parking for handicapped persons and identified by an
official traffic-control device without displaying a permit issued in
accordance with § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of Tops Market located at 1455 Ridge
Road East. Termination can take place 30 days after proper notification
to cognizant Town authorities.
A. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area or fire lane.
B. Adopt any such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may
require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of
the parking area.
C. Provide regulated use of designated handicapped parking spaces at
Tops Market Addition, 1381 Ridge Road East and fines for violation
thereof to wit: No person shall park a vehicle in an individual parking
space designated for parking for handicapped persons and identified by
an official traffic-control device without displaying a permit issued in
accordance with § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as amended or
changed.
D. The right to terminate regulation of traffic, standard parking and
handicapped parking as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
reserved to the principals/owners of Tops Market Addition located at
1381 Ridge Road East. Termination can take place 30 days after proper
notification to cognizant Town authorities.
§ 222-48 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-49
219:598
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 222-50. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 222-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-50
219:599

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 222-51. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Sign Type/Direction Location
Stop sign/westbound [Added
6-20-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Barons Road at Cottonwood Drive
Stop sign/westbound [Added
6-20-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Florenton Drive at Cottonwood
Drive
§ 222-52. Schedule II: Speed Limits. [Last amended 6-19-2018 by
L.L. No. 5-2018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-5, speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are hereby established as indicated upon the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Adrian Road 25 Entire length
Amerige Park 25 Entire length
Anchor Terrace 25 Entire length
Angelus Drive 25 Entire length
Aragon Road 25 From Culver Road to Sea Breeze
Drive
Barry Road 25 Entire length
Bateau Terrace 25 Entire length
Baymouth Street 25 Entire length
Belcoda Drive 25 Entire length
Biltmore Drive 25 Entire length
Briar Lane [Added
3-19-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
25 Entire length
Briarwood Drive 25 Entire length
Brookview Drive 25 Entire length
Brower Road 25 Entire length
Brown Road 25 Entire length
Burwell Road 25 Entire length
Cinnabar Road 25 Entire length
§ 222-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-52
219:601
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Colebrook Drive 25 Entire length
Cooper Road 30 Entire length
Cottonwood Drive 25 Cottonwood Drive between
Thatcher Road and Thomas Avenue
Culver Road 35 From City line to Sweet Fern Road/
Durand Boulevard
Culver Road 30 From Sweet Fern Road to Town
line
Dayne Street 25 Entire length
Deerfield Drive 25 Entire length
Delta Terrace 25 Entire length
Densmore Road 25 Entire length
Durand Boulevard 35 From Culver Road to Sea Breeze
Drive
Edgewater Lane 25 Entire length
Empire Boulevard 35 Entire length
Fairview Crescent
[Added 3-19-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
25 Entire length
Farrell Terrace [Added
3-19-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
25 Entire length
Gardham Road 25 Entire length
Gilbert Drive 25 Entire length
Goodman Street North 35 Entire length
Harrison Terrace 25 Entire length
Harwick Road 25 Entire length
Heberle Road 25 Entire length
Hedgegarth Drive 25 Entire length
Helendale Road 25 From Empire Boulevard to
Spencer Road
Hoffman Road 25 Entire length
Hoover Road 25 Entire length
Hudson Avenue 35 Entire length
Kings Highway North 30 From Titus Avenue to Town line
Kings Highway South 35 From Titus Avenue to Ridge Road
East
§ 222-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-52
219:602
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Kiniry Drive 25 Entire length
Lake Shore Boulevard 35 Entire length
List Avenue 25 Entire length
Madison Terrace 25 Entire length
Medfield Drive 25 Entire length
Montaine Park [Added
3-19-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
25 Entire length
Mt. Airy Drive 25 Entire length
Newport Road 25 Entire length
Norcrest Drive 25 Entire length
Northfield Road 25 Entire length
Northwick Drive
[Added 3-19-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
25 Entire length
Norton Street 35 Entire length
Oakridge Drive 25 Entire length
Oakview Drive 25 Entire length
Parkview Terrace 25 Entire length
Pattonwood Drive 35 Entire length
Pinegrove Avenue 25 Entire length
Placid Place 25 Entire length
Portland Avenue 35 Entire length
Rawlinson Road 25 Entire length
Ridge Road East 35 Entire length
Rock Beach Road 25 From St. Paul Boulevard to Lake
Shore Boulevard
Sagamore Drive
[Added 3-19-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
25 Entire length
Sea Breeze Drive 45 Entire length
Seneca Avenue 35 Entire length
Seymour Road 25 Entire length
Shorewood Drive 25 Entire length
Somershire Drive 25 Entire length
St. Paul Boulevard 35 From City line to Pattonwood Drive
§ 222-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-52
219:603
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
St. Paul Boulevard 30 From Pattonwood Drive to cul-desac
Thomas Avenue 35 Entire length
Titus Avenue 35 From 100 feet east of Gardham
Road to Sea Breeze Drive
Titus Avenue 30 From St. Paul Boulevard to 100
feet east of Gardham Road
Tone Terrace 25 Entire length
Wahl Road 25 Entire length
Walzer Road 25 Entire length
Washington Avenue 25 Entire length
Whipple Lane 25 Entire length
Whitlock Road 25 Entire length
Wimbledon Road 25 Between Seneca Avenue and
Rosemont Drive
Winona Boulevard 25 Entire road
Winton Road North 35 Entire length
Woodrow Avenue 25 Entire length
Wyndale Road 25 Entire length
§ 222-53. Schedule III: School Speed Limits. [Amended 4-17-2018
by L.L. No. 3-2018; 6-19-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-6, no person shall drive a vehicle
in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below,
during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Briarwood Drive 20
53 feet north of Somershire Drive
to 133 feet south of Thorncliffe
Drive
Brockley Road 20 32 feet west of Whittington Road
to 711 feet east of Shelford Road
Brookview Drive 20 588 feet west of Drake Drive to
330 feet east of Miller Lane
Brown Road 20
549 feet north of Ridge Road East
to 208 feet south of Ridgecastle
Road
§ 222-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-53
219:604
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Burwell Road 20 55 feet east of Seneca Avenue to
Oak Lane
Colebrook Drive 20 310 feet west of Crestfield Drive to
584 feet east of St Paul Boulevard
Cooper Road 20 106 feet north of Hoover Road to
1,450 feet north of Hoover Road
Helendale Road 15 21 feet north of Laurelton Road to
21 feet north of Yorkshire Road
Kings Highway South 25 535 feet north of Parker Lane to
400 feet south of Kings Lane
List Avenue 20 95 feet north of Thornton Road to
85 feet south of Biltmore Road
Northfield Road 20 75 feet east of Seneca Avenue to
Oak Lane
Norton Street 25 843 feet west of Helendale Road to
619 feet east of Andrea Lane
Pardee Road 20 768 feet north of Candlewood Road
to 85 feet south of Norton Street
Point Pleasant Road 20 50 feet west of Lodge Drive to 327
feet east of Culver Road
Rawlinson Road 20 55 feet east of Seneca Avenue to
Oak Lane
Ridge Road East 25 1,316 feet west of Culver Road to
407 feet east of Kane Drive
Stanton Lane 20 120 feet north of Ridge Road East
Whipple Lane 20 212 feet south of Nile Lane to
Ridge Road East
St. Paul Boulevard 25 938 feet north of Pinegrove Avenue
to 90 feet south of Briarcliff Road
Seneca Avenue 25 188 feet north of Barry Road to
100 feet south of Wimbledon Road
Thomas Avenue 25 From Hollywood Crescent to St.
Paul Boulevard
§ 222-54. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-7, the following described streets
or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 222-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-54
219:605
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Beach Avenue West From Washington Avenue to St. Paul
Boulevard
Cottonwood Drive
[Added
7-16-2002 by
L.L. No.
11-2002]
South Entire length of street
Dewey Avenue North From Eaton Road to a point 100 feet
south of St. Paul Boulevard
Hartland Road East From Cooper Road to Dakeland Road
Oak Lane North From Rawlinson Road to Northfield
Road
Washington
Avenue
North From Rock Beach Road to Beach
Avenue
§ 222-55. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-56. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
(Reserved)
§ 222-57. (Reserved)108
§ 222-58. (Reserved)109
§ 222-59. Stop and yield intersections; authority to place signs.
[Last amended 2-15-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
Upon passage of a resolution and/or order by the Town Board, the Chief of
Police and the Highway Superintendent are authorized to install or remove
108. Editor's Note: Former § 222-57, Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal, was
repealed 9-18-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018.
109. Editor's Note: Former § 222-58, Schedule VIII: Right Turns on Red Signal, was repealed
9-18-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018.
§ 222-54 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-59
219:606
a stop sign or a yield sign at any intersection of a state highway, county
road, Town highway or Town street.
§ 222-60. (Reserved)110
§ 222-61. Schedule XI: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-14, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts
thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-62. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-16, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Anchor Terrace East Entire length
Anchor Terrace West From Lake Front (top of bank) to a
point 150 feet south thereof
Armstrong Avenue
[Added 5-16-2017
by L.L. No. 2-2017]
South Easternmost point of the driveway at
23 Armstrong Avenue to a point 15
feet east thereof
Bay Front South East From Orchard Park to a point 150
feet north thereof
Bayview Road Both From Bayshore Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Beach Terrace Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet south thereof
Belcoda Drive [Added
9-23-2003 by L.L.
No. 8-2003]
Both From St. Paul Boulevard for a
distance of 194 feet west
Breezeway Drive South From Culver Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Brower Road North From Angelus Drive to Breton Road
Brower Road [Added
10-16-2004 by L.L.
No. 11-2004]
South From Culver Road east to the
driveway of 113 Brower Road
110. Editor's Note: Former § 222-60, Schedule X: Yield Intersections, was repealed 2-15-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005. See now § 222-59.
§ 222-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-62
219:607
Name of Street Side Location
Culver Parkway Both From Shelford Road to a point 150
feet east and west thereof
Curtice Road West From Titus Avenue to a point 200
feet north thereof
Durand Boulevard Both From Culver Road to Route 590
Eastview Drive West Entire length
Emily Street South From Culver Road to Vanderline Park
Ewer Avenue Both From Point Pleasant Road to a point
235 feet south thereof
Fairfax Road Both From Brett Road to the south Town
line
Harwick Road North From Waldo Avenue west to the
Rochester City line
Harwick Road South From house number 63 west to the
city line
Hoffman Road Both From Rainbow Drive to north
terminus
Hurstbourne Road Both From the east Town line to a point
500 feet east thereof
Kings Highway South West From the north drive entrance into
Bishop Kearney High School to Kings
Gate North
Kiwanis Road West From Titus Avenue to a point 200
feet north thereof
List Avenue Both From Hoover Road to Circle Court
Norton Street Both From in front of Irondequoit
Volunteer Ambulance building (2332
Norton Street) to a point 50 feet east
and west of the property line
Ontario View Street Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
200 feet west thereof
Rock Beach Road East From Consolidated Railway's north
right-of-way line to a point 454.71
feet north
Rock Beach Road West From Consolidated Railway's north
right-of-way line to a point 424.71
feet north thereof, thence 170 feet
west
St. Paul Boulevard Both From the north city line to the city
line at the Genesee River
§ 222-62 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-62
219:608
Name of Street Side Location
Seneca Park Avenue Both From a point 505 feet west of St.
Joseph Street to the City of
Rochester boundary line
Seneca Road [Added
4-21-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
Both From 200 feet east of Orenda Drive
to the Newport Yacht Club
Shelford Road Both From Culver Parkway to a point 150
feet north and south thereof
Thorncliffe Drive
[Added 8-15-2000
by L.L. No. 7-2000]
Both From Cooper Road to Hollymount
Road
Titus Avenue South From Gardham Road to St. Paul
Boulevard
Town Property -- From Norran Drive to North Park
Drive
Vinedale Avenue West From East Ridge Road to a point 265
feet north thereof
Waldo Avenue East From Harwick Road to Empire
Boulevard
Washington Avenue Both From the north end of Washington to
a point 200 feet south of Beach
Avenue
Washington Avenue East From Colebrook Drive to Cinnabar
Road
Washington Avenue East From Colebrook Drive to Glenmont
Drive
Washington Avenue East From Lakeshore Boulevard to Rock
Beach Road
Washington Avenue West From Lake Shore Boulevard to a
point 230 feet south thereof
Washington Avenue West From a point 200 feet south of Rock
Beach Road to Lakeshore Boulevard
§ 222-62.1. Schedule XIIA: Parking Prohibited During Fourth of July
Celebration. [Added 6-11-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
The following streets will have a one-sided parking restriction from 5:00
a.m. on the first day of the celebration to 12:00 midnight on the last day of
the celebration. In no instance will the celebration last more than four days.
Name of Street Side Location
Coleen Park West From Kings Lane North
to Queens Lane
§ 222-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-62.1
219:609
Cranbrook Drive West From Kings Highway
North to Mt. Marcy
Drive
Eastgate Drive East From Oakview Drive to
Westgate Drive
Edgebrook Lane East From Kings Highway
South north to Titus
Avenue
Greendale Drive West From Titus Avenue
South to San Sharon
Drive
Harmony Lane East From Titus Avenue to
Hillview Drive
Hillview Drive East From Titus Avenue
north to Mt. Marcy
Drive
Kearney Drive South From Portland Avenue
East to Kings Highway
South
Kings Highway North Both From Titus Avenue,
North to north driveway
of Irondequoit Highway
Garage
Kings Highway North East From North entrance of
Irondequoit Highway
Garage north to Point
Pleasant Fire House
Kings Highway South West From Titus Avenue
South to Queens Lane
Kings Lane South From Portland Avenue
East to Kings Highway
South
Noridge Drive West From Titus Avenue
South to Spruce Lane
Portland Avenue East From Titus Avenue
South to Kearney Drive
Queens Lane South From Portland Avenue
East to Kings Highway
South
Ridgelawn Drive West From Titus Avenue
South to San Sharon
Drive
Ridgelawn North East From Titus Avenue
North to circle
§ 222-62.1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-62.1
219:610
San Sharon Drive North From Portland Avenue
West to end
Westgate Drive To the circle
§ 222-62.2. Schedule XIIB: Parking Prohibited on Queensboro Road
During Construction of Laurelton Firehouse. [Added 11-25-2003 by
L.L. No. 13-2003]
Parking will be prohibited during construction of the new Laurelton Fire
District Firehouse from Helendale Road west to No. 137 Queensboro Road
on the south and No. 138 Queensboro Road on the north side of the street.
§ 222-63. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-17, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Beach Avenue Both From Washington Avenue to St. Paul
Boulevard
Brad Street South From Culver Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Brower Road North From Culver Road to Angelus Drive
Buell Drive North From Portland Avenue to a point 200
feet east thereof
Center Terrace Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Colebrook Drive North From St. Paul Boulevard to
Shorewood Drive
Colebrook Drive South From St. Paul Boulevard to a point 80
feet east thereof
Colebrook Drive
[Added 10-6-1998 by
L.L. No. 5-1998111]
South From St. Paul Boulevard east to
Washington Avenue from 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., school days only
Cooper Avenue West From Oneta Road to St. Paul
Boulevard
Cooper Road Both Entire length
Culver Road Both From Hoffman Road to Route 590
Eastgate Drive Both From Oakview Drive to a point 350
feet east thereof
Ganado Road West From Titus Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
111. Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 12-1-1998.
§ 222-62.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-63
219:611
Name of Street Side Location
Goodman Street North Both From the south Town line to East
Ridge Road
Heberton Road South From Culver Road to a point 150 feet
west thereof
Helendale Road Both From Empire Boulevard to Virgil
Drive
Helendale Road Both From a point 100 feet south of
Yorkshire Road to Westchester Road
Kings Highway Both From Titus Avenue to Edgebrook
Drive
Kings Highway Both From Titus Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Lake Terrace Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Nixon Drive Both From Culver Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Norcrest Drive Both From Rock Beach Road to a point 275
feet south thereof
Norran Drive [Repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
North Park Drive [Repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
Oak Lane West From Rawlinson Road to Burwell
Road
Oakview Drive East From Titus Avenue to Wyndale Road
Orland Road Both From Kane Drive to a point 400 feet
west thereof
Parkview Terrace West From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Pattonwood Drive North From Timrod Drive to a point 350 feet
west thereof
Perrin Drive Both From East Ridge Road to a point 300
feet south thereof
Point Pleasant Road Both From Culver Road to Route 590
Point Pleasant Road South From Route 590 to Peart Avenue
Portland Parkway Both From Portland Avenue to a point 150
feet east thereof
Reynolds Avenue North From North Goodman Street to North
Park Drive
Rock Beach Road North From Tone Terrace to Washington
Avenue
§ 222-63 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-63
219:612
Name of Street Side Location
Rock Beach Road South From Tone Terrace extension to a
point 1,030 feet west thereof
Rock Beach Road South From Washington Avenue to a point
140 feet east thereof
Rode Drive Both From Culver Road to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Seneca Avenue Both From Longacre Road to Titus Avenue
Somershire Drive Both From Briarwood Drive to Cooper
Road
Sumerville Drive Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Titus Avenue Both From Culver Road to Route 590
Wabash Avenue Both From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
300 feet west thereof
Walzer Road Both From East Ridge Road to a point 180
feet north thereof
Washington Avenue East From Lakeshore Boulevard to Rock
Beach Road
Washington Avenue East From Rock Beach Road to a point 130
feet south thereof
Washington Avenue West From a point 200 feet south of Rock
Beach Road to Lakeshore Boulevard
Wimbleton Road North From a point 450 feet east of Seneca
Avenue to a point 300 feet east
thereof
Winona Boulevard South From Cooper Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
§ 222-64. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-18, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Baymouth Street West From Point Pleasant Road to Adrian
Road
Briarwood Drive West From Titus Avenue to a point 200
feet north thereof
Clinton Avenue North East From Longacre Road to Rogers
Parkway
§ 222-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-64
219:613
Name of Street Side Location
Clinton Avenue North
[Added 10-6-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998112]
West From Rogers Parkway to Longacre
Road
Dayne Street East From Point Pleasant Road to a point
300 feet south thereof
Forest Avenue Both From East Ridge Road to a point 500
feet south thereof
Helendale Road West From Empire Boulevard to
Queensboro Road
Lynn Drive Both From Culver Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Montclair Drive North From Cooper Road to a point 100
feet east thereof
Rawlinson Road North From Oak Lane to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Thomas Avenue North From St. Paul Boulevard to a point
450 feet west thereof
Washington Avenue East From Lakeshore Boulevard to Rock
Beach Road
Washington Avenue West From Rock Beach Road to Beach
Avenue
Washington Avenue West From a point 200 feet south of Rock
Beach Road to Lakeshore Boulevard
§ 222-65. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-19, no person shall park a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
All streets All 12 midnight to
9:00 a.m./Nov. 1
to April 15
Entire length
Attleboro Road
[Added
8-23-2005 by
L.L. No.
6-2005]
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./during
school days
From Salem Road and
continuing north to
Worthington Road
Brett Road South During church
services
From Whittington Road to
Fairfax Road
112. Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 12-1-1998.
§ 222-64 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-65
219:614
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Brockley Road North During church
services
From Whittington Road to
a point 800 feet east
thereof
Broderick Drive Both 8:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
From Culver Road to
Fawn Street
Daley Boulevard Both and
center
median
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From the east end of the
Town right-of-way to a
point 100 feet west
thereof
Fawn Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./All
From Broderick Drive to
Rode Drive
Hollymount
Road
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
only
From Thorncliffe Drive to
Eastbourne Road
Maplehurst Road North All/Tuesday,
Thursday,
Saturday and
Sunday, with
hour of change
being 6:00 p.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
Entire length
Maplehurst Road South All/Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday, with hour
of change being
6:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Entire length
Oak Lane East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From Rawlinson Road to
Burwell Road
Rogers Parkway North During school
hours
In front of St. Mary's
school between driveways
and to a point 30 feet
west of the driveway to
the parking area
Thistledown
Drive
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, but
school days only
From 103-108
Thistledown Drive to
Thorncliffe Drive
Thornton Road 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, but
school days only
From List Avenue to
Upland Drive
§ 222-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-65
219:615
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Winona
Boulevard
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., school days
only
Between Cooper Road
and St. Paul Boulevard
§ 222-66. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-20, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-67. Schedule XVII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-21, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Attleboro Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From Abington Road to
Salem Road
Barry Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From a point 400 feet
west of Carol Drive to a
point 350 feet west
thereof
Biltmore Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Gardham Road to
Cooper Road
Biltmore Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Gardham Road to
List Avenue
Brown Road West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From Castleview Drive to
a point 1,000 feet north
thereof
Daley Boulevard Both and
center
median
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From the east end of the
Town to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Gardham Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Dake Avenue to a
point 1,000 feet south
thereof
§ 222-65 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-67
219:616
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Gardham Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Wyndale Road to a
point 825 feet north
thereof
Hoover Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From List Avenue to
Cooper Road
Idyllwood Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
Entire length
Oneta Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Cooper Road to
Briarwood Drive
Rogers Parkway South During school
hours
In front of St. Mary's
school between
driveways and to a point
30 feet west of the
driveway to the parking
area
Sandymount
Drive
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Cooper Road to
Thistledown Drive
Thorncliffe Drive
[Amended
8-15-2000 by
L.L. No. 7-2000]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Cooper Road to
Hollymount Road
Thornton Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Cooper Road to
List Avenue
Westchester Road North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Helendale Road to
a point 250 feet east
thereof
Westchester Road South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Helendale Road to
a point 550 feet east
thereof
§ 222-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-67
219:617
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Whipple Lane East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From Worthington Road
to a point 900 feet south
thereof
Wyndale Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, school
days only
From List Avenue to
Cooper Road
§ 222-68. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-22, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
East Ridge Road North 30 minutes; All/All At Walzer Road
§ 222-69. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-23, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-70. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-71. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-67 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 222-72
219:618
§ 222-72. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-72
219:619
Chapter 225
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 219.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
Operation of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 225-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Outdoor Storage of
Motor Vehicles Law of the Town of Irondequoit."
§ 225-2. Purpose. [Amended 4-23-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
The outdoor storage of unlicensed/unregistered and junked motor vehicles
on privately owned property or within a public right-of-way within the Town
of Irondequoit is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
community. The same also constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and
in many ways imperils their safety. Such storage also endangers the person
and property of members of the community, since fuel tanks still containing
gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily explode. Such storage is unsightly
and depreciates all property values. The control of the outdoor storage
of unlicensed/unregistered and junked motor vehicles on privately owned
properties (and within a public right-of-way within the Town of Irondequoit)
is, therefore, regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 225-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DULY AUTHORIZED COLLISION REPAIR SHOP — Any New York State
licensed repair shop and/or inspection station which is available to the
public and whose principal business purpose is to repair, service, adjust
or equip motor vehicles damaged as a result of motor vehicle accidents or
vandalism.
DULY AUTHORIZED SERVICE STATION OR REPAIR SHOP — Any New York
State licensed repair shop and/or inspection station which is available to
the public and operated for gain and which is used for the repair, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle that is wrecked, discarded,
abandoned, dismantled or partially dismantled, which is no longer intended
to be used or is in such a condition that said motor vehicle cannot be legally
used, upon a public highway, without substantial repair.
§ 222-72 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 225-3
225:620
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials, machinery or two or more disabled motor vehicles or
other type of junk.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle originally designed and intended to be
operated, drawn or driven or capable of being operated, drawn or driven
upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term "motor vehicle" shall include, but is not
limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles; and recreation vehicles
as defined at § 235-104B of this Code.
OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLES — A person, firm or corporation having
an interest in or title to a motor vehicle, a person entitled to the use and
possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person and
also including any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the use thereof
under lease or otherwise.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — A person, firm or corporation being the
owner, contract purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver
or assignee of private premises or private property located within the Town
of Irondequoit.
PRIVATE PREMISES or PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all parcels of real
property not owned by any unit of government situated in the Town of
Irondequoit, whether occupied or vacant, regardless of size, topography or
location.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land owned by the state, county or
town which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk and/
or utility lines, such as electric, gas, oil, water, sanitary sewer or storm
sewer.)
UNLICENSED/UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
that is without a current registration of the State of New York or any other
state and properly issued and attached license plates of the State of New
York or any other state thereto.
§ 225-4. Outdoor storage on private property prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store or
deposit or cause or permit to be stored or deposited a junked motor
vehicle or part or piece thereof on any private property or public rightof-
way within the Town of Irondequoit unless one or more of the
following is found:
(1) Such junked motor vehicle is stored or deposited on premises
legally used and operated as a junkyard.
(2) Such junked motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely
enclosed building.
§ 225-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 225-4
225:621
(3) Such junked motor vehicle is stored or deposited on premises
legally used and operated as a duly authorized collision repair shop
while awaiting repairs or servicing at such place of business. Such
junked vehicle must be stored within the confines of an approved
parking space as indicated on site plans on file with the town for
such duly authorized collision repair shop. If a site plan is not on
file with the town for such duly authorized collision repair shop,
said duly authorized collision repair shop will be required to file
such site plan with the Town Planning Board within two weeks
upon written notification thereof unless extended for due cause, in
writing, by the Director of Development Services.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store or
deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, an unlicensed/
unregistered motor vehicle or part or piece thereof on any private
property or public right-of-way within the Town of Irondequoit unless
one or more of the following is found:
(1) Such unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle is stored or deposited
in a completely enclosed building.
(2) Such unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle is under repair,
reconstruction or refurbishing by the owners thereof, who must
actually be residing on the private premises. Not more than one
such unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle shall be permitted at
any one time on any private premises. Such unlicensed/
unregistered motor vehicle must be so maintained and protected as
not to create any safety hazard or nuisance to surrounding property
owners, residents or occupiers and shall not remain on the private
premises for more than seven cumulative or consecutive days
within a one-year period.
(3) Such unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle is temporarily stored
or deposited on the premises of a duly authorized service station or
repair shop while awaiting repairs or servicing at such place of
business. Such unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle shall not
remain on the premises of a duly authorized service station or
repair shop for more than six cumulative or consecutive days while
awaiting repairs or servicing at such place of business. Such
unlicensed/unregistered motor vehicle must be stored within the
confines of an approved parking space, as indicated on site plans
on file with the town for such duly authorized service station or
repair shop. If a site plan is not on file with the town for such duly
authorized service station or repair shop, said duly authorized
service station or repair shop shall be required to file such site plan
with the Town Planning Board within two weeks upon written
notification thereof unless extended for due cause, in writing, by
the Director of Development Services.
§ 225-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 225-5
225:622
§ 225-5. Enforcement. [Amended 4-23-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
The Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways, and/or
the Director of Development Services or his or her designee, and/or the
Irondequoit Police Department and/or its designee, are hereby authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 225-6. Notice of violation; removal; right of entry; charges.
[Amended 4-23-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
A. If the provisions of this chapter are believed to be violated, the
enforcement officer shall serve a written notice, either personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the owner,
occupant or person having charge of the private property on which the
unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle is located, ordering
such person to remove said unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor
vehicle within seven days of the date of such service. Such notice shall
also contain a description of the premises, a statement as to the
location thereon of the unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor
vehicle, reference to this chapter and to the fact that the location of
such unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle on such premises
is in violation of this chapter. The enforcement officer may determine
ownership of any parcel of land in the Town of Irondequoit from the
current assessment roll of the Town and may serve written notice upon
the owner thereof by mailing such notice, as provided above, to said
owner at the address listed on the current assessment roll.
B. In the event that said unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle
or vehicles are not removed from the premises within seven days as
provided in Subsection A above, the enforcement officer or his or her
duly authorized representative shall have the right to enter upon the
premises and to remove such unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor
vehicle or vehicles to the Town of Irondequoit police impound area or
such other place as the Town Board may from time to time designate.
Thereafter, the enforcement officer or his or her duly authorized
representative may, pursuant to Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure
Law, as amended or changed, and Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 4(a), as amended or changed, issue an appearance ticket to
the owner, occupant or person having charge of the private property on
which the unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle is located,
directing such person to appear in the Town of Irondequoit Justice
Court in connection with such person's alleged violation of the
provisions of this chapter and to determine the destruction, disposal or
otherwise of the unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle or
vehicles.
C. The expense of notices, removal, destruction or disposal of an
unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor vehicle or vehicles by the
Town shall be assessed against the property described in the notice and
shall constitute a lien and charge on the real property on which it is
levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged as other Town
§ 225-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 225-6
225:623
§ 225-7. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter or any provision or part thereof by any person,
firm or corporation is hereby declared to be a Class A violation, punishable
as provided in § 1-16. A violation of this chapter shall also subject the
violator to a civil penalty of the greater of $50 per separate violation or
the town's costs of inspection, service of notices, removal, towing and
permanently disposing of such unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor
vehicles, less any penal monetary fine which may have been imposed. Any
person, firm or corporation who shall resist or obstruct the duly authorized
agents, servants, officers and employees of the Town of Irondequoit in
the removal and disposal of an unlicensed/unregistered or junked motor
vehicle, as provided in this chapter, shall be in violation of this chapter and
subject to the fines and penalties provided herein. Each day's continued
violation shall constitute a separate and additional offense. For the purpose
of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally,
violations of this chapter or any provision or parts thereof shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
§ 225-8. Procedures for removal of violations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Town of
Irondequoit may serve such notice and do such other and further things as
are set forth in §§ 225-5 and 225-6 of this chapter and may at the same time
or at any other time, without prior notice, proceed under § 225-7 of this
chapter.
Chapter 228
VEHICLES, OPERATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 219.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 225.
charges. In addition, the expenses of such notice shall be collected in a
civil action instituted in the name of the Town or in accordance with the
provisions of § 225-7 of this chapter.
D. Unlicensed/unregistered or junked vehicles within a public right-of-way
shall be removed by order of the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, and/or the Director of Development
Services or his or her designee, and/or the Irondequoit Police
Department and/or its designee, who has total jurisdiction within said
right-of-way. Such motor vehicle shall be considered an obstruction
within the right-of--way and, therefore, allow for immediate removal at
the owner's expense.
§ 225-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 225-8
228:624
§ 228-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Local Law No. 1-1979,"
regulating the use of motor-driven vehicles on property of the Town of
Irondequoit and on privately owned property.
§ 228-2. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to preserve and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of any persons who wish to use and operate motor-driven
vehicles on private property or municipal property. It is also the purpose
of this chapter to prevent any person who wishes to use and operate
motor-driven vehicles from trespassing on public or private property in the
Town of Irondequoit, from annoying inhabitants and from creating a public
nuisance.
§ 228-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles.
§ 228-4. Prohibited operation.
It shall be unlawful to operate or for the owner to permit the operation of
any type of motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including but not limited
to two-wheel vehicles known as "minibikes," "trail bikes," "mopeds,"
"motorcycles," four-wheel motor vehicles known as "go-carts" or
snowmobiles under the following circumstances:
A. On private property of another person without written permission of the
owner or occupant of said property. Said permission must be in the
possession of the person operating the motor-driven vehicles and must
be presented upon demand to any peace officer or police officer so
demanding.
B. Any property owned, leased or controlled by the Town of Irondequoit,
except on trails duly designated by the town for the use of such vehicles
at the times and in the manner so designated.
C. On property owned by the Town of Irondequoit and on privately owned
property, as follows:
(1) In such a manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other
persons.
(2) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person, including
the operator of said vehicle.
§ 225-8 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 228-4
228:625
§ 228-5. Enforcement.
The Irondequoit Police Department, through the Chief of Police of the Town
of Irondequoit, any other police officer and any other peace officer, shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 228-6. Removal of vehicles in violation.
Any member of the Irondequoit Police Department or any other
enforcement officer who shall encounter any person operating a motordriven
vehicle or conveyance in violation of this chapter shall remove said
vehicle or conveyance to a place designated by the Chief of Police. The
owner or duly designated agent of the owner of such vehicle or conveyance
may regain the same upon payment of all expenses and charges necessarily
and actually incurred by the removal and/or storage of said vehicle or
conveyance.
§ 228-7. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 230
LITTERING
(3) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances.
(4) While in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of
narcotics or drugs as defined by § 1194 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law, as amended or changed.
(5) Between sunset and sunrise or when lights are required for safety
without displaying at least one lighted headlight and taillight.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating or permitting the violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in § 1-16.113
B. In addition, any and all persons, firms or corporations violating or
permitting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or omitting
or refusing to do any act required by this chapter shall, severally, for
each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be liable for
a civil penalty of $50.
C. The imposition of all penalties for any violation of this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue. The application of the
above penalties or the provisions of this chapter shall not be held to
prevent the enforcement of this chapter by other action.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 228-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 230-1
230:626
§ 230-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Litter
Ordinance."
§ 230-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in ordinances regulating garbage and
waste disposal.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or tends to create
blight.
LOT — A plot, tract, premises or parcel of land with or without buildings or
structures located thereon, as surveyed and apportioned for sale or other
purpose.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Town owned or operated by the Town and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, property owner, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any house, building or other structure not owned
or operated by the Town, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, including any yard, ground, parking lot, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox, belonging or appurtenant to
such house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, concrete, asphalt, building materials and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as, but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding and
crockery.
§ 230-1 LITTERING § 230-2
230:627
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or public street.
§ 230-3. Litter in public places and on Town property.
§ 230-4. Litter thrown from or caused by vehicles.
§ 230-5. Litter in parks, lakes and fountains.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Town, nor on any property owned by the
Town, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
B. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
C. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
D. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter from any vehicle upon any street
or other public place within the Town or upon private property.
B. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place or private property.
C. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Town, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place sticky substances or foreign matter of such kind
which adheres to the road surface.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Town
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
part of the park, upon any street or other public or private place. Where
public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and property,
disposed of elsewhere, as provided herein.
B. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the
Town.
§ 230-2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 230-6
230:628
§ 230-6. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by members of any police
department, the Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of
Highways or his designee(s), the Director of Development Services or his
designee(s) or the Fire Marshal. Any person found violating this chapter
may be issued an appearance ticket directing the violator to appear in a
designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection
with this alleged commission of a designated offense of this chapter. A
violation of this chapter will result in a fine not to exceed $500 and/or
community service. In addition, any person littering or disposing of refuse
in a public place or on property owned by the Town shall be liable to the
Town in a civil action for the costs of removal of such litter or refuse and
the restoration of said public place or land to its condition before the litter
or refuse was disposed of at the site.
§ 230-7. Reimbursement for costs.
In the event that Town personnel are required to restore any premises to its
original condition due to a person littering, any person who has littered or
disposed of refuse shall reimburse the Town for the cost, including out-ofpocket
administrative expense of the work performed or services rendered
by direction of the Town as hereinabove provided.
§ 230-8. Unconstitutionality or invalidity in part.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of
the chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and
effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
Chapter 235
ZONING
§ 230-6 LITTERING § 230-8
230:629

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 235-1. Title. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the
Town of Irondequoit of 1997."
§ 235-2. Purposes.
§ 235-3. Compliance required; applicability.
A. The purpose of this chapter, the regulations therein and the zoning
districts, as outlined on the Zoning Map, are to provide for the orderly
growth, in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan, to protect and
conserve the value of property; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to
avoid undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion in the
streets; to secure safety from fire, flood or other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the public.
B. These regulations have been made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, as to the character of each district and its peculiar
suitability uses, and with a view to encouraging the most appropriate
use of land and also particular uses.
C. Whenever a change in district is approved subsequent to the adoption
of this chapter, the designation shall be in accord with the purposes and
general intent as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of
Irondequoit.
A. Compliance. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure
shall be erected, moved, altered or extended and no land, building or
structure or part thereof shall be occupied or used unless in conformity
with the regulations specified for the district in which it is located.
B. Coverage and height restrictions. No building shall hereafter be
erected or altered to exceed the height; to accommodate or house a
greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards than
is specified herein for the district in which such building is located.
C. Use of open space. No part of a yard or other open space about any
building required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open space
similarly required for another building.
D. Uses prohibited unless specifically permitted. All uses not specifically
permitted in a district or permitted after obtaining a special permit
shall be deemed prohibited.
§ 235-1 LITTERING § 235-3
230:631
E. Application to existing buildings and uses. [Amended 7-7-2007 by
L.L. No. 4-2007]
(1) Legally preexisting buildings, lots and uses. This chapter shall not
apply to legally preexisting buildings, lots and structures, nor to
the legally preexisting use of any building, structure or land, but
only to the extent to which it was used at the time of the original
enactment of this chapter. This chapter shall apply to any new
construction and/or any change in use, alterations, extension or
movement of a building or structure and to any change in use of a
building or structure and to any change in use of land subsequent
to enactment of this chapter.
(2) Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming uses.
(a) Subject to the provisions of § 235-76.25 of this chapter, any
nonconforming building or use lawfully existing may be
continued only on the same premises and in the same buildings
and/or structures. Such nonconforming building or use shall
not be enlarged, and the buildings, structures, or premises
shall not be altered or changed except to a conforming use,
including, but not limited to, the design guidelines and the
bonus provisions of Article VIIIA of this chapter; provided,
however, that ordinary maintenance and repair of the
buildings, structures, or premises shall be permitted.
(b) When a nonconforming use shall have been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use.
(c) The abandonment of any nonconforming use, or the failure to
exercise or continue any nonconforming use, for a period of
one year or more shall terminate the right to continue such
nonconforming use, and thereafter the buildings, structures, or
premises shall be used only in conformity with this chapter.
(d) If more than 50% of the gross floor area, or more than 50% of
the assessed value, of a nonconforming building or use is
destroyed by fire or otherwise, the building or use shall not be
rebuilt or restored unless it shall thereafter conform to all
applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
(e) No nonconforming accessory use, accessory structure or sign
that is accessory to a principal nonconforming building or
structure or use shall continue after the abandonment or
removal of such principal building or structure or use unless it
shall thereafter conform to all of the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
§ 235-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-3
230:632
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 235-4. Definitions.
A. Generally. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the
singular includes the plural; the work "lot" includes "plot"; the word
"building" includes "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word
"may" is permissive; "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though
followed by "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied";
"person" includes "individual," "partnership," "association,"
"corporation," "company" or "organization." [Amended 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
B. Specific terms. When used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the
following words shall have the meanings therein:
ABANDONMENT — To cease or discontinue a use or activity without
intent to resume, excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a
use or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining or otherwise
improving or rearranging a facility or during normal periods of vacation
or seasonal closure.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure, detached from
but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of
which is customarily incidental and accessory to that of the principal
structure. Said structure shall be subordinate and/or lesser in area,
extent and purpose to the principal structure or principal use served
and shall meet all applicable requirements of § 235-13.1 regarding
accessory structures.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
7-7-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
ACCESSORY USE — A use that is subordinate and customarily
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use or occupancy
of a building or lot (see also "home occupation"). Said use shall be
subordinate and/or lesser in area, extent and purpose to the principal
use served, and shall meet all applicable requirements of § 235-13.1
regarding accessory uses.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
ADDITION — An extension or increase in area or height of a building.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors
or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:633
ADULT BOOKSTORE [Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995] —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995]
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(1)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be defined as an "adult
bookstore" or "adult video store" so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
of the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2)
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
(3)
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic
reproductions;
(1)
Offers sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; or
(2)
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:634
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion picture,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
ADULT USES — Adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
motels, adult motion-picture theaters, adult theaters, adult video
stores, escort agencies, nude model studios and sexual encounter
centers.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
ADULT VIDEO STORE — See "adult bookstore."[Added 5-2-1995 by
L.L. No. 9-1995]
ALLEY — A narrow supplementary thoroughfare for the public use of
vehicles or pedestrians, affording access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a building,
other than repairs, or any modification in construction or in building
equipment.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves external to or attached to the exterior of any
building.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a building comprising more than
three dwelling units, each of which has an entrance to a hallway or
balcony in common with at least one other dwelling unit.[Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY — A separate and complete dwelling unit
that is contained within the structure of a single-family dwelling
unit.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit without a separate and
distinct room for sleeping.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building containing primarily apartments
(see also "multiple dwelling").
APARTMENT, STUDIO — A dwelling unit that has no separate bedroom
and is designed to be used by not more than two persons.
AREA, LIVABLE — The area of finished floors of a dwelling, excluding
cellars, garages, breezeways, unenclosed porches, attics or basements
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(3)
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:635
not designed for human occupancy. Measurement of livable floor area
shall be made from exterior faces of exterior walls or from center lines
of party walls.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
BEDROOM — A room in a dwelling unit planned and intended for
sleeping, separable from other rooms by a doorway.[Added 2-4-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
BILLBOARD — Any outdoor sign, advertising medium, structure or
device which advertises, directs or calls attention to any business,
article, substance, service or any other thing which is painted, printed,
pasted, posted or affixed to any building, wall, fence, railing, natural
object or structure of any kind on real property or upon the ground
itself.
BUFFER AREA — A landscaped area intended to separate and/or
partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from
one another.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of a
space.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building or portion of the
main building on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that
of the main or principal building (see also "accessory structure").
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finish grade at the front of the
building to a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the
roof, excepting chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, signs,
tanks and similar projections which may be permitted or authorized by
this chapter.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Town officer designated by the Town
Board of the Town of Irondequoit to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
BUILDING LINE — The line of the building most nearly facing the
front, rear or side line of the lot. Such building lines shall include
sun parlors, garages, covered porches and covered walking patios,
terraces, entrances and balconies, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but
does not include steps or overhanging eaves under two feet in width.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade and which has more than half of its height, measured from floor
to ceiling, below the average established curb level or finished grade of
the ground adjoining the building.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:636
CHILD-CARE FACILITIES [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997] —
CHURCH OR PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP — An institution that
people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services,
meetings and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a
secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious
services of any denomination are held.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining
land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation
of environmentally sensitive areas.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that would not be appropriate generally
or without restriction throughout the zoning district, but which, if
controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood,
would not be detrimental to public health, safety or general
welfare.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
CONDOMINIUM — A system of separate ownership of individual
dwelling units in a multiple-unit building. Each unit, together with its
common interest, shall, for all purposes, constitute real property.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — A residential facility for four or more
elderly persons (age 55 or older) within which are provided living and
sleeping facilities, meal preparation and laundry services and room
cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, such as
transportation for routing social and medical appointments and
counseling (see also "housing for the elderly/senior
apartments").[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre.[Added 2-4-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A building or structure where care,
protection and supervision are provided on a regular schedule to
more than 12 children.
(1)
CHILD-CARE FACILITY, GROUP — A private residence, certified
pursuant to New York State Law, where care, protection and
supervision are provided on a regular schedule to at least seven
and no more than 12 children, including children of the adult
provider.
(2)
CHILD-CARE HOME, FAMILY — A private residence, certified
pursuant to New York State Law, where care, protection and
supervision are provided on a regular schedule with no more than
six children, including the children of the adult provider.
(3)
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:637
disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
DOG KENNEL — A structure used for the keeping of more than two
dogs that are more than six months old.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential purposes, including one-, two- and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels and boarding- and lodging
houses.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 3-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 2-2015]
DWELLING UNIT — A complete self-contained residential unit, with
living, sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities within the unit, for use
by one family.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date of another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.[Added
5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L.
No. 9-1995]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached residential building
containing two or more dwelling units, including what is commonly
known as an "apartment building," but not including group, row, or
townhouses.
(1)
DWELLING, GROUP, ROW AND TOWNHOUSES — A residential
building containing dwelling units, each of which has primary
ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each
other by party walls without openings.
(2)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing
not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
(3)
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business;
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(2)
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
(3)
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:638
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on premises, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding- or rooming house or
hotel.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
FARM — Any parcel of land in excess of three acres which is used
for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry or
dairy products. It excludes the raising of fur-bearing animals, livery or
boarding stables, dog kennels and the raising of livestock and poultry
exclusively for sale and slaughter and fed principally with products
bought in the open market.
FENCE — An artificially constructed enclosure or barrier or any
material or combination of materials, but not including a hedge or other
natural growth, erected to enclose or screen areas of land. A "fence"
shall be considered an accessory structure for the purposes of this
chapter.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
FENCE, BOUNDARY — A fence located on or near property lines to
enclose a parcel of land. A "boundary fence" shall include any part of a
fence that is generally parallel to the lot lines and is located within the
required minimum depth of yard or setbacks for principal structures,
whichever is less.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
FENCE, DECORATIVE — A fence located in a front or side yard with
the principal purpose of providing an attractive appearance of all front
yards along a residential streets.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
FENCE, PRIVACY — Any fence located within the buildable area of
residential lots and generally intended to divide portions of a lot into
outdoor living areas and block public view.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
FENCE, SAFETY — Any fence with the principal purpose of providing a
safety barrier to danger inside or beyond the fenced area or to enclose
an attractive nuisance.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or right-of-way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered
as the ordinary side line of a corner lot.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building for the private use of the owner
or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot or the
principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for
mechanical service or repairs of a commercial or public nature.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
GARAGE, PRIVATE, DETACHED — A building erected on a residential
lot, not physically attached to the residential building located on such
lot, for an accessory use.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain and which is used for storage, repair,
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:639
rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of
automobiles or other motor vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the supply and sale of gasoline and oil or
other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles or motorboats and which
may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying,
cleaning or otherwise servicing such motor vehicles or motorboats.
GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED — A dwelling shared by
four or more handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live
together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term familylike
environment in which staff persons provide care, education and
participation in community activities for the residents, with the primary
goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in
order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, "handicapped"
shall mean having a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such
person in incapable of living independently; a record of having such an
impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. However,
"handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a
controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency
in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of
other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not
include alcoholism or drug treatment centers, work release facilities
for convicts or ex-convicts or other housing facilities serving as an
alternative to incarceration (see also "family").[Added 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for
flat roofs; to the deckline for mansard roofs and to the average height
between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs, all
measured from the curb level if the building is not more than 10 feet
from the front lot line or from the grade in all other cases.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful
employment which is:[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
amended 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY/SENIOR APARTMENTS — Multifamily
dwelling units occupied by persons 55 years of age or older. In the case
of double occupancy of a unit, only one resident is required to be at
least 55 years of age. The housing must be self-contained and physically
accessible to elderly citizens.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit
as a residence.
(1)
Carried on solely within the main dwelling and does not alter or
change the exterior character or appearance of the dwelling.
(2)
(3) Located in a residential district.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:640
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as most conventionally
surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar
structures.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
JUNK VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle that is without a current
registration of the State of New York, or any other state, and license
plates of the State of New York or any other state attached and without
insurance and current inspection and/or old, wrecked, discarded,
abandoned or dismantled or partially dismantled and is in such
deteriorated condition that it cannot be legally operated upon the
public highway without substantial repairs. With respect to any motor
vehicle not required to be licensed or motor vehicles not usually used
on public highways, the fact that such motor vehicle has remained
unused for more than seven days and is not in condition to be moved
under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such motor
vehicle is a "junked motor vehicle."[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
LIFE CARE FACILITY — A facility for the transitional residency of
elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living
in single-family units to congregate apartment living where residents
share common meals and culminating in a full health and continuing
care nursing home facility (see also "congregate housing" and "housing
for the elderly").[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT — A platted parcel of land intended to be separately owned,
developed and otherwise used as a unit.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical
planes through front, side and rear lot lines.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or
more streets. On a "corner lot," all street lines shall be deemed front lot
lines.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed
areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies and similar
features.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT, FLAG — A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means
of a narrow corridor.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.[Added 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT LINE — The line dividing one premises from another or from a
street or other public space.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:641
LOT LINE, FRONT — On an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street;
or, on a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street; or, on a through
lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the
lot; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the
street from which access is obtained; or, on a waterfront lot, the lot line
abutting the water body.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line opposite to the front property line.
Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear lot line
shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying within
the lot and parallel to the front property line. In the event that the front
property line is a curved line, then the rear lot line shall be assumed to
be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to a
line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.[Added 2-4-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot that is not a front or rear
lot line. On a corner lot, a side lot line may be a street lot line.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot which lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails, by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the use
district in which it is located.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT OF RECORD — A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the County of Monroe,
or any parcel of land, whether or not part of a subdivision, that has
been officially recorded by a deed in the office of the Clerk, provided
that such lot was of a size that met the minimum dimensions and
development standards for lots in the district in which it was located
at the time of recording or was recorded prior to the effective date of
zoning in the area where the lot is located.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
LOT, SUBSTANDARD — A lot or parcel of land that has less than the
required minimum depth, area or width, as established by the zone in
which it is located, and provided that such lot or parcel was of record
as a legally created lot on the effective date of this chapter.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through
lot, both street lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.[Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
at the required front setback line.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
MARINA — Any waterfront facility which provides accommodations or
services for vessels by engaging in any of the following:[Amended
5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:642
MOBILE HOME — A vehicular, portable structure on a chassis and
designed to be used without a permanent foundation as a dwelling
when connected to utilities.
MOBILE HOME COURT or MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land
which has been planned and improved primarily for the placement of
mobile homes.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING — [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
MULTIPLE STORY BUILDING — Any building with a height of four or
more stories above grade level.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — Any building or structure which was
lawfully existing prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
Zoning Law but which fails to conform to the size, height, area and/or
location limitations on a lot in the district in which such is located or the
use regulations for the district in which such use is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997; 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — A lot of record which does not
comply with the lot requirements for any permitted use in the district
in which it is located.[Added 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building, other structure or
tract of land which was lawfully existing prior to the adoption, revision
or amendment of this Zoning Law but which fails to conform to the
use regulations for the district in which such use is located by reason
(1) The sale of marine products or services;
(2) The sale, lease, rental or charter of vessels of any type; or
The sale, lease, rental or any other provision of storage, wharf
space or mooring for vessels not registered to the owner of said
facility, a member of the owner's immediate family or an overnight
guest on said property.
(3)
Any of the following:
A building designed or occupied for residential purposes by
two or more families;
(a)
A series of attached, detached or semidetached residential
buildings which are provided as a group collectively with
essential services and utilities and which are located on a lot,
plot or parcel of land under common ownership; or
(b)
(c) The residential part of a mixed-occupancy building.
(1)
Regardless of the foregoing, any residential building, other than a
one-family dwelling on a single zoning lot, shall be deemed to be a
"multiple dwelling."
(2)
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:643
of such adoption, revision or amendment.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997; 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, genitals or
full female breast.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
OPEN DEVELOPMENT — An area within the Town, designated by
resolution of the Town Board, wherein building permits may be issued
for erection of structures to which access is given by right-of-way or
easement.[Added 9-27-2005 by L.L. No. 13-2005]
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping in an unroofed and unenclosed
area of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same
place for more than 24 hours.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
PARCEL — A continuous quantity of land in the possession of or owned
by or recorded as the property of the same person or persons.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
PARKING SPACE — An unobstructed space or area other than a street
or alley that is permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of
one motor vehicle.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
PERSON — Any individual, agent, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trustee, receiver or assignee or person acting in any other
representative capacity. For the purposes of Article XIII, Adult Uses,
"person" shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the primary use of the lot
on which the building is located is conducted.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE — Any area of a business that
generates a minimum of 10% of the annual gross receipts.[Added
5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a secondary or accessory use.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization catering exclusively to members
and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic
purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain. Except as
required generally for the membership and purposes of the club,
vending machines, merchandising or commercial activities shall be
prohibited.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:644
RADIO AND/OR TELEVISION ANTENNA STRUCTURE — Structural
members used to support an antenna as well as the antenna itself,
excluding nonrigid wire.
RAMP, TEMPORARY — A temporary structure, designed to provide
pedestrian access to a dwelling, with a walking surface that has a
running slope steeper than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (fivepercent
slope). "Temporary," in this case, shall refer to a ramp in place
for a fixed period of time of not more than 18 months and constructed
in such a way as to be readily removed after said period of time.[Added
7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
RESIDENCE — A building designed or used as the living quarters for
one or more families (see also "dwelling").
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, ONE-AND-ONE-HALF-STORY — A
residential building with the first story having the minimum height
required of a one-story residential building and the upper level having
a vertical distance between floor and ceiling of not less than seven feet
nor more than nine feet, and a vertical distance of not less than three
feet, six inches along the studs forming the exterior walls.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, ONE-STORY — A residential building having
a vertical distance between floor and ceiling of not less than seven feet,
eight inches on one level or floor, not including basement or cellar,
the measurement of such vertical distance being made along the studs
forming each of the exterior walls.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, TWO-STORY — A two-story residential
building with the first story having the minimum height required of
a one-story residential building and the upper story having a vertical
distance between floor and ceiling of not less than seven feet nor more
than nine feet, and the vertical distance along the studs forming each
of the exterior walls of the upper story being not less than five feet.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building that is the primary residence of the
owner and in which rooms are provided by the owner, for
compensation, to two or more adult persons not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to the owner (see also "boardinghouse").[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A round parabolic antenna intended
to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources.
"Noncommercial dish antennas" are defined as being less than four
feet in diameter, while "commercial dish antennas" are usually those
larger than four feet in diameter and typically used by broadcasting
stations.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SCREENING — The method by which a view of one site from another
adjacent site is shielded, concealed or hidden. Screening techniques
include fences, walls, hedges, berms or other features (see also "buffer
yard").[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:645
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.[Added
5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
SETBACK — The least distance from the side, rear or front lot line of a
lot to the side, rear or front building line of any building located or to
be located thereon.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
SHOPPING PLAZA — Two or more commercial enterprises located in
a single building or in two or more connected or adjacent buildings,
when the same is developed as part of a single integrated commercial
project.[Added 9-20-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994]114
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing
the extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border.
Curved, spherical or any other shaped sign faces shall be computed
on the basis of actual surface area. The copy of signs composed of
individual letters, numerals or other devices shall be the sum of the
area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing
the letter or device. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the
area of one face only. Double-faced signs shall be so constructed that
the perimeter of both faces coincide and are parallel and not more than
24 inches apart.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign commonly associated with and limited
to information and directions necessary and convenient for persons
coming on the property, including signs marking entrances, parking
areas, one-way drives, rest rooms, pickup and delivery areas and the
like.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, FLASHING — Any moving or animated sign or any illuminated
sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained
stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude.
(2)
114. Editor's Note: The former definition of "sign," as amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:646
Any revolving sign or any revolving light shall be considered a "flashing
sign." 115
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign illuminated in any manner by an
artificial light source.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY — An advertising sign or
billboard which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the
same lot (see also "billboard").
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground
or to a building, including any sign attached to or displayed on a
vehicle that is used for the express purpose of advertising a business
establishment, product, service or entertainment when that vehicle is
so parked as to attract the attention of the motoring or pedestrian
traffic.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A display, informational sign, banner or other
advertising device constructed of cloth, canvass, fabric, wood or other
temporary material, with or without a structural frame, and intended
for a limited period of display, including decorative displays for holidays
or public demonstrations.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, TENANT — A sign which provides an index of uses (or tenants)
included within one building or development.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
SIGN, WALL — A sign painted on the outside of a building or attached
to and erected parallel to the face of a building and supported through
its length by such building.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign painted, stenciled or affixed on a
window.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SITE PLAN — A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of
all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features
proposed for a specific parcel of land.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of
sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:[Added
5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(1)
115. Editor's Note: The former definition of "sign, freestanding," as amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997.
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:647
STATE OF NUDITY — See "nudity."[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no
floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it.
A basement shall be counted as a "story" if its ceiling is over six feet
above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the
exterior walls of such story or if it is used for business or dwelling
purposes.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
STREET — The same meaning ascribed to the term in Chapter 204,
Subdivision of Land.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street right-of-way and
any lot or parcel of land.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land used for public or private
passageways and designed for the conveyance of persons and or
vehicles from one point to another.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction
framed of component structural parts for occupancy or use, including
buildings.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any substantial remodeling or
reconstruction of any principal building or structure that requires the
issuance of a building permit and which involves changes to existing
bearing walls, columns, roofs, foundations or other structural aspects
of the building.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SUBDIVISION — The division of land, a lot, tract or parcel into two
or more lots, parcels, plats or sites or other divisions of land for the
purpose of sale, lease, offer or development, whether immediate or
future. The term shall also include the division of residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or other land whether by deed,
metes and bounds descriptions, lease, map, plat or other
instrument.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor areas occupied
by a sexually oriented business by more than 25% of the floor areas as
it exists on the effective date of this chapter.[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L.
No. 9-1995]
SWALE — The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and
the property line.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections B(1), (2) and (3) above.
(4)
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:648
SWIMMING POOL — Any artificial pool of water constructed, installed
or maintained, in or above the ground, which is designed to contain
water to a depth of two feet or more, which has at least one horizontal
dimension of 10 feet or more and the upper side of which is
open.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
TAKE-OUT FOOD BUSINESS [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997] —
TOWNHOUSE — A residential building consisting of a series of
noncommunicating, individually owned one-family units having a
common party wall between each unit, with private outside entrances,
separate front and rear yards and separate utility services and which is
located on a separate recorded lot.
TRAILER, CAMPING — A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels
and constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing
by another vehicle.
Includes any or all of the following:
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — An establishment which by
design of physical facilities or by service or packaging
procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared
ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the
premises and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles
on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged.
(a)
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose
principal business is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared
food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state,
for consumption either within the restaurant building or off
premises.
(b)
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof
where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption and where all or a significant portion of the
consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside
the confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on the
site.
(c)
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile place
or facility at or in which food or drink is offered or prepared for
retail sale or for service, with or without charge, on or at the
premises or elsewhere.
(d)
(1)
Exceptions. Temporary retail food establishments that operate at a
fixed location for a temporary period of time in connection with a
fair, carnival, parade, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory
gathering, including church suppers, picnics or similar
organizational meetings, are excluded from this definition.
(2)
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:649
TRAILER, TRAVEL or TRAILER, HOUSE — A vehicular portable unit,
mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special
highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle; and of
a body width of no more than eight feet and a body length of no more
than 32 feet when factory equipped for the road.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Means and includes any
of the following:[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
TRANSITIONAL USE — A permitted use or structure that, by nature or
level and scale of activity, acts as a transition or buffer between two or
more incompatible uses.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
TREED LOTS — Includes all areas in the Town of Irondequoit of one
acre or more but less than five acres containing tree communities and
trees six inches in diameter and greater in which the average basal area
is at least 30 square feet per acre of trees six-inches and greater as
determined using a ten-factor prism.[Added 12-17-1996 by L.L. No.
12-1996; amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
TRUCK, CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be loaded onto or
affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck. "Truck campers" are of two
basic types:
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon
is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or
maintained.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
USE, CHANGE OF — A change in the nature of occupancy or use of
any principal building or structure within the Town of Irondequoit that
requires the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy
from the Town Building Department. A change of use shall not include
a similar use that can occupy a principal building or structure with
only minor remodeling or repair work and which does not require
the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.[Added
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of a sexually oriented business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
a sexually oriented business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of a sexually oriented business,
except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the
date of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
SLIDE-IN CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be loaded onto
and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.
(1)
CHASSIS-MOUNT CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be
affixed to a truck chassis.
(2)
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:650
USE, PRINCIPAL — The specific primary purpose for which the land is
used.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time
with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such
time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent structure.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
VARIANCE — A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of
property as a method of alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing
a reasonable use of the building, structure or property which, because
of unusual or unique circumstances, is denied by the terms of this
chapter.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
YARD — An open space located on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory
buildings, or such projections as are expressly permitted in this
chapter. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall consist of the
horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest point of the
foundation wall of the main building.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full width of a front lot
line between side lot lines and from the front line to the front building
line in depth. Front entrance platforms with or without steps and
protective hoods over entrance doors may project into the minimum
front yard setback requirement. Temporary ramps may project into the
minimum front yard setback requirement. The size of the platform or
hood shall not exceed 32 square feet. For properties which do not
meet the minimum front setback requirements, the entry platform shall
not exceed 16 square feet.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear
yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the
lot.[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the
nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard or, in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the
front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles
to the side lines of the lot.116[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
ZERO LOT LINE — The location of a building on a lot in such a
manner that one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot
line.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
ZONE — A portion of the territory of the Town, exclusive of streets,
alleys and other public ways, within which certain uses of land,
premises and buildings are not permitted and within which certain
116. Editor's Note: The former definition of "wooded lot," added 3-21-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 12-17-1996 by L.L. No. 11-1996.
§ 235-4 LITTERING § 235-4
230:651
yards and open spaces are required and certain height limits are
established for buildings.[Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
C. Other terms and phrases. Other terms and phrases not specifically
defined in this chapter but defined in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code applicable to general building
construction shall have the meanings ascribed therein. All other words
not specifically defined and used in this chapter shall carry their
customary meanings.
§ 235-4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-4
230:652
ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 235-5. Establishment of districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Irondequoit is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
A. Residential districts: [Amended 1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
R-R
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7 [Added 9-25-2001 by L.L. No. 12-2001]
B. Business districts: [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
C
WD
C. Manufacturing district:
M
D. Open Space Districts - OS. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
E. Environmental Protection Overlay Districts - EPOD: [Added 2-4-1997
by L.L. 1-1997; amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
EPOD - 1 Wetland
EPOD - 2 Steep Slope
EPOD - 3 Wood Lot/Treed Lot
EPOD - 4 Flood Plain
EPOD - 5 Watercourse Protection
EPOD - 6 Coastal Erosion Area Protection
F. LaSalle's Landing Development District. [Added 8-19-1997 by L.L.
No. 6-1997]
G. River Harbor District - RH. [Added 9-25-2001 by L.L. No. 13-2001]
H. Tourism and Resort Redevelopment District (TRR District).117
117. Editor's Note: Added pursuant to L.L. No. 3-2009, adopted 2-17-2009. See Art. XXVI,
Tourism and Resort Redevelopment District (LTRR District).
§ 235-5 LITTERING § 235-6
230:653
§ 235-6. Zoning Map. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The zoning districts are shown, defined and bounded on the map entitled
the "Official Zoning Map of the Town of Irondequoit," which map, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter. The
Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk.118
§ 235-7. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. Generally. In interpreting the Zoning Map of the Town of Irondequoit,
the following rules shall apply: [Amended 2-21-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
(1) Where district boundaries abut streets, railroad lines or streams,
the center lines of said streets, railroad lines or streams shall be
construed to be the boundaries.
(2) Notwithstanding the application of Subsection A(1) above, where
district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow
the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
(3) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel
to the center lines of streets, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom
as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such
dimension shall be determined by the use of a scale.
B. Appeal to Board of Appeals. If any applicant or party to a zoning matter
shall be or deemed to be aggrieved by any determination of the Building
Inspector acting as the enforcement officer of this chapter as to the
interpretation of the Zoning Map, an appeal may be taken to the Board
of Appeals as hereinafter provided.
118. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is also included in the online version of the Code of the
Town of Irondequoit (eCode360®).
§ 235-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-7
230:654
ARTICLE IV
R-R, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts
§ 235-8. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
In R-R, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts, the following uses are
permitted:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
C. Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by the
New York State Department of Education, public hospitals, public
libraries and municipal and special district buildings, provided that no
such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of any adjoining lot line.
D. Fire stations without club facilities.
E. Farms, greenhouses, plant nurseries and riding stables lawfully existing
on the effective date of this chapter, provided that: [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(1) No new building or structure shall be constructed nor existing
buildings or structures enlarged, converted or moved in which
horses or other farm animals are kept, unless such building is at
least 100 feet from any lot line.
(2) No storage of manure or other odor- or dust-producing substance
shall be permitted within 100 feet of any lot line.
F. Home occupations. [Amended 12-28-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987; L.L.
No. 5-1992; 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
(1) "Home occupation" is defined for the purpose of this section as any
activity carried out for gain by a resident of a dwelling unit which
results in the manufacture or sale or provision of goods and/or
services and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
premises as a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the
exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(2) Occupations included; where conducted.
(a) Home occupations shall include:
[1] General office, business, and professional services
(computer services, doctors, counselors, bookkeeping,
etc.)
[2] Studios/work spaces for handicraft production, fine arts,
cooking, etc.
§ 235-8 LITTERING § 235-8
230:655
[3] Direct sale product distribution (Avon, Tupperware, etc.)
[4] Individual instruction (music lessons, etc.)
(b) All home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the
main dwelling unit exclusive of any accessory structures.
(3) The following uses shall not be deemed a home occupation: retail
selling; firewood sales; stocking firearms sales; clinic; hospital;
funeral home; restaurant; motel, hotel, rooming house, kennels,
animal hospital, mortuary; personal service shop; spa; dance,
aerobic exercise, martial art studio, etc.; repair, storage and/or
painting of motorized vehicles or boats; welding shop; large
appliance repair; place of amusement; public storage facility; and
any use similar to the above.
(4) The use of noxious, combustible, corrosive, flammable, explosive,
radioactive or other materials that would endanger the health and
safety of the occupants and the surrounding residents is prohibited.
(5) No home occupation shall require trash and recyclables pickup in
excess of that required normally in single-family dwelling
residential areas. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(6) A home occupation shall employ no more than one person in
addition to the resident(s) of the dwelling unit.
(7) Renters shall provide written evidence of owner approval for a
home occupation with their application.
(8) All parking associated with the home occupation must be in the
driveway where the home occupation is located. No parking shall
be permitted in the street or yard. No shared parking is permitted
associated with any home occupation.
(9) The number of clients hosted by the home occupation shall not
exceed the rate of two per hour and shall occur only between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(10) Servicing by trucks with three axles or more shall be prohibited. All
servicing by trucks, such as UPS, or other vehicles shall occur only
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and
not exceed the rate of six per day.
(11) Not more than 25% of the total gross floor area of the main
dwelling unit may be used for a home occupation.
(12) Outside storage and/or outside display of goods is prohibited.
(13) The display and/or storage of goods within a dwelling unit in such a
manner as to be visible from the outside of the dwelling unit is
prohibited.
§ 235-8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-8
230:656
(14) The use shall not produce offensive noise, odors, vibrations, smoke,
fumes, heat, or dust detectable to normal sensory perception
beyond the premises. No equipment or process shall be used in a
home occupation which creates visual or audible electrical
interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises or
which causes fluctuations in line voltage off premises.
(15) Owners of home occupations shall submit a completed home
occupation application form, with applicable fee, to the Director of
Community Development for approval.
(16) The owner of a home occupation may appeal the decision of the
Director of Community Development to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Renters must provide written approval of appeal from the
building owner.
(17) When a property containing a home occupation is sold, the home
occupation shall cease.
(18) Any home occupation that was lawful at the time of the effective
date of this section may be continued upon written affirmation from
the business owner that such home occupation shall have
continued in operation, does not constitute a nuisance, and shall
not be enlarged, altered, or changed in area, activity, or content
during its continuance, except as provided otherwise in this
section.
G. Private garages with a maximum area of 900 square feet having a
frontage of not more than 30 feet; however, in no case with an area
larger than the footprint of the principal structure. Private garages
attached to the principal structure shall not be higher than the principal
structure. Private garages detached from the principal structure shall
not be higher than the principal structure or 12 feet, whichever is less.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 7-17-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007]
H. Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and structures
not operated for gain.
I. Swimming pools, subject to provisions of § 235-71.
J. (Reserved)119
K. (Reserved)120
L. (Reserved)121
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding signs, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997.
120. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding storage of mobile homes, etc., was repealed
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding parking of trucks, was repealed 6-17-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-8 LITTERING § 235-9
230:657
§ 235-9. Height restrictions.
No residential building shall exceed the height of a two-story residential
building measured from the mean grade at the front setback, not to exceed
24 feet in height, except that buildings described in § 235-8B, C and D shall
not exceed 65 feet in height.
§ 235-10. Lot coverage.
The area of the principal and accessory buildings on any lot measured
horizontally shall not exceed 25% of the area of such lot.
§ 235-11. Lot and bulk requirements. [Amended 1-21-1988 by L.L.
No. 1-1988]
A. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected on any lot unless
such lot shall have the following minimum dimensions:
(1) Width: at least 80 feet in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and 150 feet in
R-R Districts.
(2) Depth: at least 120 feet in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and 300 feet in
R-R Districts; or
(3) Area: at least 9600 square feet in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and at
least 45,000 square feet in R-R Districts.
B. No building shall extend nearer to a street line than the minimum
distance of the setback of the average of existing dwellings within 200
feet on either side thereof, except that no building shall be required to
set back more than 50 feet from the property line in R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts and 75 feet in R-R Districts. In all cases however, the minimum
front yard depth shall be 30 feet in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and 50
feet in R-R Districts.
C. The front yard depth of lots located on the inside part of a curve shall be
measured from the nearest point of the arc establishing the front line of
the lot to the front wall of the main building.
D. In the case of a building on a through lot, the front yard depth shall be
required on both streets.
E. In the case of a corner lot, no building shall be located nearer than 30
feet to the side street line in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and 50 feet in RR
Districts; provided, however, that if the size of the lot shall make the
thirty- or fifty-foot setback impractical, then such setback may be
reduced by locating the building no further than 10% of the width of the
lot from the inside lot line, the narrow dimension of the building in such
cases shall parallel the narrow dimension of the corner lot, and any
garage, attached or otherwise, shall conform to the same setback
requirements.
§ 235-9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-11
230:658
§ 235-12. Minimum building size.
§ 235-13. Private garages.
F. No building or structure shall be located nearer to either of the side
lines of an inside lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure
is to be located than the distance equal to 10% of the width of the lot at
the building line, except for private detached garages, which shall be
located as provided in § 235-13 of this article and except that no
dwelling need setback more than 15 feet from the sideline R-1, R-2 and
R-3 Districts and 25 feet in R-R Districts.
G. There shall be a rear yard of a minimum depth of 30 feet between the
rear lot line and the main building in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and 50
feet in R-R Districts.
A. No residential building shall contain a floor area and a ground floor
area of less than the following:
Ground Floor Area
(square feet)
District
Total Floor Area
(square feet) 1-Story
1 1/2- and
2-Story
R-R 1,300 1,300 700
R-1 1,100 1,100 660
R-2 900 900 600
R-3 750 750 500
B. In determining such area, the measurements shall be made along the
exterior of the main foundation walls of the building and shall exclude
any portion of uncovered porches, breezeways or garages.
A. Uses incidental to the occupancy of the residence. No business,
occupation, service or residence shall be permitted. An attached garage
made an integral part of a residence, however, may provide living
quarters on the second floor. In no case shall vehicle repairs or
maintenance be done in or around said garage unless performed:
[Amended 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
(1) By a resident of the premises;
(2) On a vehicle owned or leased by a resident of the premises and
operated by such resident for his or her personal use; and
(3) Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
B. A detached private garage shall not be located nearer than four feet to
the rear or side lines of the lot, nor closer than eight feet from any
building used for residential purposes. If erected on a corner lot, the
§ 235-11 LITTERING § 235-13
230:659
§ 235-13.1. Accessory structures [Added 7-17-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007]
detached garage shall not be located nearer than 30 feet to the side
street line, except if such lot shall be less than 70 feet in width, then
such garage shall be erected not nearer than four feet nor further than
six feet from the side line of the lot opposite the side street. If such
garage, at the time of its erection, is the only structure located on such
lot, it shall be located not nearer than four feet nor more than five feet
from the rear line of such lot. On through lots, garages shall be located
not nearer than 30 feet to either street line.
C. In R-R Districts, a detached private garage shall not be located nearer
than 15 feet to the rear or side lines of the lot, nor closer than 25 feet
from any building used for residential purposes. If erected on a corner
lot, the detached garage shall not be located nearer than 50 feet to the
side street line. If such garage is the only structure located on such lot,
at the time of its erection it shall be located not closer than 15 feet from
the rear line of such lot. On through lots in R-R Districts, such garages
shall be located no closer than 50 feet to either street or right-of-way
line. [Amended 1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
A. Accessory structures and uses are permitted only, in connection with
any principal use lawfully existing and in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this section and/or this chapter.
B. Accessory structures and uses shall include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following examples; provided, however, that each such
structure or use shall comply with all applicable requirements of this
section and/or this chapter: private garages, storage structures, pet
shelters, children's playhouses, tennis courts, private swimming pools
and related appurtenances such as decks, generators, heat pumps and
air-conditioning units, and other such uses as may be similar in area,
extent and purpose.
C. Accessory structures and uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) Accessory structures and uses shall not be located within the
required front yard and shall not be located closer to the front lot
line than the front building line of the principal structure.
(2) Corner lots. Accessory structures installed or constructed on a
corner lot shall be located behind the front building line of the
principal structure as measured from either street and shall further
comply with § 235-13 of this chapter.
(3) Accessory structures and uses shall be included in the calculation
of lot coverage and shall not occupy more than the maximum
permitted.
§ 235-13 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-13.1
230:660
(4) Accessory structures attached to the principal structure or within
10 feet of the principal structure shall be considered to be an
integral part thereof, and the front, side, and rear yard
requirements of the applicable district shall apply.
(5) Detached accessory structures and uses shall be located no closer
than four feet to rear or side property lines and no closer than six
feet to the principal building.
(6) Accessory structures detached from the principal structure shall
not be higher than the principal structure or 12 feet, whichever is
less.
(7) Storage structures larger than 200 square feet in floor area shall be
considered to be private garages and shall be subject to all of the
applicable requirements for same.
§ 235-13.1 LITTERING § 235-13.1
230:661

ARTICLE V
R-4 Residential Districts
§ 235-14. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-28-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987;
1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988; L.L. No. 5-1992; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
In R-4 Residential Districts, the following uses are permitted:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
C. Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by the
New York State Department of Education, public hospitals, public
libraries and municipal and special district buildings, provided that no
such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of any adjoining lot line.
D. Fire stations without club facilities.
E. Farms, greenhouses, plant nurseries and riding stables lawfully existing
on the effective date of this chapter, provided that:
(1) No new building or structure shall be constructed nor existing
buildings or structures enlarged, converted or moved in which
horses or other farm animals are kept, unless such building is at
least 100 feet from any lot line.
(2) No storage of manure or other odor- or dust-producing substance
shall be permitted within 100 feet of any lot line.
F. Home occupations. [Amended 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
(1) "Home occupation" is defined for the purpose of this section as any
activity carried out for gain by a resident of a dwelling unit which
results in the manufacture or sale or provision of goods and/or
services and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
premises as a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the
exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(2) Occupations included; where conducted.
(a) Home occupations shall include:
[1] General office, business, and professional services
(computer services, doctors, counselors, bookkeeping,
etc.)
[2] Studios/work spaces for handicraft production, fine arts,
cooking, etc.
[3] Direct sale product distribution (Avon, Tupperware, etc.)
§ 235-14 LITTERING § 235-14
230:663
[4] Individual instruction (music lessons, etc.)
(b) All home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the
main dwelling unit exclusive of any accessory structures.
(3) The following uses shall not be deemed a home occupation: retail
selling; firewood sales; stocking firearms sales; clinic; hospital;
funeral home; restaurant; motel, hotel, rooming house, kennels,
animal hospital, mortuary; personal service shop; spa; dance,
aerobic exercise, martial art studio, etc.; repair, storage and/or
painting of motorized vehicles or boats; welding shop; large
appliance repair; place of amusement; public storage facility; and
any use similar to the above.
(4) The use of noxious, combustible, corrosive, flammable, explosive,
radioactive or other materials that would endanger the health and
safety of the occupants and the surrounding residents is prohibited.
(5) No home occupation shall require trash and recyclables pickup in
excess of that required normally in single-family dwelling
residential areas. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(6) A home occupation shall employ no more than one person in
addition to the resident(s) of the dwelling unit.
(7) Renters shall provide written evidence of owner approval for a
home occupation with their application.
(8) All parking associated with the home occupation must be in the
driveway where the home occupation is located. No parking shall
be permitted in the street or yard. No shared parking is permitted
associated with any home occupation.
(9) The number of clients hosted by the home occupation shall not
exceed the rate of two per hour and shall occur only between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(10) Servicing by trucks with three axles or more shall be prohibited. All
servicing by trucks, such as UPS, or other vehicles shall occur only
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and
not exceed the rate of six per day.
(11) Not more than 25% of the total gross floor area of the main
dwelling unit may be used for a home occupation.
(12) Outside storage and/or outside display of goods is prohibited.
(13) The display and/or storage of goods within a dwelling unit in such a
manner as to be visible from the outside of the dwelling unit is
prohibited.
(14) The use shall not produce offensive noise, odors, vibrations, smoke,
fumes, heat, or dust detectable to normal sensory perception
§ 235-14 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-14
230:664
§ 235-15. Lot and bulk requirements for two-, three- and fourfamily
dwellings.
beyond the premises. No equipment or process shall be used in
a home occupation which creates visual or audible electrical
interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises or
which causes fluctuations in line voltage off premises.
(15) Owners of home occupations shall submit a completed home
occupation application form, with applicable fee, to the Director of
Community Development for approval.
(16) The owner of a home occupation may appeal the decision of the
Director of Community Development to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Renters must provide written approval of appeal from the
building owner.
(17) When a property containing a home occupation is sold, the home
occupation shall cease.
(18) Any home occupation that was lawful at the time of the effective
date of this section may be continued upon written affirmation from
the business owner that such home occupation shall have
continued in operation, does not constitute a nuisance, and shall
not be enlarged, altered, or changed in area, activity, or content
during its continuance, except as provided otherwise in this
section.
G. Private garages with a maximum area of 900 square feet having a
frontage of not more than 30 feet.
H. Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and structures
not operated for gain.
I. Swimming pools, subject to provisions of § 235-71.
J. (Reserved)122
K. (Reserved)123
L. (Reserved)124
M. Two-, three- and four-family dwellings subject to the provisions of
§ 235-15.
A. The minimum lot size for two-, three- and four-family dwellings shall be
as follows:
122. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding signs, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997.
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding storage of mobile homes, etc., was repealed
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding parking of trucks, was repealed 6-17-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-14 LITTERING § 235-15
230:665
§ 235-16. Site plan.
No permits shall be issued pursuant to the foregoing regulations of this
article until and unless a site development plan for such two-, three- and
four-family dwelling or dwellings shall be presented to and approved by the
Planning Board, which shall consider and determine that all requirements
of this chapter have been met and further they shall approve, with
modifications, or disapprove the site development plan in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 235-17. Additional restrictions. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
All requirements or restrictions listed in Article IV hereof for R-R, R-1, R-2
and R-3 Residential Districts shall apply in R-4 Residential Districts, except
as modified by this article.
(1) Width: at least 100 feet.
(2) Depth: at least 120 feet.
(3) Area: at least 12,000 square feet.
B. One dwelling is permitted per required lot.
C. The maximum height of buildings or structures shall be 30 feet.
D. Minimum dimensions for dwellings. A livable floor area at least 480
square feet per family unit with a total livable floor area of at least
1,320 square feet, and ground coverage (exclusive of garage) at least
660 square feet is required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, studio
apartments shall be permitted with a livable floor area of at least 360
square feet for each unit.
A. The conditions necessary to restrict, safeguard and protect property
values in the vicinity of the proposed site and protect the health, safety,
morals, peace and general welfare of the Town.
B. The effect of the proposed use on the ordinary development and
characteristics of the neighborhood and upon the development and
conduct of other lawful users in the vicinity.
C. Whether the proposal and its use will be in harmony with the character
of the neighborhood.
D. Whether the proposed use will create hazards and dangers to the
general public or to persons in the vicinity from the point of view of
traffic congestion, crowds, fire protection and parking automobiles.
§ 235-15 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-17
230:666
ARTICLE VI
R-5 Residential Districts
§ 235-18. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988;
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
In R-5 Residential Districts the following uses are permitted:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
C. Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by the
New York State Department of Education, public hospitals, public
libraries and municipal and special district buildings, provided that no
such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of any adjoining lot line.
D. Fire stations without club facilities.
E. Farms, greenhouses, plant nurseries and riding stables lawfully existing
on the effective date of this chapter, provided that:
(1) No new building or structure shall be constructed nor existing
buildings or structures enlarged, converted or moved in which
horses or other farm animals are kept, unless such building is at
least 100 feet from any lot line.
(2) No storage of manure or other odor- or dust-producing substance
shall be permitted within 100 feet of any lot line.
F. Home occupations. [Amended 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
(1) "Home occupation" is defined for the purpose of this section as any
activity carried out for gain by a resident of a dwelling unit which
results in the manufacture or sale or provision of goods and/or
services and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
premises as a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the
exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(2) Occupations included; where conducted.
(a) Home occupations shall include:
[1] General office, business, and professional services
(computer services, doctors, counselors, bookkeeping,
etc.)
[2] Studios/work spaces for handicraft production, fine arts,
cooking, etc.
[3] Direct sale product distribution (Avon, Tupperware, etc.)
§ 235-18 LITTERING § 235-18
230:667
[4] Individual instruction (music lessons, etc.)
(b) All home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the
main dwelling unit exclusive of any accessory structures.
(3) The following uses shall not be deemed a home occupation: retail
selling; firewood sales; stocking firearms sales; clinic; hospital;
funeral home; restaurant; motel, hotel, rooming house, kennels,
animal hospital, mortuary; personal service shop; spa; dance,
aerobic exercise, martial art studio, etc.; repair, storage and/or
painting of motorized vehicles or boats; welding shop; large
appliance repair; place of amusement; public storage facility; and
any use similar to the above.
(4) The use of noxious, combustible, corrosive, flammable, explosive,
radioactive or other materials that would endanger the health and
safety of the occupants and the surrounding residents is prohibited.
(5) No home occupation shall require trash and recyclables pickup in
excess of that required normally in single-family dwelling
residential areas. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(6) A home occupation shall employ no more than one person in
addition to the resident(s) of the dwelling unit.
(7) Renters shall provide written evidence of owner approval for a
home occupation with their application.
(8) All parking associated with the home occupation must be in the
driveway where the home occupation is located. No parking shall
be permitted in the street or yard. No shared parking is permitted
associated with any home occupation.
(9) The number of clients hosted by the home occupation shall not
exceed the rate of two per hour and shall occur only between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(10) Servicing by trucks with three axles or more shall be prohibited. All
servicing by trucks, such as UPS, or other vehicles shall occur only
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and
not exceed the rate of six per day.
(11) Not more than 25% of the total gross floor area of the main
dwelling unit may be used for a home occupation.
(12) Outside storage and/or outside display of goods is prohibited.
(13) The display and/or storage of goods within a dwelling unit in such a
manner as to be visible from the outside of the dwelling unit is
prohibited.
(14) The use shall not produce offensive noise, odors, vibrations, smoke,
fumes, heat, or dust detectable to normal sensory perception
§ 235-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-18
230:668
beyond the premises. No equipment or process shall be used in
a home occupation which creates visual or audible electrical
interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises or
which causes fluctuations in line voltage off premises.
(15) Owners of home occupations shall submit a completed home
occupation application form, with applicable fee, to the Director of
Community Development for approval.
(16) The owner of a home occupation may appeal the decision of the
Director of Community Development to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Renters must provide written approval of appeal from the
building owner.
(17) When a property containing a home occupation is sold, the home
occupation shall cease.
(18) Any home occupation that was lawful at the time of the effective
date of this section may be continued upon written affirmation from
the business owner that such home occupation shall have
continued in operation, does not constitute a nuisance, and shall
not be enlarged, altered, or changed in area, activity, or content
during its continuance, except as provided otherwise in this
section.
G. Private garages with a maximum area of 900 square feet having a
frontage of not more than 30 feet.
H. Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and structures
not operated for gain.
I. Swimming pools, subject to provisions of § 235-71.
J. (Reserved)125
K. (Reserved)126
L. (Reserved)127
M. Multiple dwellings subject to the provisions of § 235-19.
N. A dwelling group, i.e., two or more buildings, subject to limitations of
height, lot size, dwelling unit size, yard size as required in § 235-19.
O. Hospitals and nursing homes or institutions of a religious, charitable or
philanthropic organization, provided that they are not used primarily
for treatment of contagious diseases, mental patients, epileptics, drug
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding signs, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997.
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding storage of mobile homes, etc., was repealed
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding parking of trucks, was repealed 6-17-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-18 LITTERING § 235-18
230:669
§ 235-19. Lot and bulk requirements for multiple dwellings.
§ 235-20. Site plan.
No permits shall be issued for the uses set forth in § 235-18M and N above
until and unless a site plan of all proposals for multiple dwellings and
dwelling groups shall be presented to and approved by the Planning Board
in accordance with the considerations and determinations as set forth in
§ 235-16.128
§ 235-21. Additional restrictions.
All requirements or restrictions listed in Articles IV and V hereof for R-R,
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts shall apply in R-5 Residential
Districts, except as modified by this section.
or alcohol addicts or for penal correctional purposes. Such principal
shall be set back at least 50 feet from any lot line. [Added 4-24-2001
by L.L. No. 3-2001]
A. The required lot size and yards shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum dimensions of lots:
(a) Width: at least 100 feet.
(b) Depth: at least 120 feet.
(c) Area: at least 3,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit,
with a minimum of 15,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum dimensions of yards:
(a) Front and rear yards: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards, each: 25 feet or a distance equal to the height of
the building, whichever is greater.
B. The maximum height of buildings or structures shall be 30 feet.
C. Minimum dimensions of dwellings. The total livable floor area for a
dwelling unit shall be 480 square feet for a one-bedroom unit, plus 100
square feet for each additional bedroom.
D. Ground coverage shall be at least 900 square feet.
128. Editor's Note: Former § 130.33A5, which regulated hospitals in the R-5 District and
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
§ 235-18 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-21
230:670
ARTICLE VII
R-6 Residential Districts
[Amended 6-7-1978 by L.L. No. 7-1978; 10-4-1979 by L.L. No.
7-1979]
§ 235-22. Permitted uses.
A. The uses which follow shall be permitted in R-6 Residential Districts
provided that such use is conducted entirely within a structure, the
external appearance of which structure or the external appearance of
any new structure shall remain essentially a residential-type dwelling.
All uses within this section shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Board, which has final site plan review and approval pursuant to Article
XV of this chapter.
B. In determining whether or not the appearance of a structure is
essentially a residential-type dwelling, the Planning Board shall take
into consideration whether or not the proposed use and structure shall
be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and with the
other dwelling houses in the neighborhood. It shall also take into
consideration whether or not such proposed use, as conducted in the
structure, will protect the property values in the vicinity; whether or not
such proposed use, as conducted in the structure, shall be in
furtherance of the health, safety and general welfare of the Town; and
whether or not such proposed use, as conducted in the structure, will
create hazards and damage to the general public by reason of traffic
conditions, crowds and parking of automobiles.
C. Uses permitted are as follows:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
(3) Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by
the New York State Department of Education, public hospitals,
public libraries and municipal and special district buildings,
provided that no such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of
any adjoining lot line.
(4) Fire stations without club facilities.
(5) Professional offices for attorneys, physicians, physical therapy,
physician's associates and specialists' assistants, chiropractic,
dentistry and dental hygiene, veterinary medicine, nursing,
podiatry, optometry, ophthalmic dispensing, engineering and land
surveying architecture, landscape architecture, licensed
accountants, shorthand reporting, psychology, speech pathologists
and audiologists and occupational therapy.
(6) Real estate and/or insurance offices.
§ 235-22 LITTERING § 235-22
230:671
§ 235-23. (Reserved)129
§ 235-24. Outdoor storage restrictions.
§ 235-25. Lot and bulk requirements.
Lot and bulk requirements for R-6 Districts shall be as follows:
(7) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(8) Funeral homes.
(9) Employment and travel agencies.
(10) The following uses, provided that they are not used primarily for
treatment of contagious diseases, mental patients, epileptics, drug
or alcohol addicts or for penal or correctional purposes:
(a) Nursing or convalescent homes.
(b) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(11) Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and
structures not operated for gain.
(12) Private garages with a maximum area of 900 square feet and with a
frontage of not more than 30 feet. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
(13) Swimming pools, subject to § 235-71.
A. Storage and parking of mobile homes, house trailers, camping trailers,
truck campers, utility trailers, boats and boat trailers shall be permitted
only on that portion of a lot behind the rear foundation of the main
building on such lot and within the rear and side setbacks for such lots,
except where not found to have an adverse effect on or to be a
detriment or nuisance to the surrounding neighborhoods. The Town
Building Inspector will be responsible for making this determination
based on the number and nature of the complaints received.130
A. Required lot size:
(1) Width: minimum 80 feet.
(2) Depth: minimum 120 feet.
(3) Area: minimum 9,600 square feet.
B. Required open space:
129. Editor's Note: Former § 235-23, Signs, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the parking of trucks, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-22 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-25
230:672
§ 235-26. Parking spaces.
Parking spaces shall be one space for every 200 square feet of total floor
area designated for the specified business purpose or use. Total floor area
shall be measured from inside wall to inside wall.
(1) Front yards: minimum 30 feet.
(2) Rear yards: minimum 30 feet.
(3) Side yards: 10% of the width of the lot.
C. Maximum height of buildings: 30 feet.
D. Minimum dimensions of buildings (ground coverage, first floor): not
less than 900 square feet.
E. The area of the principal and accessory building on any lot measured
horizontally: not to exceed 25% of the area of such lot.
§ 235-25 LITTERING § 235-26
230:673

ARTICLE VIII
C Business District
§ 235-27. Permitted uses; site plan.
A. In C Business Districts, the following uses are permitted: [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(1) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
(2) Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by
the New York State Department of Education, public hospitals,
public libraries and municipal and special district buildings,
provided that no such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of
any adjoining lot line.
(3) Fire stations without club facilities.
(4) Professional offices for attorneys, physicians, physical therapy,
physician's associates and specialists' assistants, chiropractic,
dentistry and dental hygiene, veterinary medicine, nursing,
podiatry, optometry, ophthalmic dispensing, engineering and land
surveying architecture, landscape architecture, licensed
accountants, shorthand reporting, psychology, speech pathologists
and audiologists and occupational therapy.
(5) Real estate and/or insurance offices.
(6) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Employment and travel agencies.
(9) The following uses, provided that they are not used primarily for
treatment of contagious diseases, mental patients, epileptics, drug
or alcohol addicts or for penal or correctional purposes:
(a) Nursing or convalescent homes.
(b) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(10) Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and
structures not operated for gain.
(11) The following uses when conducted entirely within an enclosed
building:
(a) Retail stores and shops.
(b) Personal service shops (dry-cleaning or laundry stores for pick
up purposes only).
§ 235-27 LITTERING § 235-27
230:675
(c) Banks, business and professional offices not otherwise
permitted in R-6 Residential Districts. Drive-in banks shall be
permitted, provided that at least five car-length spaces are
provided in the approach drive within the property line of the
lot for each drive-in teller's window. Such spaces shall be
exclusive of required parking spaces.
(d) Baking, confectionery, dressmaking, tailoring shops, provided
that all goods or products manufactured or processed shall be
sold at retail on the premises and not more than 10 persons
shall be employed at one time. [Amended 6-17-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997]
(e) Appliance and electrical stores or printing shops.
(f) Mini-storage/self-storage facilities. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997]
(12) Restaurants or eating establishments, take-out food businesses and
drive-in hamburger, ice cream, food or beverage stands with
seating for 30 patrons or less. [Added 10-6-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
B. No permits shall be issued for the foregoing uses until and unless a site
plan of all proposals for the uses permitted shall be presented to and
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the considerations
and determinations as set forth in § 235-16 and Article XV.
C. Any of the uses permitted in Subsection A of this section that require
the use of an area other than within an enclosed building for their best
utilization may be conducted in whole or in part outside of such
building, provided that the consent of the Board of Appeals is first
obtained. The Board of Appeals may grant such consent after a public
hearing is held thereon if it appears, in the judgment of the Board of
Appeals, that the public convenience and welfare will be substantially
served and the appropriate use of neighboring property will not be
injured thereby. In granting such consent, the Board of Appeals may
impose such conditions and safeguards as shall be necessary to attain
the standards expressed in the preceding sentence. [Amended
10-6-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(1) Outdoor seating for restaurants and eating establishments shall be
permitted without Board of Appeals consent for up to 20 seats,
provided that:
(a) Approval of the outdoor seating is obtained from the Director
of Development Services upon review of setback requirements,
life and fire safety requirements and clearances for ingress and
egress.
(b) It is determined by the Director of Development Services that
public convenience and welfare will be substantially served
§ 235-27 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-27
230:676
§ 235-28. Special use permits.
and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be
injured thereby.
(c) No additional structures are needed to accommodate the
outdoor seating.
(d) There is no outdoor entertainment (live or reproduced).
A. The following uses shall be subject to the approval of the Town Board
before a building permit may be issued:
(1) Public garages, including car washes.
(2) Gasoline service stations.
(3) Pool or billiard rooms.
(4) Bowling alleys, theaters and places of public assemblage.
(5) Dry-cleaning establishments, laundries or laundromats.
(6) Outdoor advertising display signs.
(7) Cemeteries.
(8) Restaurants or eating establishments, drinking establishments
(grills, bars, etc.) with seating provided for more than 30 patrons,
and outdoor entertainment provided in relation to such uses.
[Amended 10-6-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(9) Hotels, motels, motor courts, dairies, ice cream manufacturers and
commercial parking areas.
(10) A combination of two or more of the uses permitted in this section
on the same of contiguous lots, including but not limited to the
development and use commonly known as a "shopping center or
plaza," with an area threshold of 10,000 square feet of gross
leasable area. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; amended
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(11) Parking lots for monetary gain.
(12) Amusement centers where machines are used for monetary gain.
(13) Animal hospitals.
(14) Used car sales lots. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(15) Car washes. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(16) Miniature golf courses. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(17) Batting cages. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-27 LITTERING § 235-28
230:677
§ 235-29. (Reserved)131
§ 235-30. Lot and bulk requirements.
The required lot size, yards and building height for structures in the C
Business Districts shall be as follows:
(18) Simulated golf facilities and other such uses. [Added 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
(19) Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses,
subject to the lot and bulk requirements of § 235-19A(1)(c) of the
Zoning Code of the Town of Irondequoit. [Added 5-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
B. The procedure for obtaining a special use permit from the Town Board
shall be the same as for a special use permit from the Board of Appeals
as provided in § 235-101D.
A. Minimum dimensions for lots.
(1) Width: not less than 100 feet.
(2) Depth: not less than 200 feet.
(3) Area: not less than 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum dimensions for yards.
(1) Side yard: five feet, except that where a side lot line abuts a
residential district, no building shall be nearer to such lot line than
25 feet or a distance equal to the height of building, whichever is
greater.
(2) Rear yard: 60 feet, except that where a rear lot line abuts a
residential district, no building shall be nearer to such lot line than
a distance equal to the height of the building or 60 feet, whichever
is greater.
(3) Front yard: 80 feet, except in the event that existing buildings
within 200 feet on either side thereof extend nearer than 80 feet to
a street line, such minimum front yard depth shall be the average
setback of such existing buildings, but in no case less than 60 feet
from a street line.
(4) Corner lot: in the case of a corner lot, no building shall extend
nearer than 50 feet to the side street line.
C. Maximum height of building: 45 feet.
131. Editor's Note: Former § 235-29, Accessory business signs, as amended, was repealed
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-28 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-30
230:678
D. Percentage of lot occupancy the area of the buildings on any lot
measured horizontally: not to exceed 33 1/3% of the area of such lot.
E. Maximum impervious area ratio shall not exceed 80% of the total of any
lot measured horizontally. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-30 LITTERING § 235-30
230:679

ARTICLE VIIIA
Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning District
[Added 11-18-2004 by L.L. No. 13-2004]
§ 235-30.1. General.
§ 235-30.2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGN GUIDELINES — The Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning
District design guidelines for each specific district shall serve as a guide
to the interpretation of this article and in assisting in the preparation
and review of detailed plans for development in the Zoning District.
Conformance to the design guidelines will be subject to review by the
Planning Board.
REGULATORY PLAN — A plan map labeled "Irondequoit Town Center
Regulatory Plan" that illustrates the concept of this Mixed Use Commercial
(MUC) Zoning District and depicts street and parking layouts and building
setback dimensions.
§ 235-30.3. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC)
Zoning District:
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning
District is to create a traditional mixed-use area that can serve as a
gathering place, scaled to the pedestrian.
B. Goals. The goals of this article are:
(1) To create an aesthetically pleasing public realm of streets and
sidewalks framed by building facades, decorative and enlarged
sidewalks, architectural street lighting and signage, enhanced by
trees, plazas, parks, natural and recreational areas, and other
public amenities.
(2) To make available sites for civic uses and small-scale public events.
(3) To make the zoning district an area that is appealing to pedestrians
and bicyclists and built on a scale that is conducive to pedestrian
activity.
(4) To create a distinctive identity and sense of place.
A. Retail and personal service establishments.
B. Banks, offices and agencies.
C. Restaurants and food service establishments.
§ 235-30.1 LITTERING § 235-30.3
230:681
§ 235-30.4. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in the Mixed Use
Commercial (MUC) Zoning District:
§ 235-30.5. Special permit uses.
D. Churches.
E. Libraries.
F. Apartments, multifamily residential and senior living facilities.
A. Any use in which goods or services are exclusively dispensed through a
drive-up window or automated dispensing device.
B. One- or two-family detached dwelling units.
C. Adult entertainment establishments.
D. Any use involving a building with the gross floor area (GFA) exceeding
8,000 square feet, or up to 15,000 square feet with bonuses. (See Civic
space and public improvement incentives and preexisting
nonconforming structures and uses below.)132
E. Any use which does not comply with § 235-39, Limitations on uses,
which addresses hazardous materials and pollutants.
F. Any use involving the continuous use or outdoor storage of construction
equipment.
G. Funeral homes.
H. Mini storage facilities, contractor storage yards and landscaping and
nursery uses.
I. Commercial outdoor swimming pools.
J. Laboratories.
K. Animal hospitals, dog kennels and stables.
L. Car washes.
M. Automobile, boat, recreational vehicle and motorcycle sales, service,
repair, storage and impounding facilities.
N. Motels.
A. The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a special use
permit by the Town Board pursuant to the special use permit
requirements set forth in §§ 235-28 and 235-30.5B below and upon a
132. Editor's Note: § 235-30.9 and § 235-30.10, respectively.
§ 235-30.3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-30.5
230:682
§ 235-30.6. Dimensional standards.
The following dimensional standards shall apply in the Mixed Used
Commercial (MUC) Zoning District:
§ 235-30.7. Parking requirements.
determination that such use would be consistent with the purpose and
goals of the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning District:
(1) Gasoline filling stations (used for the sale and direct delivery of
gasoline and/or other motor vehicle fuel and/or lubricating
substances).
(2) Telecommunications towers shall be concealed within the primary
building structure and shall be designed to conceal the presence of
said communications towers.
(3) Drive-up windows.
B. Requirements.
(1) Gasoline pumps, canopies and drive-up windows shall not face the
principal street.
(2) All principal buildings, not accessory structures, are to meet the
required front setbacks as specified in this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area: none.
B. Minimum lot width: 24 feet.
C. Maximum front setback: to be determined by the Planning Board but
not to exceed the average setback of the adjoining structures.
D. Rear setback: zero feet, or 10 feet when the lot abuts any residentially
zoned district.
E. Side setback: zero feet, or 10 feet when the lot abuts any residentially
zoned district.
F. Maximum building area: 8,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA)
without bonuses, up to a maximum of 15,000 square feet with bonuses.
(See Civic space and public improvement incentives and preexisting
nonconforming structures and uses below.)
G. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
H. Minimum frontage build-out: 70%. (Defined as the percentage of the lot
frontage occupied by a building's front facade.)
I. Maximum impervious surface coverage per lot: 75% without bonuses,
95% with bonuses. (See Civic space and public improvement incentives
and preexisting nonconforming structures and uses below.)
§ 235-30.5 LITTERING § 235-30.7
230:683
A. Residential uses, multiple dwellings or apartments: A minimum of oneand-
one-half spaces per dwelling unit. These requirements may be
reduced for dwelling units with less than 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area (GFA), senior citizen housing, mixed-use developments, or
under other appropriate circumstances, if the Planning Board
determines that such reductions are warranted and would help to
advance the district's purpose and goals.
B. Nonresidential uses: The minimum off-street parking requirement for
all permitted nonresidential uses shall be three spaced per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area (GFA) but no less than two per thousand
square feet of gross floor area (GFA) with bonuses.
C. Common or public parking: Parking for uses in the Mixed Use
Commercial (MUC) Zoning District shall, to the extent feasible, be
provided in parking lots open to the public or in common with other
property owners, rather than on individual lots restricted to customers
or clients of each use.
(1) Where such parking is made available to the public or in common
with other property owners, the minimum parking requirement
may be reduced by 33 1/3% by the Planning Board when consistent
with the district's purpose and goals. (See Civic space and public
improvement incentives below.133)
(2) The term "in common with other property owners" as used here is
defined as being subject to entering into mutual, recordable crossparking
casement and its review and acceptance by the Town.
D. Fee in lieu of providing required parking spaces.
(1) Where the required parking spaces cannot be made available on
the site and/or in public or private shared parking lots, in a manner
that satisfies the requirements of this section, the applicant shall
pay a fee in lieu of some or all of the parking deficiency.
(2) The Town Board shall establish an amount sufficient to cover the
estimated cost of providing and maintaining additional public
parking spaces in the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning
District. Such fee shall be kept in a dedicated fund for municipal
parking purposes in the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Zoning
District and shall be used only for such purposes.
E. Location of parking. Parking requirements may be satisfied by the use
of shared parking by different uses on the same site, off-site public or
private parking, and payment of a fee in lieu of providing parking, or a
combination of these options.
F. Cross access. Vehicular cross-access between lots may be required by
the Planning Board when feasible. The exact location and the extent of
133. Editor's Note: § 235-30.9.
§ 235-30.7 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-30.7
230:684
§ 235-30.8. Mixed use and parking incentives.
Based on the extent of the public benefit derived, the following incentives
may be provided by the Planning Board to the applicants who satisfy the
following requirements:
§ 235-30.9. Civic space and public improvement incentives.
The following additional incentives may be provided to applicants who
satisfy the following requirements:
cross-access between lots shall be subject to review and approval by
the Planning Board.
A. Mixed use. Where a building contains both residential and
nonresidential uses at least 25% of the gross floor area (GFA) of the
building must be devoted to each type of use, however, in no event the
cumulative incentives would reduce the minimum off-street parking
requirements to less than two spaces per thousand square feet of gross
floor area (GFA) and a maximum impervious ratio of 95% of the lot area.
(1) One additional story of height, not to exceed the maximum building
height, or 35 feet;
(2) Up to a 10% increase in the otherwise permitted gross floor area
(GFA);
(3) Up to a 33 1/3% reduction in the total parking requirement; or
(4) Any combination of the above.
B. Parking. When land used for parking on a lot is conveyed to the Town
for public parking, permanently posted as being available for public
use, or a cross-access easement is provided to the Town, the following
incentives may be provided:
(1) One additional story of height, not to exceed the maximum building
height of 35 feet and maximum gross floor area (GFA) of 15,000
square feet;
(2) Up to a 33 1/3% reduction in the parking requirement, but not less
than two parking spaces per thousand square feet of gross floor
area (GFA) or
(3) Up to a 10% increase in the otherwise permitted total floor area; or
(4) Any combination of the above.
A. Civic space. Upon approval of the plan and acceptance by the Town
Board, for every 1,000 square feet of land dedicated to public use for
pedestrian plazas, squares, greens, works of art, parks, playgrounds,
trails, or other such public amenity as shown on the Regulatory Plan,
100 square feet of additional gross floor area (GFA).
§ 235-30.7 LITTERING § 235-30.9
230:685
§ 235-30.10. (Reserved)134
§ 235-30.11. Preapplication review requirements.
All development/redevelopment within the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC)
Zoning District shall be subject to a preapplication review by the Planning
Board to determine the applicable incentives and parking fee and shall
include:
B. Public improvements. If an applicant agrees to install off-site public
improvements approved and accepted by the Town Board, for every
$5,000 spent on such public improvements, 100 square feet of
additional gross floor area (GFA) shall be permitted.
A. Direct pedestrian connections to the public sidewalks from the front or
side building entrance(s).
B. Direct pedestrian access to adjacent properties with pedestrian
walkways wherever possible.
C. Pedestrian walkways from buildings to parking areas, with extension of
such walkways through the parking areas to adjacent streets and
buildings.
D. A direct nexus between the plan submitted and the zoning district
design guidelines.
134. Editor's Note: Former § 235-30.10, Preexisting nonconforming structures and uses, was
repealed 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007.
§ 235-30.9 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-30.11
230:686
ARTICLE IX
Waterfront Development (WD) District
[Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-31. Purpose; goals.
A. The Waterfront Development (WD) District is designed to provide a
suitable character and stable environment for the establishment and
maintenance of water-dependent and/or water-enhanced uses and
activities along the shorelines of Lake Ontario and Irondequoit Bay. The
district is also designed to protect the unique and sensitive
environmental features that exist along the lake and bay shorelines and
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The district is
also designed to promote and encourage public access to the shoreline
appropriate water-oriented recreational uses within the shore zone and
other appropriate water-oriented development within the shore zone.
B. The Waterfront Development (WD) District permits low- to moderatedensity
residential development, as well as certain commercial,
recreational and open space uses that serve the residents of and
visitors to this district, as well as of the Town and that generally benefit
from and enhance the unique aesthetic and environmental qualities of
the Town's waterfront areas. The purpose of this district includes the
following specified goals:
(1) To ensure that development and land-use activity along the
shorelines of Lake Ontario and Irondequoit Bay is consistent with
the policies and objectives of the Town of Irondequoit's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP).
(2) To provide sufficient space in appropriate waterfront locations for
residential development, recreational activities, certain
commercial activities and other water-dependent and/or waterenhanced
uses, in order to meet the various housing and
recreational needs of the Town of Irondequoit's present and future
populations.
(3) To recognize the sensitivity of waterfront areas as unique
environmental and recreational resources and to protect these
areas from environmentally destructive uses and activities.
(4) To provide for a desirable mix of water-oriented commercial uses
and active and passive recreational opportunities that take
advantage of the unique locations and characteristics of the Town's
waterfront areas.
(5) To encourage development that is appropriately designed and in
harmony with its environment and that does not conflict with the
preservation of the natural beauty of the Town's waterfront areas.
§ 235-31 LITTERING § 235-31
230:687
§ 235-32. Permitted uses.
No structure shall be erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved,
and no structure, land or premises shall be used in any district designated
on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Irondequoit as a Waterfront
(6) To promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
direction of building development based upon land and soil types
and other natural features, environmental constraints,
neighborhood characteristics and overall community needs; to
protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings and to
protect the Town's tax revenue base.
(7) To permit development in areas which, by virtue of their location,
topography, accessibility, relationship to surrounding land uses,
zoning patterns and natural utilities, are best suited for a particular
purpose and to preserve areas that are naturally unsuited for
development or that have unique historical, aesthetic or
environmental significance.
(8) To encourage a flexibility of design, preservation of unique
environmental features and maintenance of the aesthetic quality of
waterfront areas by permitting the Town Planning Board to
establish minimum dimensional requirements for permitted
principal uses and to review other pertinent design aspects of such
proposed projects.
(9) To preserve, wherever feasible, the existing vegetation and natural
features of waterfront areas and to prevent, as much as possible,
significant problems of erosion, sedimentation and drainage both
during and after construction.
(10) To encourage and facilitate water-dependent and water-enhanced
recreational development within the shore zone as permitted
principle uses or as accessory uses where compatible with the
primary purpose of the proposed development.
(11) To protect waterfront areas as much as possible against excessive
volumes of vehicular traffic flow and safety problems related to
such vehicular traffic flow.
(12) To protect waterfront areas against congestion as much as possible
by regulating the density of population and intensity of land use
and by requiring the provision of open areas for rest and recreation
wherever practicable.
(13) To promote the maintenance and/or extension of public access to
the shore zone where practical and feasible and where such access
relates to and is compatible with the primary purpose of the
proposed development or activity.
§ 235-31 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-32
230:688
Development (WD) District, except for the following principal and
customarily incidental accessory uses:
A. Principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
(2) Public parks, playgrounds or similar public recreational uses
authorized or operated by a public agency and not operated for
gain, subject to site plan review and approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(3) Buildings or structures erected or used in connection with, but not
directly associated with, a governmental function, agency or
activity and not operated for gain, including, but not limited to,
such things as a community bandstand, Town volunteer Fire
Department and recreational facilities, historic sites, etc., subject
to site plan review and approval issued by the Town Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(4) Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses,
subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town Planning
Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this
chapter.
(5) Townhouses, row houses, and other similar uses, subject to special
use permit approval issued by the Town Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV135 of this chapter.
[Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(6) Commercial parks, playgrounds or beaches, amusement parks, golf
courses, tennis/racquetball clubs or other similar uses operated for
gain, subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(7) Private clubs or camps, private membership clubs, lodges or
fraternal organizations, neighborhood or community centers,
YMCA or YWCA or other similar uses, subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(8) Sit-down restaurants, subject to special use permit approval issued
by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: For special use permits, see Art. XVI of this chapter.
§ 235-32 LITTERING § 235-32
230:689
(9) Motels, hotels or boatels subject to special use permit approval
issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(10) Yacht clubs or other similar uses subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(11) Marinas, boat docks, docking basins, boat launching ramps,
including related retail sales of pleasure boats, marine and fishing
supplies, and other similar uses, subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(12) Boat building and boat construction facilities, boat service, repair,
rental and storage facilities or other similar uses, subject to special
use permit approval issued by the Town Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(13) Stores, shops and boutiques designated for festive retail uses and
activities, subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(14) Public utility buildings or structures, including, but not limited to,
electrical substations, subject to special use permit approval issued
by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter.
(15) Combinations of permitted principal uses based on a determination
by the Town Planning Board that such combinations are
appropriate for the proposed waterfront area and are compatible
with the purpose and intent of this district as well as the goals and
policies of the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP),
subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town Planning
Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this
chapter.
B. Principle use restrictions and/or additional requirements. All principle
uses permitted within a Waterfront Development (WD) District shall be
subject to the following restrictions and/or additional requirements:
(1) Any of the uses permitted in this section that require the use of an
area other than within an enclosed building may be conducted in
whole or in part outside of such building or absent such building,
subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town Planning
Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this
chapter.
(2) Floating piers or piers on piling shall be used to provide access to
boats, rather than dredging, whenever possible.
§ 235-32 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-32
230:690
(3) Where a barrier wall is required in connection with a marina or
boat basin, it shall be carried deep enough below the bottom of the
bay or lake to prevent movement of backfill materials into the
water.
C. Accessory uses (located on the same lot with a permitted principal use):
(1) Home occupations subject to the applicable provisions of Article IV
of this chapter.
(2) Private garages and carports subject to the applicable provisions of
Article IV of this chapter.
(3) Swimming pools subject to the provisions of § 235-71 of this
chapter.
(4) Fencing subject to the provisions of § 235-69 of this chapter.
(5) Sheds, cabanas or similar accessory structures subject to those
dimensional and setback requirements applicable to private
garages and carports as noted above.
(6) Radio, TV or CB antennas subject to the provisions of § 235-72 of
this chapter. Those structures that require a permit from the Town
Zoning Board of Appeals shall also be subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board, in accordance with
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(7) (Reserved)136
(8) Parking of trucks, vans and other similar vehicles, subject to the
applicable provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(9) Storage of mobile homes, motor homes, house trailers, campers,
camping trailers, truck campers, utility campers, boats and boat
trailers, subject to the applicable provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
(10) The keeping of animals and poultry, subject to the provisions of
§ 235-70 of this chapter.
(11) Tennis courts and other similar outdoor recreational facilities as
determined by the Town Building Inspector, provided that such
uses are clearly incidental to the primary residential or principal
use on the property, and provided that such uses are located at
least four feet from any lot line.
(12) Dumpsters and other similar outdoor refuse containers or
enclosures, provided that such uses are located at least four feet
from any lot line and subject to site plan review and approval
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7), regarding signage, as amended 2-4-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 235-32 LITTERING § 235-32
230:691
issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(13) Outdoor storage of boats, subject to special use permit approval
issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(14)Waterfront structures and facilities.
(a) Fishing piers, docks, wharves, boat launching ramps and
similar waterfront structures and facilities, when such uses are
clearly accessory or incidental to the primary, principal use on
the property, subject to all applicable state regulations and
approvals and subject to special use permit approval issued by
the Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter. Similar waterfront structures and
facilities shall include:
[1] Facilities for the pumping out of marine holding tanks;
[2] Facilities for waste oil collection;
[3] Facilities for the sale and dispensing of fuel and lubricants
for boats and boatyard equipment;
[4] Facilities for the storage of fuel; and
[5] Facilities for the sale of food and beverages for offpremises
consumption and the sale of fishing and boating
supplies.
(b) Such facilities and structures shall be limited to the Waterfront
Development District and shall be prohibited within any
residential district. Such facilities and structures shall also be
clearly incidental to the primary or principal use on the
property.
(c) The following additional requirements shall apply to all such
structures and facilities:
[1] The construction of such structures and facilities shall be
undertaken in such a way so as not to impair water quality,
cause harm to fish spawning grounds, destroy the natural
beauty of the shoreline, reduce the stability of steep slope
areas, cause erosion or sedimentation problems along the
shoreline, create hazards for navigation, interfere with the
public use and enjoyment of the water surface or shoreline
or otherwise threaten the public health and safety.
[2] Design standards for piers, docks and wharves shall be
determined based on the information contained in Table 2
at the end of this section.
§ 235-32 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-32
230:692
[3] Such structures and facilities shall only be constructed of
materials which are stable, chemically inert and insoluble
and which will have no adverse effects on water quality.
Such materials shall also be Coast Guard approved.
[4] The amount of grading, dredging, earthmoving and
disturbance of land above and below water during the
construction of such structures and facilities shall be
minimized as much as possible and shall be consistent with
the permit requirements of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
[5] To permit the free circulation of water, reduce the effects
of fluctuating water levels and prevent adverse
modifications of the shoreline, piers, docks and wharves
shall be of floating construction wherever feasible and
shall not be of rock-filled cribbing, sheet piling, closely
spaced piling or such other construction which would
significantly impair water circulation.
[6] There shall be no superstructure permitted above the
decks of piers, docks or wharves except those structures
that are accessory to marinas.
[7] No pier, dock or wharf shall be constructed in a
configuration other than straight or T-, L-, U- or F-shaped.
[8] No pier, dock or wharf shall be constructed so as to extend
offshore for more than 50 feet from the mean low-water
line, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that additional
length is necessary in order to reach adequate water depth
for proposed boat docking.
[9] The width of any pier, dock or wharf shall not exceed eight
feet.
[10] The maximum surface area of any pier, dock or wharf shall
not exceed 700 square feet.
[11] The number of private piers, docks or wharves permitted
per each waterfront lot used for single-family residential
purposes shall not exceed the following:
[a] One hundred feet or less of water frontage: a total of
one such structure.
[b] One-hundred one to two hundred fifty (101 to 250)
feet of water frontage: a total of two such structures.
[c] Two hundred fifty-one to five hundred (251 to 500)
feet of water frontage: a total of three such structures.
§ 235-32 LITTERING § 235-32
230:693
[d] Each 150 feet of water frontage in excess of 500 feet:
one additional structure shall be allowed.
[12] The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per each
waterfront lot used for multifamily, townhouse or
condominium purposes shall not exceed one such
structure per residential unit built.
[13] The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per each
waterfront lot used for commercial purposes shall not
exceed three such structures per lot. The construction of
more than three such structures per commercially used lot
shall be subject to a determination by the Town Planning
Board that such additional structures are needed to
accommodate anticipated boat traffic and can be
developed on the site without adversely affecting existing
environmental conditions or natural features.
[14] Every pier, dock or wharf that is constructed shall have a
minimum clearance or setback of 10 feet from adjacent
property lines, as extended at a ninety-degree angle from
the shoreline, to allow adequate vessel access to
neighboring waterfront parcels. [Amended 4-21-1988 by
L.L. No. 4-1988]
[15] Piers, docks or wharves that are 100 feet or longer shall,
during the hours of darkness, be required to be lighted in
such a manner so as to not constitute a hazard to
navigation.
[16] Lighting of the surface of any pier, dock or wharf shall be
provided in such a manner so as not to produce any
offensive glare when viewed from the water or the land.
The use of lowmast lighting fixtures and deflector shields
to direct the light downward shall be required to reduce or
eliminate glare.
(15) Mooring buoys or facilities, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) Mooring buoys shall only be placed in connection with littoral
parcels. On such parcels, such buoys shall be placed only
within an area parallel to and 20 feet inward of the parcel lines
extended bayward at right angles from the shoreline and to a
depth necessary for the safe mooring of a boat, not to exceed
100 feet from the shoreline.
(b) Moorings shall be placed so that objects moored to them, at
full swing of their mooring or anchor line, will be no closer than
10 feet to the projection of this adjacent property lines from
the shoreline and no more than 100 feet from the shoreline
itself.
§ 235-32 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-32
230:694
§ 235-33. Lot and bulk requirements.
(c) The number of private moorings permitted per each waterfront
lot used for single-family residential purposes shall not exceed
the following:
[1] One hundred feet or less of water frontage: a total of one
such mooring.
[2] One-hundred one to two hundred fifty (101 to 250) feet of
water frontage: a total of two such moorings.
[3] Two hundred fifty-one to five hundred (251 to 500) feet of
water frontage: a total of three such moorings.
[4] Each 150 feet of water frontage in excess of 500 feet: one
additional mooring shall be allowed.
(d) A maximum of four moorings shall be permitted per
commercially used lot, provided that such lot has less than 500
feet of shoreline frontage. A maximum of one mooring per 100
feet of shoreline frontage shall be permitted per commercially
used lot if such lot has more than 500 feet of shoreline
frontage.
(16) Accessory dredging and filling, when clearly incidental to the
principle use permitted on the parcel, subject to all applicable state
regulations and approvals and subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
A. Required minimum lot size.
(1) No new principal building or structure to be used as a single-family
dwelling shall hereafter be erected on any lot in any Waterfront
Development (WD) District unless such lot shall have a minimum
area of 20,000 square feet. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
(2) No new principal building or structure to be used as a multifamily
dwelling, apartment building or other similar use shall hereafter be
erected on any lot in any Waterfront Development (WD) District
unless such lot shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(3) No new principal building or structure to be used as a townhouse,
row house or other similar use shall hereafter be erected on any lot
in any Waterfront Development (WD) District unless such lot shall
have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
[Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(4) The required minimum lot sized for all other principal uses
permitted in the Waterfront Development (WD) District shall be
§ 235-32 LITTERING § 235-33
230:695
established by the Town Planning Board during the site plan review
and approval process or the special use permit approval process.
The required minimum lot size shall be based on the amount of land
area necessary to adequately accommodate the proposed principal
use, as well as all parking, loading, landscaping, open space,
setback and access areas and fire lanes for such use. The required
minimum lot size shall also be based on the relative intensity of the
proposed land use and the need to protect or buffer the proposed
land use from sensitive environmental areas, significant historic or
archaeological areas or scenic views or vistas.
B. Required minimum building setbacks (required front, side and rear
yards).
(1) In order to establish suitable front, side and rear yards, principal
buildings and accessory structures for single-family dwellings
hereafter erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved in
any Waterfront Development (WD) District shall be subject to the
applicable setback provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
Notwithstanding this requirement, the Town Planning Board, in
accordance with the provisions of § 278 of New York State Town
Law, as amended or changed, shall be empowered to modify the
setback requirements and other applicable provisions of this
chapter with respect to the approval of a plat or plats. The purpose
of this authorization is to enable and encourage a flexibility of
design and development of land in such a manner so as to promote
the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the adequate and
economical provisions of streets and utilities, to encourage and
maintain adequate public access to the shoreline and to preserve
and protect the natural and scenic qualities of the Town's open
lands and shore zone.
(2) Setbacks of buildings and structures from all other buildings and
structures on the lot and from property lines for all other permitted
principal and accessory uses and not already identified in this
section shall be determined by the Town Planning Board during the
site plan review and approval process or the special use permit
process and shall be based on the following guidelines:
(a) Principal buildings, parking areas and accessory structures,
excluding such facilities as docks, piers, wharves and boat
ramps, should be set back a minimum of 25 feet inlaid from the
high water's edge, in order to maintain adequate access to the
shore zone.
(b) Principal buildings, parking areas and accessory structures
should be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any road right-ofway
and a minimum of 15 feet from any property line.
(c) Principal building and accessory structure setbacks should be
established with due consideration to provisions for fire
§ 235-33 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-33
230:696
protection services and adequate access for fire and
emergency equipment within and around the site.
(d) Principal building and accessory structure setbacks should be
established with due consideration to the protection and
preservation of unique and sensitive environmental features,
maintenance of the generally wooded character of the shore
zone area, scenic views and vistas, the specific goals
established for this district and the use of clustering as a site
design technique.
C. Maximum building heights.
(1) Maximum building heights for single-family dwellings shall not
exceed 25 feet as measured from ground level to the ceiling of the
second floor. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(2) Maximum building heights for multifamily dwellings, apartment
buildings or other similar uses shall be determined by the Town
Planning Board during the special use permit review and approval
process and shall be based on a visual analysis of the site prepared
and submitted by the applicant as a part of that review. The Town
Planning Board shall be empowered to establish maximum
principal building heights and locations in order to preserve the
aesthetic integrity of waterfront areas and protect any scenic views
or vistas identified in the visual analysis.
(3) Maximum building heights for townhouses, row houses or other
similar uses shall not exceed 35 feet. [Amended 3-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 2-2015]
(4) Maximum building heights for all other permitted principal uses
specified in this section shall not exceed 45 feet, except where it
has been determined by the Town Planning Board during the
special use permit review and approval process that, based on a
visual analysis of the site prepared and submitted by the applicant
and reviewed by the Board, such building heights would interfere
with identified scenic views or vistas or destroy the aesthetic
integrity of the waterfront area. In such cases, the Town Planning
Board shall be empowered to establish maximum principal building
heights in order to protect the scenic views and vistas and the
aesthetic character of waterfront areas in general.
(5) Accessory structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet
unless otherwise specified or regulated in this chapter.
D. Maximum density/maximum percentage of lot occupancy.
(1) The total overall ground coverage of all principal and accessory
buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces on any lot
in any Waterfront Development (WD) District shall not exceed 75%
§ 235-33 LITTERING § 235-33
230:697
§ 235-34. Off-street parking and loading.
of the total lot area. The remainder of the lot shall be for open
space and/or landscaped areas.
(2) Ground coverage for principal buildings for garden-type
apartments shall not exceed 25% of any site.
(3) Ground coverage for impervious surfaces for single-family homes
shall not exceed 33%. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
A. Off-street parking spaces and loading facilities must be provided for all
uses specified in this article, in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIV of this chapter and the following additional requirements:
(1) All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any
street line or property line to provide for proper landscaping and
buffering.
(2) Parking for shore zone uses shall be provided according to the
following minimum standards:
(a) Marinas/boat launching ramps. Single spaces shall be as
shown on the following diagram. Dimensions for double spaces
shall be 9 feet by 36 feet. All parking spaces should be located
within 600 feet of berths or ramps. Overflow parking should be
placed at the ends of the parking areas in any unusually shaped
parcels. The required spaces shall be as shown on following
table: [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 6-17-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 235-33 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-34
230:698
Use Number of Spaces
Boat slips [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
0.6
Boat slips including charter
fishing
2
Boat ramps 30 car trailer spaces, plus 10
single spaces
Retail floor area [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
5.5 per 1,000 square feet of
floor area
(b) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family: two spaces per dwelling unit.
[2] Apartments, condominiums, multifamily, high-rise
residential: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
(c) Hotels, motels and boatels: one space per room or suite; plus
one space per three employees on maximum shift; plus one
space per three persons to maximum capacity of public
meeting rooms; plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for
restaurants, accessory uses, etc.
(d) Yacht clubs: one space per three persons to maximum capacity
of meeting rooms, plus 1.56 spaces per boat berth.
(e) Restaurants.
[1] Sit-down: one space per three patron seats or one space
per 100 square feet or floor area, whichever is greater,
plus one space per employee on a maximum shift.
[2] Fast-food/takeout: one space per 50 square feet of floor
area, plus one per employee on a maximum shift.
(f) Boat rentals: one space per boat under 16 feet and 1.5 spaces
per boat over 16 feet.
(g) Amusement parks: one space per four patrons to the maximum
capacity of the facility, plus one space per two employees on
the largest work shift. The minimum parking stall size shall be
as shown on the diagram in Subsection A(2)(a). [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
B. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of parking spaces
required for a given project may be permitted by the Town Planning
Board during the site plan review process where it can be demonstrated
that such a reduction will not create overflow parking problems or
traffic congestion and that the additional space will be used for
§ 235-34 LITTERING § 235-34
230:699
§ 235-35. Landscaping; buffering; trails and paths.
landscaping or open space within the site. Such a reduction shall be
permitted by the Town Planning Board on a case-by-case basis.
A. When a use is the first to develop on two adjacent vacant parcels, this
first use shall be required to meet minimum setbacks, but shall not be
required to provide a buffer yard. The second use to develop shall, at
the time it is constructed, provide all additional plant material and/or
land necessary to provide the total buffer yard required between the
two uses. Existing plant materials and/or land located on the
preexisting (first developed) land use which meets the requirements of
this section may be counted as contributing to the total buffer yard
required between it and the second (adjacent) land use to be developed.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
B. Parking areas shall be landscaped and buffered as much as possible. A
reasonable reduction in the size and number of parking spaces required
for a project shall be permitted by the Town Planning Board where it
can be demonstrated by the applicant that such a reduction will not
create overflow parking problems and that the additional space will be
used for landscaping or open space within the site.
C. Outdoor storage of boats, equipment, etc., shall be buffered using trees,
berms, etc.
D. Where practical, trees with a diameter or caliper of three inches or
greater shall be retained on the site.
E. The Town of Irondequoit Planning Board, as part of the site plan and/or
special permit review and approval process, may require public access
in the form of walkways, pedestrian trails or paths or bikeways to the
shoreline for those development projects or proposed uses adjacent to
the shoreline where such access is appropriate and desirable and does
not conflict with existing natural features or the public health, safety or
general welfare. In requiring such public access, the Planning Board
shall consider the nature of the access to and from surrounding
properties and uses, as well as the relationship of the access and
proposed use to the water.
F. Maximum impervious area ratio shall not exceed 80% of the total of any
lot measured horizontally. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997137]
137. Editor's Note: Former Table 1, Sign Dimensions, and Table 3, Landscaping and Buffering
Standards, which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997.
§ 235-34 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-35
230:700
DOCK, SLIP AND BOAT BASIN STANDARDS [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
TABLE 1
DIMENSIONS FOR SLIPS AND CATWALKS
NOTE: Use this tabulation in conjunction with Plate No. 1 to
obtain widths of slips, lengths of Catwalks and locations of
stern anchor piles. This Tabulation is based upon the use of
Traveler Irons.
§ 235-35 LITTERING § 235-35
230:701

ARTICLE IXA
LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLDD)
[Added 8-19-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
§ 235-35.1. Purpose; goals.
A. Pursuant to a joint land use plan adopted by the Towns of Irondequoit
and Penfield, the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLDD) is
designed to provide a suitable character and stable environment for the
establishment and maintenance of water-oriented and/or waterenhanced
uses and activities along the shoreline of Irondequoit Bay and
its adjacent wetlands. The district is also designed to protect the unique
and sensitive environmental features that exist along the Bay shoreline,
and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The
district is also designed to promote and encourage public access to the
shore zone and appropriate water-oriented recreational and other
appropriate development adjacent to the shore zone.
B. The LLDD permits moderate-density residential development, as well
as certain commercial, recreational and open-space uses that serve the
residents of and visitors to this district, as well as the Town, and that
generally benefit from and enhance the unique aesthetic and
environmental qualities of the Town's waterfront areas. The purpose of
this district includes the following specific goals:
(1) To ensure that development and land-use activity along the
shoreline of Irondequoit Bay is consistent with the policies and
objectives of the Towns of Irondequoit's and Penfield's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Programs (LWRP).
(2) To provide sufficient space in appropriate waterfront locations for
moderate-density residential development, recreational activities,
certain commercial activities and other water-oriented uses, in
order to meet the various housing and recreational needs of the
Towns of Irondequoit's and Penfield's present and future
populations.
(3) To recognize the sensitivity of waterfront areas as unique
environmental and recreational resources and to protect these
areas from environmentally destructive uses and activities.
(4) To provide for a desirable mix of water-oriented commercial uses
and active and passive recreational opportunities that take
advantage of the unique locations and characteristics of the Towns'
waterfront areas.
(5) To encourage development that is appropriately designed and in
harmony with its environment and that does not conflict with the
preservation of the natural beauty of the Towns' waterfront areas.
§ 235-35.1 LITTERING § 235-35.1
230:703
(6) To promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
direction of building development based upon land and soil types
and other natural features, environmental constraints,
neighborhood characteristics and overall community needs.
(7) To protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability
for particular uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and
to protect and enhance the tax revenue bases of the Towns of
Irondequoit and Penfield.
(8) To permit development in areas which, by virtue of their locations,
topography, accessibility, relationship to surrounding land uses,
zoning patterns and natural features and availability of public
services and utilities, are best suited for a particular purpose; and
to preserve areas that are naturally unsuited for development or
that have unique historical, aesthetic or environmental
significance.
(9) To encourage flexibility of design and preservation of unique
environmental features through, for example, the use of Town Law
§ 278 (cluster development) and/or incentive zoning where
applicable, and maintenance of the aesthetic quality of waterfront
areas by permitting the Town of Irondequoit and the Town of
Penfield to establish consistent minimum dimensional
requirements for permitted principal uses, and to review other
pertinent design aspects of such proposed projects.
(10) To preserve, wherever feasible, the existing vegetation and natural
features of waterfront areas and to prevent, as much as possible,
significant erosion, sedimentation and drainage problems, both
during and after construction.
(11) To encourage and facilitate water-oriented recreational
development within the shore zone, as permitted principal uses or
as accessory uses where compatible with the primary purpose of
the proposed development.
(12) To protect the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLDD) and
its waterfront areas as much as possible against excessive volumes
of vehicular traffic flow, and to deal with safety problems related to
such vehicular traffic flow.
(13) To protect waterfront areas against congestion, as much as
possible, by regulating the density of population and intensity of
land use, and by requiring the provision of open areas for rest and
recreation, wherever practicable.
(14) To promote the maintenance and/or extension of public access to
the shore zone, where practical and feasible, where such access
relates to and is compatible with the primary purpose of the
proposed development or activity.
§ 235-35.1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-35.1
230:704
§ 235-35.2. Permitted uses.
No structure shall be erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved
and no structure, land or premises shall be used in the district designated
on the Official Zoning Maps of the Towns of Irondequoit and Penfield as
"LaSalle's Landing Development District" (LLDD) except for the following
principal and customarily incidental accessory uses, all of which shall be
subject to a special use permit and site plan approval issued by the Planning
Board in accordance with Articles XVI and XV of this chapter.
(15) To minimize impacts upon Irondequoit Bay water quality, such as
disturbance of sediment and pollutants, through prohibition of
docking and marina-related activities such as channel dredging.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Public parks, playgrounds or similar public recreational use
authorized or operated by a public agency and not operated for
gain.
(2) Multi-family dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses.
(3) Townhouses, row houses and other similar uses. [Amended
3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(4) Commercial parks, playgrounds, beaches, parks, golf courses,
tennis/racquetball clubs or other similar recreational uses operated
for gain.
(5) Retail food establishments and carry-out restaurants as defined in
§ 235-4 of this chapter.
(6) Motels and hotels.
(7) Stores, shops and boutiques designated for festive retail uses,
offices and activities as defined in § 235-4 of this chapter.
(8) Car-top boat and canoe sales, display and launch areas. Floating
piers or piers on pilings shall be used to provide access to canoes,
kayaks and other nonmotorized boats.
(9) Public utility buildings or structures, including but not limited to
electrical substations.
(10) Combinations of permitted principal uses, based on a
determination by the Planning Board that such combinations are
appropriate for the proposed LLDD and are compatible with the
purpose and intent of this district, as well as the goals and policies
of the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP), subject to
special use permit approval issued by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
§ 235-35.1 LITTERING § 235-35.2
230:705
B. Principal use restrictions and/or additional requirements. All principal
uses permitted within the LaSalle's Landing Development District
(LLDD) shall be subject to the following restrictions and/or additional
requirements:
(1) Any of the uses permitted in this section that require the use of an
area other than within an enclosed building may be conducted in
whole or in part outside of such building or absent such building
and shall be subject to special use permit approval issued by the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of
this chapter.
C. Accessory uses (located on the same lot with a permitted principal use).
(1) Gazebos, boardwalks and community interpretative centers,
subject to the applicable provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(2) Private garages and carports subject to the applicable provisions of
Article IV of this chapter.
(3) Swimming pools subject to the provisions of § 235-71 of this
chapter.
(4) Fencing subject to the provisions of § 235-69 of this chapter.
(5) Sheds, cabanas or similar accessory structures subject to those
dimensional and setback requirements applicable to private
garages and carports as noted above.
(6) Radio, TV or CB antennas subject to the provisions of § 235-72 of
this chapter. Those structures that require a permit from the Town
Zoning Board of Appeals shall also be subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Planning Board in accordance with
provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
(7) Signage subject to the following restrictions:
(a) All signage, with the exception of real estate signs, temporary
political signs and accessory traffic signs, shall be subject to
special use permit approval issued by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
Real estate signs shall be subject to the applicable provisions
of Article XXI of this chapter.
(b) Signs may be illuminated with a constant source, but flashing,
neon, revolving, animated or similar types of signs shall be
prohibited.
(c) Signs oriented toward the water shall be permitted for
identification purposes only, shall be building-mounted, and
shall not exceed 20 square feet per face.
§ 235-35.2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-35.2
230:706
(8) Parking of trucks, vans and other similar vehicles subject to the
applicable provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(9) Storage of mobile homes, motor homes, house trailers, campers,
camping trailers, truck campers, utility campers, boats and boat
trailers subject to the applicable provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
(10)Keeping of animals and poultry subject to the provisions of
§ 235-70 of this chapter.
(11) Tennis courts and other similar outdoor recreational facilities,
provided that such uses are clearly incidental to the primary
residential or principal use on the property, and provided that such
uses are located at a minimum of 10 feet from any property line,
subject to site plan review.
(12) Dumpsters enclosed and located no closer than 10 feet from any lot
line and subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning
Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this
chapter.
(13) Outdoor storage of boats subject to special use permit approval by
the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI
of this chapter.
(14) Fishing piers, wharves, boat launching ramps and similar
waterfront structures and facilities, when such uses are clearly
accessory or incidental to the primary, principal use on the
property, subject to all applicable state regulations and approvals
and subject to special use permit approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
(15) The following additional requirements shall also apply to all such
structures and facilities:
(a) The construction of such structures and facilities shall be
undertaken in such a way so as not to impair water quality,
cause harm to fish spawning grounds, destroy the natural
beauty of the shoreline, impede views/vistas of the Bay, reduce
the stability of steep slope areas, cause erosion or
sedimentation problems along the shoreline, create hazards
for navigation, interfere with the public use and enjoyment of
the water surface or shoreline, or otherwise threaten the
public health and safety.
(b) Dredging, earth moving and disturbance of land above and
below water shall be minimized as much as possible and shall
be consistent with the permit requirements of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation and the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
§ 235-35.2 LITTERING § 235-35.2
230:707
§ 235-35.3. Dimensional requirements.
(c) To permit the free circulation of water, reduce the effects of
fluctuating water levels and prevent adverse modification of
the shoreline, piers and wharves shall be of floating
construction wherever feasible and shall not be of rockfilled
cribbing, sheet piling, closely spaced piling or such other
construction which would significantly impair water
circulation.
(d) The maximum surface area of any pier or wharf shall not
exceed 700 square feet.
(e) The number of piers or wharves permitted per waterfront lot
used for commercial purposes shall not exceed one such
structure and be subject to a determination by the Planning
Board.
(f) Every pier or wharf that is constructed shall have a minimum
clearance or setback of 10 feet from adjacent property lines, as
extended at a 90º angle from the shoreline, to allow adequate
vessel access to neighboring waterfront parcels.
(g) Piers or wharves that are 100 feet or longer shall, during the
hours of darkness, be required to be lighted in such a manner
so as to not constitute a hazard to navigation.
(h) Lighting of the surface of any pier or wharf shall be provided in
such a manner so as not to produce any offensive glare when
viewed from the water or the land. The use of lowmast lighting
fixtures and deflector shields to direct the light downward shall
be required to reduce or eliminate glare.
A. Required minimum lot size.
(1) No new principal building or structure to be used as a multifamily
dwelling, apartment building or other similar use shall hereafter be
erected on any lot unless such lot shall have a minimum area of
3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) No new principal building or structure to be used as a townhouse
dwelling or other similar use shall hereafter be erected on any lot
unless such lot shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(3) The required minimium lot sizes for all other principal uses
permitted in the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLDD)
shall be established by the Planning Board during the site plan
approval and the special use permit approval process. The required
minimum lot size shall also be based on the relative intensity of the
proposed land use and the need to protect or buffer the use from
§ 235-35.2 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-35.3
230:708
sensitive environmental areas, significant historic or archeological
areas, or scenic views or vistas.
B. Required minimum building setbacks (required front, side and rear
yards):
(1) The Town Planning Board, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 278 of New York State Town Law, shall be empowered to modify
the setback requirements and other applicable provisions of this
article with respect to the approval of a plat or plats. The purpose
of this authorization is to enable and encourage a flexibility of
design and development of land in such a manner so as to promote
the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the adequate and
economical provisions of streets and utilities, to encourage and
maintain adequate public access to the shoreline and to preserve
and protect the natural and scenic qualities of the Town's open
lands and shore zone.
(2) Setbacks of buildings and structures from all other buildings and
structures on the lot and from property lines, for all other
permitted principal and accessory uses not already identified in
this section, shall be determined by the Planning Board during the
site plan review and approval process and/or the special use permit
process and shall be based on the following guidelines:
(a) Principal buildings, parking areas and accessory structures,
excluding such facilities as piers, wharves and boat ramps,
shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet inland from the high
water's edge in order to maintain adequate access to the shore
zone.
(b) Principal buildings, parking areas, and accessory structures
shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any road right-ofway,
a minimum of 20 feet from any side property line and 30
feet from any rear property line or, in the case of properties
fronting Irondequoit Bay, 25 feet from any pedestrian access
easement existing or proposed along the waters' edge.
(c) Principal building and accessory structure setbacks shall be
established with due consideration to provisions for fire
protection services and adequate access for fire and
emergency equipment within and around the site.
(d) Principal building and accessory structure setbacks shall be
established with due consideration to the protection and
preservation of unique and sensitive environmental features,
scenic views and vistas, the specific goals established for this
district and the use of clustering as a site design technique.
C. Maximum building heights.
§ 235-35.3 LITTERING § 235-35.3
230:709
§ 235-35.4. Parking; landscaping and buffering; public access.
(1) Maximum building heights for all permitted principal uses specified
in this section shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less, except where it has been determined by the Planning Board
during the special use permit process that, based on a visual
analysis of the site prepared and submitted by the applicant and
reviewed by the Board, greater building heights would not
interfere with identified scenic views or vistas or destroy the
aesthetic quality and integrity of the waterfront area. In such
cases, the Planning Board shall be empowered to establish
maximum principal building heights in order to protect the scenic
views and vistas and the aesthetic character of waterfront areas in
general.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet
unless otherwise specified or regulated in this article.
D. Maximum density/maximum percentage of lot occupancy. The total
overall ground coverage of all principal and accessory buildings,
parking areas and other impervious surfaces on any lot shall not exceed
70% of the total lot area. The remainder of the lot shall be utilized for
pedestrian access, open space and/or landscaped areas.
E. Hours of operation. Business establishments within the LLDD may be
open to the public 24 hours on a daily basis.
A. Adequate off-street parking and loading requirements.
(1) Off-street parking spaces and loading facilities shall be provided for
all uses specified in this section, in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIV of this chapter and the following additional
requirements:
(a) All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any street line or property line to provide for proper
landscaping and buffering, except in cases where shared
parking is proposed and approved by the Planning Board
during the special use permit and site plan review process.
(b) Parking for shore zone uses shall be provided according to the
following minimum standards:
[1] Commercial uses.
[a] Five spaces for 1,000 square feet of gross retail floor
area.
[b] Dimensions for single parking space: 9 feet by 18 feet.
[c] Fire lane width: 25 inches minimum.
[2] Residential uses.
§ 235-35.3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-35.4
230:710
[a] Townhouse: two spaces per dwelling unit.
[b] Apartments, condominiums and multifamily: two
spaces per dwelling unit.
[3] Hotels. One space per room or suite; plus one space per
three employees on minimum shift, plus one space per
three persons based on the maximum capacity of public
meeting rooms, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required
for restaurants, accessory uses, etc.
[4] Restaurants. Sit-down: One space per three patron seats,
including any bar stools, or one space per 100 square feet
of floor area, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on maximum shift.
[5] Retail establishments: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
[6] Office. One space per each 100 square feet of office area.
B. Landscaping and buffering requirements.
(1) Parking areas shall be landscaped and buffered as much as
possible. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of parking
spaces required for a project shall be permitted by the Planning
Board where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that such a
reduction will not create overflow parking problems and that the
additional space will be used for landscaping or open space within
the site.
(2) Where practical, trees with a diameter or caliper of six inches or
greater shall be retained on the site.
C. The Planning Board, as part of the site plan and/or special permit
review and approval process, shall require public access in the form of
walkways, pedestrian trails, paths or bikeways to the shoreline for
those development projects or proposed uses adjacent to the shoreline
where such access is appropriate and desirable and does not conflict
with existing natural features or the public health, safety or general
welfare. In requiring such public access, the Planning Board shall
consider the nature of the access to and from surrounding properties
and uses, as well as the relationship of the access and proposed use of
the water.
§ 235-35.4 LITTERING § 235-35.4
230:711

ARTICLE X
M Manufacturing Districts
§ 235-36. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988;
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
A. In M Manufacturing Districts, the following uses shall be permitted
when conducted within a completely enclosed building:
(1) Churches or similar places of worship.
(2) Private, nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools accredited by
the New York State Department of Education, public hospitals,
public libraries and municipal and special district buildings,
provided that no such buildings shall be located within 50 feet of
any adjoining lot line.
(3) Fire stations without club facilities.
(4) Professional offices for attorneys, physicians, physical therapy,
physician's associates and specialists' assistants, chiropractic,
dentistry and dental hygiene, veterinary medicine, nursing,
podiatry, optometry, ophthalmic dispensing, engineering and land
surveying architecture, landscape architecture, licensed
accountants, shorthand reporting, psychology, speech pathologists
and audiologists and occupational therapy.
(5) Real estate and/or insurance offices.
(6) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Employment and travel agencies.
(9) The following uses, provided that they are not used primarily for
treatment of contagious diseases, mental patients, epileptics, drug
or alcohol addicts or for penal or correctional purposes:
(a) Nursing or convalescent homes.
(b) Nonprofit institution for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(10) Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas and
structures not operated for gain.
(11) Private garages with a maximum area of 900 square feet with a
frontage of not more than 30 feet.
(12) Swimming pools, subject to § 235-71.
(13) Retail stores and shops.
§ 235-36 LITTERING § 235-36
230:713
§ 235-36.1. Special permit uses. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997; amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 9-27-2005 by L.L.
No. 8-2005]
The following uses shall require the issuance of a special use permit by the
Town Board:
(14) Personal service shops (dry-cleaning or laundry stores for pick up
purposes only).
(15) Banks, business and professional offices not otherwise permitted in
R-6 Residential Districts. Drive-in banks are permitted, provided
that at least five car length spaces are provided in the approach
drive within the property line of the lot for each drive-in teller's
window. Such spaces shall be exclusive of required parking spaces.
(16) Baking, confectionery, dressmaking, tailoring shops, provided that
all goods or products manufactured or processed shall be sold at
retail on the premises and not more than 10 persons shall be
employed at one time. [Amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(17) Appliance and electrical stores or printing plants.
(18) Laboratories used in research, testing and experimental work,
including any process normal to laboratory practice and technique.
(19) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise.
(20) Storage of contractors equipment and materials.
(21) Public utilities storage and service facilities.
(22) Bottling of beverages from previously prepared materials.
(23)Warehousing of goods and materials.
(24) Jewelry and coin exchange dealers, pawnbrokers, and secondhand
dealers, as those persons and businesses are defined at § 165-2 of
this Code, to the extent that it is consistent with local law and New
York State General Business Law. [Added 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
A. Public garages including car washes.
B. Gasoline and automobile service stations.
C. Pool or billiard rooms.
D. Bowling alleys, theaters and places of public assemblage.
E. Dry-cleaning establishments, laundries or laundromats.
F. Outdoor advertising display signs.
§ 235-36 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-36.1
230:714
§ 235-37. Accessory uses. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 235-38. (Reserved)138
§ 235-39. Limitations on uses.
G. Cemeteries.
H. Restaurants; eating or drinking establishments (grill, bars, etc.); takeout
food businesses; and drive-in hamburger, ice cream, food or
beverage stands.
I. Hotels, motels, motor courts, dairies, ice cream manufacturers and
commercial parking areas.
J. A combination of two or more of the uses permitted in this section on
the same or contiguous lots, including, but not limited to, the
development and use commonly known as a "shopping center or plaza."
K. Parking lots for monetary gain.
L. Amusement centers where machines are used for monetary gain.
M. The following uses shall be subject to approval of the Town Board
before a building permit may be issued:
(1) Dog kennels.
(2) Animal hospitals.
N. Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses,
subject to the lot and bulk requirements of § 235-19A(1)(c) of the
Zoning Code of the Town of Irondequoit. [Added 5-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008]
A. Quarters for a caretaker or watchman.
B. Other customary accessory uses.
A. Hazards. No use of land, building or structure shall be permitted the
operation of which results in an undue:
(1) Fire or explosive hazard.
(2) Dissemination of atmospheric pollutants, noise, vibration, glare or
odor beyond the boundaries of the premises upon which such is
located.
138. Editor's Note: Former § 235-38, Special use permits, was repealed 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997. See now § 235-36.1M.
§ 235-36.1 LITTERING § 235-39
230:715
§ 235-40. Lot and bulk requirements.
The lot and bulk requirements shall be as follows:
B. Storage of flammable liquids. Storage of flammable liquids shall be
entirely underground and in storage tanks approved by the National
Board of Fire Underwriters. Safety containers shall be used within any
building or structure in which flammable liquids are handled.
C. Review and approval by Planning Board. No permits shall issue on the
uses herein until and unless a site plan of all proposals shall be
presented to and approved by the Planning Board in accordance with
the considerations and determinations as set forth in § 235-16.
D. Signage shall be regulated as set forth in § 235-29. [Added 2-4-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
A. Minimum dimensions for lots.
(1) Width: 100 feet.
(2) Depth: 200 feet.
(3) Area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum dimensions for yards.
(1) Side yard: 10 feet, except that where a side lot line abuts a
residential district, no building shall be nearer to such lot line than
50 feet or a distance equal to the height of the building, whichever
is greater.
(2) Rear yard: 60 feet, except that where a rear lot line abuts a
residential district, no building shall be nearer to such lot line than
a distance equal to the height of the building or 50 feet, whichever
is greater.
(3) Front yard: 50 feet, except in the event that existing buildings
within 200 feet on either side thereof extend nearer than 50 feet to
a street line, such minimum front yard depth shall be the average
setback of such existing buildings, but in no case less than 50 feet
from a street line.
(4) Corner lot. In the case of a corner lot, no building shall extend
nearer than 50 feet to the side street line.
C. Maximum height of building: 45 feet.
D. Percentage of lot occupancy. The area of the building on any lot
measured horizontally shall not exceed 33 1/3% of the area of such lot.
E. Maximum impervious area ratio shall not exceed 80% of the total of any
lot measured horizontally. [Added 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-39 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-40
230:716
ARTICLE XI
Environmental Protection Overlay Districts
[Added 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-41. Purpose.
§ 235-42. Division of districts.
In order to address the specific goals listed in § 235-41A of this chapter,
the Town of Irondequoit is hereby divided into the following environmental
protection overlay districts:
EPOD1 - Wetland Protection District
EPOD2 - Steep Slopes Protection District
EPOD3 - Woodlot Protection District
EPOD4 - Floodplain Protection District
EPOD5 - Watercourse Protection District
EPOD6 - Coastal Erosion Area Protection District [Amended 4-21-1988
by L.L. No. 4-1988]
§ 235-43. Maps.
The locations and boundaries of all environmental protection overlay
districts shall be delineated on an official set of maps on file in the Town
Clerk's office and Town Building Department. These maps shall be known
and may be cited as the "Official Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps" and
shall include the environmental atlas maps for the Town [prepared by
the Monroe County Environmental Management Council (MCEMC)], the
Official Wetland Maps for the Town [prepared by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC)], the Official Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for the Town [prepared by the Federal
A. The purpose of the environmental protection overlay districts
established in this article is to provide special controls over land
development located in sensitive environmental areas within the Town
of Irondequoit. These districts and the regulations associated within
them are designed to preserve and protect unique environmental
features within the Town as much as possible, including, but not limited
to, wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains and woodlots.
B. The regulation contained in each environmental protection overlay
district (EPOD) are not intended to be substituted for other general
zoning district provisions, but can be superimposed over such district
provisions and should be considered as additional requirements to be
met by the applicant or developer, prior to project approval. The
purpose of the overlay districts is to provide the Town with an
additional level of review and regulation that controls how land
development permitted by the Town's primary zoning districts should
occur in sensitive or unique environmental areas.
§ 235-41 LITTERING § 235-43
230:717
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)], the Coastal Erosion Hazard Area
maps (prepared by the NYSDEC) and the State Coastal Erosion Maps.
The Official Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps shall be used for reference
purposes only and shall not be used to delineate specific or exact
boundaries of the various overlay districts. Field investigations and/or other
environmental analyses may be required in order to determine whether or
not a particular piece of property is included within one or more of the
overlay districts.
§ 235-44. Interpretation of district boundaries. [Amended
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
The Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall be responsible for
interpreting environmental protection overlay district boundaries based
on an interpretation of the Official Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps, as
well as the use of various criteria set forth in this article for determining
such district boundaries. The Town Department of Planning and Zoning
may request the assistance of the Town Engineer or other appropriate
department or agency in making such a determination. Appeals from a
determination of the Town Department of Planning and Zoning regarding
boundaries of overlay districts shall be made to the Town Planning Board in
accordance with the public hearing procedures of Article XV of this chapter.
§ 235-45. Development permit required.
An EPOD development permit shall be required subject to the provisions of
this article and prior to the commencement of any regulated activity of the
issuance of any building permit for regulated development in a designated
environmental protection overlay district within the Town of Irondequoit.
The following activities are exempt from the permit procedures of this
article, subject to a determination by the Town Building Inspector that such
activities involve necessary normal maintenance and upkeep of property
and/or involve public health, safety or emergency situations:
A. Lawn care and maintenance.
B. Gardening activities.
C. Tree and shrub care and maintenance.
D. Removal of dead or deteriorating vegetation.
E. Removal of structures.
F. Repair and maintenance of structures.
G. Repair and maintenance of faulty or deteriorating sewage facilities or
utility lines.
H. Reconstruction of structures damaged by a natural disaster.
I. Agricultural activities, except structural activities.
§ 235-43 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-45
230:718
§ 235-46. Development permit application. [Amended 4-21-1988 by
L.L. No. 4-1988; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
J. Public health activities, orders and regulations of the New York State
Department of Health, Monroe County Department of Health or other
agencies undertakes in compliance with § 24-0701, Subdivision 5, of the
New York State Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or
changed.
K. Activities subject to the review jurisdiction of the New York State Public
Service Commission or the New York State Board on Electric
Generation Siting and the Environment, under the provisions of Article
7 or Article 8 of the New York State Public Service Law, respectively.
L. Any actual or ongoing emergency activity which is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life, property or
natural resource values.
A. Application for EPOD development permits shall be made in writing to
the Town Planning Board on forms available to the Town Department of
Planning and Zoning. Such an application shall be made by the property
owner or his/her agent and shall be accompanied by any materials or
information deemed appropriate by the Town Department of Planning
and Zoning or Town Engineer, including but not limited to a scaled site
plan prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or land surveyor that
contains the following minimum information:
(1) A location plan and boundary line survey of the property.
(2) The location of all environmental protection overlay district
boundaries, designated Town open space, Town, county or state
parkland or other similar areas within and/or adjacent to the
property, as defined by this article.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
utility lines, sewers, water and storm drains on the property or
within 200 feet of the proposed work site.
(4) The location of all existing and proposed impervious surfaces, such
as driveways, sidewalks, etc., on the property or within 200 feet of
the proposed work site.
(5) Existing and proposed contour levels at intervals of five feet for the
property, unless such property is located within a Steep Slope
Protection District whereby contour levels shall be required at
intervals of two feet.
(6) The location and types of all existing and proposed vegetation and
shrub masses, as well as all trees with a diameter of four inches or
more within and/or adjacent to the property.
§ 235-45 LITTERING § 235-46
230:719
§ 235-47. Application review; public hearing; issuance or denial of
permit. [Amended 2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 6-17-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997; 8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
(7) The location of all existing and proposed drainage patterns,
drainageways, swales, etc., within and/or adjacent to the property.
B. Each application for an EPOD development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee set in accordance with § 1-18. This
fee shall be in addition to any other fee required for the development
under this chapter.
A. The Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall refer a completed
permit application to the Town Planning Board for a public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter. The Town
Department of Planning and Zoning shall also refer a completed permit
application to the Town Conservation Board for its review and
recommendations. The Town Conservation Board shall have 30 days
from the date of its receipt of a completed application in which to
review such application and report its recommendations to the Town
Planning Board. Should the Town Conservation Board fail to report or
make a recommendation to the Town Planning Board regarding the
application within the thirty-day time period, the Town Planning Board
may take action on the permit application without such report.
B. Following the required public hearing, the Town Planning Board shall
have the authority to grant or deny an EPOD development permit,
subject to the standards, criteria and other regulations contained in this
article. The Town Planning Board shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Town Conservation Board and may also
request a report from the Town Engineer or other appropriate
department or agency in acting on such permit application.
C. In addition, the Town Planning Board, when deemed necessary by a
majority vote of the Board, may refer any completed application for an
EPOD development permit to the Town Board for its review, comments
and recommendations. When such a referral is made, then the Town
Planning Board may not take action on such an application until it has
received the report of the Town Board concerning the development
permit request.
D. Any development permit issued by the Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of this article may be issued with conditions. Such
conditions may be attached as are deemed necessary by the Board to
ensure the preservation and protection of environmentally sensitive
areas and to ensure compliance with the policies and provisions of this
article. Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall contain the
following conditions:
§ 235-46 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-47
230:720
(1) The Town Building Inspector, Town Engineer and/or other
appropriate Town official shall have the right to inspect the project
from time to time.
(2) The permit shall expire on a particular date, unless extended by the
Planning Board upon good cause shown.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the Town Building Inspector or other
appropriate Town official of the date on which project construction
is to begin, at least five days in advance of such date.
(4) The EPOD development permit shall be prominently displayed at
the project site during the undertaking of the activities authorized
by the permit.
E. Review of application for all permits. Any permit issued by the
Commissioner of Public Works/Superintendent of Highways pursuant to
this chapter or Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention,
which involves property subject to one or more environmental
protection overlay districts must be reviewed by the Town Planning
Board.
F. Site capacity worksheet.
(1) The applicant shall also submit a completed site capacity
worksheet with any application for land subdivision to the Town of
Irondequoit Planning Board. Said worksheet shall be made
available at the Town of Irondequoit Director of Planning and
Zoning's office. Said worksheet shall be in a form approved by the
Town Board and shall include, as part of the calculation, base site
areas, environmental protection overlay districts, net buildable site
areas and maximum allowable dwelling units. Said site capacity
worksheet is attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A,
together with any further changes or amendments that may be
approved by the Town Board.
EXHIBIT A
Site Capacity Worksheet
A. Base Site Area: = ______________ Acres
B. Environmental Protection Overlay Districts:
(Area to be subtracted from the Base Site Area)
EPOD
Open
Space
Factor*
Acres In
Resource
Required
Resource
Protection Land
Steep slopes
30% and over
0.95 x =
§ 235-47 LITTERING § 235-47
230:721
Watercourse
Corridor
Protection
0.90 x =
Woodlot 0.75 x =
Steep slopes
20% to less
than 30%
0.50 x =
Floodplain 0.90 x =
Wetlands:
NYDEC 0.90 x =
USCA 0.90 x =
TOTAL EPOD LAND = _________ Acres
C. Gross Buildable Site Area
(1) Base Site Area (A) = _______
(2) Total EPOD Protection Land (B)
=
_______
(3) Gross Buildable Site Area =
C(1) - C(2) =
_______
_____ Acres
D. Total Area Within Right(s)-of-Way= _____ Acres
E. Net Buildable Site Area = C(3) - D = _____ Acres
F. Maximum Allowable Dwelling Units
(1) Net Buildable Site Area (E) = ______
(2) Minimum Lot Size = ______
(3) Maximum Dwelling Units = F(1)
divided by F(2) =
______ ____
Units
NOTES:
1. The open space factors are not intended to be calculated on a
cumulative basis. Where a property is encumbered with more
than one overlapping Environmental Protection Overlay Districts
(EPODs), the EPOD with the higher open space factor would be
used in the subsequently overlapping EPOD area(s).
2. Floodplains, steep slopes, wetlands and watercourses can be
effectively designed to act as buffers between existing and
proposed developments, used as open space within subdivision or
maintained privately as part of the subdivision lots and
homesites.
A reasonable credit is, therefore, provided for the amenity these
features provide in determining the maximum density of
subdivisions.
§ 235-47 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-47
230:722
§ 235-48. Performance guaranty. [Amended 4-21-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988; 2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995; 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997;
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
Following approval of an application for an EPOD development permit and
prior to the commencement of any site activity, issuance of any building
or other Town permit, the applicant shall furnish the Town Director of
Development Services with an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount to
be reviewed by the Town Engineer and Town Attorney, which is sufficient to
cover the costs of compliance with the various specifications and conditions
of the development permit. The purpose of the letter of credit shall be to
ensure that all items, activities or structures specified in the plans approved
by the Town Planning Board are constructed or carried out in accordance
with such plans and specifications and other appropriate requirements of
the Town of Irondequoit. The irrevocable letter of credit shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as the Commissioner of Public Works
has certified, in writing, to the Town Planning Board that, based on a
site inspection, all specifications, requirements and permit conditions have
been completed and/or complied with, whereupon the letter of credit shall
be released to the applicant. The Town Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer,
Town Planning Board or other appropriate department or official, may
deduct or withhold an amount from the letter of credit sufficient to cover
the cost of noncompliance with any requirements, specifications or permit
condition and/or release the Town from any liability resulting from such
noncompliance.
§ 235-49. Suspension or revocation of permits. [Amended 2-4-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The Department of Development Services may suspend a permit
(temporarily) until such time as the Planning Board reviews the suspension.
The Town Planning Board, upon recommendation of the Town Building
Inspector or other appropriate Town official and subject to a majority vote
of the Board, may suspend or revoke a development permit issued in
accordance with the provisions of this article where it has found evidence
that the applicant has not complied with any or all terms or conditions of
such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the permit or has failed
to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the application. The
Town Planning Board shall set forth, in writing, its findings and reasons for
revoking or suspending a permit issued pursuant to this article and shall
forward a copy of said findings to the applicant.
(2) No permit to undertake any regulated activity within an EPOD shall
be issued by the Planning Board unless the net buildable site area
and maximum allowable dwelling units are less than or equal to the
calculated value under the site capacity calculation worksheet.
§ 235-47 LITTERING § 235-50
230:723
§ 235-50. Citizen enforcement. [Added 2-14-1995 by L.L. No.
4-1995]
Citizens of the Town of Irondequoit shall have the power to enforce the
EPOD regulations in the same manner as is permitted in Town Law § 268,
as amended or changed.
§ 235-51. EPOD1 - Wetland Protection District. [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Wetland Protection District is to preserve
and protect freshwater wetlands located within the Town of
Irondequoit, pursuant to Article 24 of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law. Through this statement of purpose, it
is declared to be the public policy of the Town of Irondequoit that these
areas shall be protected as invaluable natural resources that provide
for flood protection, wildlife habitats, recreational and open space,
erosion and pollution control and protection and recharging of
groundwater supplies. The regulations contained in this district seek to
prevent the despoilation and destruction of freshwater wetlands by
controlling development in these areas and by requiring review and
permit approval prior to project commencement.
B. Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Wetland
Protection District shall be delineated on the Official Town of
Irondequoit EPOD Maps and shall include all wetland areas designated
as Type I, Type II, Type III and Type IV by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. The provisions of this
section shall be applicable to all wetland areas within the Town of
Irondequoit and as shown on the Official Town Maps, other than those
areas designated as Type I wetlands by the State Department of
Environmental Conservation. Permit application for development
within all Type I Environmental Conservation shall be reviewed and
approved by the State Department of Environmental Conservation,
subject to the provisions of Part 665 of the New York State Codes, Rules
and Regulations (NYCRR). Upon application for a development permit
within a Wetland Protection District, the Town Department of Planning
and Zoning shall refer such application and site plan to the State
Department of Environmental Conservation in order to determine the
precise boundary of the wetland area. The boundary of a Wetland
Protection District shall include a buffer zone that extends out from the
edge of the wetland area for a distance of 100 feet or three hundred
feet, as determined by the DEC.
C. Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Wetland Protection District in the Town
of Irondequoit, unless such person has first applied for and obtained an
EPOD development permit pursuant to the requirements of this article:
§ 235-50 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-51
230:724
(1) Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of any
natural materials, directly or indirectly, from a wetland.
(2) Any form of dumping, filling or depositing any material either
directly or indirectly within a wetland.
(3) The erection or placement of any structures, roads or any manmade
materials within the wetland.
(4) Any form of pollution, including but not limited to installing a septic
tank, running a sewer outfall or discharging sewage treatment
effluent or other liquid wastes into a wetland.
(5) Any activity which impairs the natural function of wetlands,
whether located within the wetland or not.
(6) Any activity regulated by § 24-0701 of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law, as amended or changed.
D. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
Development permit, the Town Planning Board shall consider the
effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on the public
health, safety and welfare and the protection or enhancement of
the several functions and benefits of freshwater wetland areas as
stated in Subsection A of this section. No permit to undertake a
regulated activity within a wetland protection district in the Town
of Irondequoit shall be issued by the Town Planning Board, unless
the applicant can adequately demonstrate to the Board that:
(a) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the policy of
this chapter to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom.
(b) The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public
health, safety and welfare.
(c) The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary.
(d) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent
area.
(2) In addition, any applicant for a permit to undertake a regulated
activity within a Wetland Protection District of the Town of
Irondequoit shall be required to adequately demonstrate to the
Town Planning Board that the proposed activity will in no way at
present or at any time in the future adversely affect the following:
(a) Groundwater reservoir capacities.
(b) Watercourse flood-carrying capacities.
§ 235-51 LITTERING § 235-51
230:725
§ 235-52. EPOD2 - Steep Slopes Protection District. [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988; 2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995;
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
(c) Water quality.
(d) Water retention capabilities.
(e) Downstream siltation.
(f) The natural wildlife balance.
(g) Any natural function of the wetland.
(3) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden demonstrating
that the proposed regulated activity will be conducted in
accordance with the standards and requirements set forth above.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Steep Slope Protection District is to
minimize the impacts of development activities on steep slopes in the
Town of Irondequoit by regulating activities in these areas and by
requiring review and permit approval prior to project commencement.
The developmental impacts include soil erosion and sedimentation,
destruction of vegetation, increased runoff rates and slope failure. The
regulations contained in this district are designed to minimize the
disturbance or removal of existing vegetation, prevent increased
erosion and runoff, maintain established drainage systems, locate
development where it is less likely to cause future slope failures and to
retain as much as possible the natural character of these areas.
B. Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Steep Slope
Protection District shall be delineated on the Official Town of
Irondequoit EPOD Maps and shall include all areas in the Town of
Irondequoit with a fifteen-percent slope or greater. The Town
Department of Planning and Zoning and Town Engineer may consult
other information, including but not limited to soil survey reports
prepared by the Soil Conservation Service, topographic maps produced
by the United States Geological Survey, field surveys and other
appropriate sources in order to more accurately locate and delineate
steep slope protection district boundaries within the Town. The
following additional areas shall also be considered within the "steep
slope" definition:
(1) A transition zone at the top of the slope defined as that area
containing soil classes (as defined in the Monroe County Soil
Survey) with moderate to severe limitations for development and
recreational uses as determined on a site-specific high-intensity
soil survey.
(2) Natural protective features (beaches, bluffs and near-shore areas)
around Irondequoit Bay, as defined in regulations in Part 505 of the
NYCRR implementing the Coastal Erosion Hazard Act.
§ 235-51 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-52
230:726
C. Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Steep Slope Protection District in the
Town of Irondequoit, unless such person has first applied for and
obtained an EPOD development permit pursuant to the requirements of
this article:
(1) Clearing of or constructing on any land area within the district,
including construction or clearing activities related to providing
equipment access on the site, except for those activities exempted
from the permit requirements of this article as indicated in
§ 235-45 of this chapter.
(2) The construction or placement of any sewage disposal system,
including individual sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, septic
drainage or leach fields.
(3) Filling, cutting or excavating operations.
(4) Discharge of stormwater and/or construction and placement of
stormwater runoff systems.
(5) Construction of new buildings or structures or additions and
modifications to existing buildings and structures in areas of slopes
exceeding 15%.
D. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
development permit, the Town Planning Board shall consider the
effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on the public
health, safety and welfare and the protection or enhancement of
the fragile and environmentally sensitive steep slope areas within
the Town. No permit to undertake a regulated activity within a
Steep Slope Protection District in the Town of Irondequoit shall be
issued by the Town Planning Board unless the applicant can
adequately demonstrate to the Board that:
(a) The stable angle of repose of the soil classes as found on the
site has been used to determine the proper placement of
structures and other development-related facilities within the
plateau area. Site specific calculations of the stable angle of
repose for the site shall be determined by a professional soil
scientist or engineer using the soil classes and nomenclature
contained in the best management practices of the Irondequoit
Bay Coordinating Committee, as defined and illustrated in
Table 1, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference,139 and obtained for the site by borings, as well as
high-density soil survey data provided by the developer.
139. Editor's Note: Said table and the accompanying diagram are on file in the Town Clerk's
office.
§ 235-52 LITTERING § 235-52
230:727
(b) The stability of soil will be maintained or increased to
adequately support any construction thereon or to support any
landscaping, agricultural or similar activities. This shall be
documented by soil bearing data provided by a qualified
testing laboratory or engineer and paid for by the developer.
(c) No proposed activity will cause uncontrolled erosion or
slipping of soil or cause sediment to be discharged into
Irondequoit Bay, Lake Ontario, the Genesee River and their
wetlands or tributaries.
(d) Plant life located on the slopes outside of the minimum area
that need be disturbed for carrying on approved activities shall
not be destroyed. Plants or other acceptable ground cover shall
be reestablished in disturbed areas immediately upon
completion of development activity so as to prevent any of the
harmful effects set forth above to maintain the natural scenic
characteristics of the Irondequoit Bay or other scenic areas.
(e) Access down steep slopes shall be provided with ramp slopes
no greater than 16% and side slopes no greater than 30% if not
terraced or otherwise structurally stabilized. Disturbed
nonroadway areas shall be stabilized with vegetation or other
approved physical means. Completed roadways shall be
stabilized and adequately drained. Disturbance to slopes of
greater than 30% to provide access to subdivision sites shall be
limited to 3% of such slope area.
(f) Construction of erosion protection structures, particularly
along the water side of eroding bluffs, shall be permitted to
provide protection of bluff features according to the following
standards:
[1] All erosion protection structures shall be designed and
constructed according to generally accepted engineering
principles which have demonstrated success or a
likelihood of success in controlling long-term erosion.
Such engineering principles can be found in publications
of the United States Soil Conservation Service. The
protective measure must have a reasonable probability of
controlling erosion on the immediate site for a least 30
years.
[2] A long-term maintenance program shall be included in any
application for construction, modification or restoration of
an erosion protection structure. Such programs shall
include specifications for normal maintenance of
degradable materials and the periodic replacement of
removable materials.
[3] All material used in such structures shall be durable and
capable of withstanding inundation, wave impacts,
§ 235-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-52
230:728
weathering and other effects of storm conditions.
Individual component materials may have a working life
of less than 30 years only when a maintenance program
ensures that they will be regularly maintained and
replaced as necessary to attain the required 30 years of
erosion protection.
[4] The construction, modification or restoration of erosion
protection structures shall not be likely to cause any
measurable increase in erosion at the development site or
other locations and prevent adverse effects to natural
protective features, existing erosion protection structures
and natural resources such as significant fish and wildlife
habitats.
(g) Drainage of stormwater shall not cause erosion or siltation,
contribute to slope failures, pollute groundwater or cause
damage to or flooding of property. Drainage systems shall be
designed and located to ensure slope stability.
(h) Any grading, excavating or other soil disturbance conducted
on a steep slopes shall not direct surface water runoff over the
receding edge during construction.
(i) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on that portion of the site containing steep slopes.
(j) All applications for EPOD development permit shall be
prepared and reviewed using the following guidelines:
[1] All structural foundations shall be placed on virgin,
undisturbed soil. (The site plan shall have a note to this
effect and depict a section through the proposed structure
indicating the areas of slopes greater than 15% and areas
of fill.)
[2] The finished grade for all cut or fill slopes shall not exceed
3 to 1, i.e., three horizontal to one vertical. The use of
retaining structures may be required to eliminate slopes
greater than 3 to 1. All such retaining walls must be
approved by the Town Engineer. The site plan shall show
proposed contours and indicate all proposed slopes
greater than 3 to 1.
[3] Surface runoff or downspout water will not be allowed to
discharge on slopes greater than 15%. Said waters shall be
discharged from a closed drainage system to the toe of the
slope or into a recharge structure (i.e., dry well) or a
dedicated stormwater system. Storm drainage methods
shall be shown and noted on the site plan.
§ 235-52 LITTERING § 235-52
230:729
§ 235-53. EPOD3 - Woodlot Protection District.
[4] All disturbed steep slope areas shall be regraded and
stabilized as soon as practical but in less than 30 days.
[5] Disturbance of steep slopes areas shall be the minimum
required to allow for the completion of the subject
construction. Such areas shall be clearly marked and
noted on the site plan.
[6] Temporary erosion control (i.e., straw bales, siltation
fences, hydroseeding, mulching, etc.) shall be provided for
all disturbed areas, shall be installed before work starts
and shall be maintained until restoration is complete. (The
site plan shall show the location and method of erosion/
siltation control.)
[7] The selection of vegetation shall be appropriate for subject
applications and the plant list and ground cover vegetation
shall be shown on the site plan.
[8] Steep slope areas which will not support vegetation (i.e.,
beneath a deck in full shade) shall receive an appropriate
soil cover (i.e., stone pavers, etc.). The type and limit of
nonvegetative cover shall be shown on the site plan.
[9] Removal of existing mature trees from steep slope areas
will only be permitted where absolutely necessary to allow
the subject construction. All trees larger than three inches
in diameter shall be shown on the site plan. Trees to be
removed shall also be indicated on the site plan.
[10] Deck support systems on steep slopes shall be designed by
a licensed professional engineer. Details for deck supports
on steep slopes shall be shown on the site plan.
[11] All steep slope EPOD permit plans shall bear the original
seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer.
(2) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of demonstrating
that the proposed regulated activity will be conducted in
accordance with the standards and requirements set forth above.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Woodlot Protection District is to preserve
and protect woodlots located within the Town of Irondequoit by
regulating or controlling development in those areas and by requiring
review and permit approval prior to project commencement.
B. The boundaries of the Woodlot Protection District shall be delineated on
the Official Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps and shall include all areas
in the Town of five acres or more containing tree communities and trees
six inches in diameter and greater in which the average basal area is at
§ 235-52 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-53
230:730
least 30 square feet per acre of trees six inches and larger as
determined using a ten-factor prism. Tree communities are those which
are established within 10 to 20 years after cultivation and maintenance
of land ceases and shall include pioneer communities of ash, silver
maple, cherry, hawthorn, willow and bass wood and mature woodlot
communities of red maple, sugar maple, oak, hickory, beech, horse
chestnut, willow and evergreens. [Amended 2-14-1995 by L.L. No.
1-1995; 12-17-1996 by L.L. No. 12-1996; 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997; 8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
(1) Basal areas determination methodology: A minimum of two
nonoverlapping random samples shall be taken in determining
whether a site is a woodlot, and the approximate locations of
samples are to be marked on the site plan. The samples shall be
taken entirely in the wooded area. For every sample location, the
number of trees six inches in diameter and larger are counted 360º
around the center of the sample. For trees to be counted when
using the prism, the tree images (displaced versus real image) must
be touching or overlapping. The basal area for each sample shall be
calculated using the formula: Basal area = N (number of trees
counted) x 10 (prism factor). All the samples shall be then averaged
to obtain the average basal area of the site.
(2) More than three samples shall be taken for sites of 20 acres and
larger.
C. Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Woodlot Protection District in the Town
of Irondequoit unless such person has first applied for and obtained an
EPOD development permit pursuant to the requirements of this article:
(1) Clearing of or constructing on any land area within the district
except for those activities exempted from the permit requirements
of this article as indicated in § 235-45 of this chapter, as well as any
watercourse maintenance activities.
D. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
development permit, the Town Planning Board shall consider the
effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on the public
health, safety and welfare and the protection and enhancement of
the woodland areas within the Town.
(2) Any applicant for a permit to undertake a regulated activity within
a Woodlot Protection District in the Town of Irondequoit shall be
required to adequately demonstrate to the Town Planning Board
that the proposed activity will in no way at present or at any time in
the future adversely affect the following:
(a) Soil stability.
§ 235-53 LITTERING § 235-53
230:731
(b) Velocity of surface water runoff.
(c) Existing drainage systems.
(d) Natural characteristics of a watercourse.
(3) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of demonstrating
that the proposed regulated activity will be conducted in
accordance with the standards and requirements listed above.
E. Other standards/conditions.
(1) Any activity within a woodlot area involving the cutting of trees
with the intent to manage the woodlot or harvest timber for
commercial use shall be subject to an EPOD development permit.
Applications for woodlot management shall be submitted by the
applicant to the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation for a review and advisory opinion. Applicants for such
activity must submit a management plan prepared by a qualified
consulting forester or a forest management recommendation
prepared by a NYSDEC forester, which includes the following
information:
(a) A site plan with maps, tables and text showing boundaries and
size of the woodlot;
(b) The kinds and sizes of trees present and the basal area (density
of trees calculated per acre by trunk size) of the site before and
after the proposed management activity;
(c) The actions proposed to produce and harvest the forest crop;
(d) The schedule for a commercial harvest;
(e) Any noncommercial thinning of the woodlot;
(f) Proposed road construction; and
(g) Proposed erosion and sedimentation control measures and
including revegetation and timing designated in accordance
with best management practices prepared by the Irondequoit
Bay Coordinating Committee (IBCC). [Amended 2-14-1995
by L.L. No. 1-1995]
(2) Timber sale contracts shall be required and shall conform to the
following:
(a) The posting of a bond to pay for completion of remedial
measures upon failure of the applicant to meet the
specifications of the plan, in an amount necessary to complete
the anticipated work.
(b) The recording of timber sale contracts with the Town Clerk of
the municipality in which the work will be occurring.
§ 235-53 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-53
230:732
§ 235-54. Treed lots. [Added 3-21-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995; amended
12-17-1996 by L.L. No. 12-1996]
(3) The following specific practices shall be used to minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation during woodlot management activities:
(a) No skidding shall take place during wet months.
(b) Stream crossings shall be kept to a minimum.
(c) Stream banks shall be protected by controlling skidding and
felling close to the stream.
(d) Slopes exceeding 15% shall require additional protection
measures.
(e) All roads and skid trails shall be reviewed for appropriate
location, design and construction.
(f) Landing locations that avoid erosion problems shall be
selected.
(g) Applications for woodlot management shall comply with all
applicable New York State and local fire laws.
(h) When woodlot management techniques are employed along
major travel corridors or the bay shoreline in locations that are
not screened by a hill, high bank or other topography, the
applicant shall establish a buffer strip along the roadside or
bay shore in which a basal area of 60 square feet of stems six
inches in diameter at breast height and larger is maintained.
(i) Whenever possible, landings shall be kept out of sight.
Landings and access roads shall be restored after use.
(j) In planning and development sites, applicants shall preserve as
much mature vegetation as possible. Use of clustering of
buildings to avoid mature wooded areas shall be encouraged
wherever practical, as well as the planting of replacement
vegetation to mitigate the unavoidable uses of woodlots.
(k) No EPOD permit will be granted where the removal of
vegetation from the woodlot or shrub community is likely to
cause substantial erosion. [Added 2-14-1995 by L.L. No.
1-1995]
A. Purpose. The purpose of identifying wooded lots is to preserve and
protect trees in excess of six inches caliper located within the Town of
Irondequoit, controlling development in those areas and by requiring
review and permit approval prior to project commencement.
B. The treed lot shall include all areas in the Town of Irondequoit of one or
more but less than five acres containing tree communities and trees six
§ 235-53 LITTERING § 235-54
230:733
§ 235-55. EPOD4 - Floodplain Protection District. [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]141
inches in diameter and greater in which the average basal area is
at least 30 square feet per acre of trees six inches and greater as
determined using a ten-factor prism.
(1) Basal areas determination methodology: A minimum of two
nonoverlapping random samples shall be taken in determining
whether a site is a woodlot, and the approximate locations of
samples are to be marked on the site plan. The samples shall be
taken entirely in the wooded area. For every sample location, the
number of trees six inches in diameter and larger are counted 360º
around the center of the sample. For trees to be counted when
using the prism, the tree images (displaced versus real image) must
be touching or overlapping. The basal area for each sample shall be
calculated using the formula: Basal area = N (number of trees
counted) x 10 (prism factor). All the samples shall be then averaged
to obtain the average basal area of the site. [Amended 6-17-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997]140
C. Development standard/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
development permit, the Town Planning Board shall consider the
effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on the public
health, safety and welfare and the protection or the enhancement
of the fragile and environmentally sensitive wooded lots within the
Town.
(2) No permit to undertake a regulated activity within a wooded lot in
the Town of Irondequoit shall be issued by the Town Planning Board
unless the applicant can adequately demonstrate to the Board that:
(a) The stability of soil will be maintained or increased to
adequately support any construction thereon or to support any
landscaping, agricultural or similar activities. This shall be
documented by soil bearing data provided by a qualified
testing laboratory or engineer and paid for by the developer;
(b) No proposed activity will cause uncontrolled erosion or
slipping of soil or cause sediment to be discharged into
Irondequoit Bay, Lake Ontario, the Genesee River or their
wetlands or tributaries; and
(c) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on that portion of the site containing wooded lots.
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding samples, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998.
141. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 136, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 235-54 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-55
230:734
A. Purpose. Certain areas of the Town of Irondequoit are subject to
periodic flooding which can result in loss of life, property damage,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commercial and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditure for flood protection and
relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of this Town.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by
the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses which are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. It is
the purpose of the Floodplain Protection District to prevent public and
private losses due to flood conditions in certain areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect the health and welfare of the residents of this Town.
(2) Minimize public expenditure for flood-control projects.
(3) Minimize the need for relief and rescue efforts.
(4) Minimize business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by minimizing flood damage to
private and commercial property.
(7) Identify those structures and properties which are located in areas
of special flood hazard and maintain such information for public
inspection.
B. Delineation of district boundaries.
(1) The boundaries of the Floodplain Protection District shall be
delineated on the Official Town of Irondequoit EPOD Maps and
shall include all areas of special flood hazard, as identified by the
Federal Insurance Administration through a report entitled the
"Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Irondequoit, New York"
dated December 1977, with an accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Map and Flood Hazard Boundary Map. These maps and any
revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this section.
(2) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided in the Flood
Insurance Study for areas in the Town of Irondequoit as required
above, the Town Planning Board, Town Department of Planning and
Zoning or Town Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state,
Town or other source in order to administer the standards and
requirements of this section.
(3) For the purposes of this section, there is hereby established within
the Town of Irondequoit three Floodplain Protection Districts to be
§ 235-55 LITTERING § 235-55
230:735
known as "Floodplain Overlay District I (FPO-I)," "Floodplain
Overlay District II (FPO-II)" and "Floodplain Overlay District III
(FPO-III)." The boundaries of the Floodplain Overlay District shall
include all areas within the floodways as delineated in the Flood
Insurance Study for the Town of Irondequoit, and as shown on
the National Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the Town. The
boundaries of the FPO-III Zone shall include all areas within the
one-hundred-year floodplain as delineated in the Town Flood
Insurance Study, but does not include any areas within Floodplain
Overlay District I (FPO-I) and Floodplain Overlay District II (FPOII).
C. Regulated activities.
(1) Prohibited activities. The following activities are not permitted in a
Floodplain Overlay District (FPO):
(a) The temporary or permanent placement of a mobile home or
similar structure.
(b) The construction or operation of an on-site sewage disposal
system.
(c) Any other activity which, as demonstrated through a technical
evaluation, will result in any increase in the flood level during
the occurrence of the base discharge.
(2) Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within the FPO Zone unless such person has
first applied for and obtained an EPOD development permit
pursuant to the requirements of this section:
(a) Additions or substantial improvements to structures.
(b) New structures (temporary or permanent).
(c) Subdivision of land.
(d) Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to building or other structures,
mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
D. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) No EPOD development permit shall be issued by the Town Planning
Board for any regulated activity within any Floodplain Overlay
District unless the applicant for such a permit has submitted a plan
that is certified by a registered professional engineer and shows
evidence of the following:
§ 235-55 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-55
230:736
(a) That the structure will be constructed with its lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood level.
(b) That the structure will not affect the efficiency or the capacity
of the floodway or increase flood heights.
(c) That the structure will not cause increased velocities or
obstruct or otherwise catch or collect debris which will
obstruct flow under flood conditions.
(d) That the structure shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the obstruction to the flow of waters.
(e) That the structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement which may result in damage to
other structures, restrictions of bridge openings and other
narrowings of the watercourse.
(f) That all new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems
into floodwaters.
(g) That service facilities, such as electrical and heating
equipment, shall be constructed at or above the base flood
level for the particular area or shall be floodproofed.
(h) That new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using materials, methods and practices that
minimize flood damages.
(i) That base flood elevation data is provided for all subdivision
proposals.
(j) Such other data or evidence as may be requested by the Town
Planning Board, Conservation Board or Town Department of
Planning and Zoning pertaining to flooding and site plan
information.
(k) Information and/or a description regarding the extent to which
any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of any
proposed development.
(l) Plans indicating any walls to be used to enclose space located
below the base flood level.
(m) That there is no reasonable alternative for the proposed
regulated activity on a site which is not in a flood hazard area.
(2) When taking action on an application for an EPOD development
permit for a regulated action in any Floodplain Overlay District, the
Town Planning Board shall consider all technical information
§ 235-55 LITTERING § 235-55
230:737
available, all relevant factors and standards specified in this
section, as well as the following:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
detriment of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location;
(f) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
or erosion damage for the proposed use;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Town
Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for
that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
(3) The Town Planning Board may also require the applicant for an
EPOD development permit in any Floodplain Overly District to
adequately demonstrate that one or more of the following
conditions have been met before a permit is granted for any
regulated activity:
(a) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
(b) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressure.
(c) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
(d) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
§ 235-55 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-55
230:738
(e) Addition of mass or weight to resist flotation.
(f) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(g) Pumping facilities to relieve hydrostatic water pressure on
external walls and basement floors.
(h) Elimination of gravity flow drains.
(i) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
(j) Compliance with other applicable environmental regulations
contained in the Code of the Town of Irondequoit.
E. Additional requirements/information.
(1) In addition to the other duties and responsibilities specified in this
section, the Town Department of Planning and Zoning is authorized
to administer the following provisions of this chapter. The Town
Department of Planning and Zoning shall:
(a) Secure from the applicant all information necessary for a
complete review of the proposed development by the
appropriate boards and officials. The information necessary for
submission shall be the same as required for site plan approval
as specified in Article XV of this chapter, plus any additional
information that may be required by the Town Planning Board
to adequately review a request for a permit.
(b) Review all applications to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(c) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to sea level)
of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(d) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to sea
level).
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in this
section.
(e) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this section.
(f) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 235-55 LITTERING § 235-55
230:739
§ 235-56. EPOD5 - Watercourse Protection District.
(g) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(2) Where this section imposes greater restrictions than are imposed
by the provision of any law, ordinance, regulation or private
agreement, this section shall control. Where there are restrictions
by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement greater
than those imposed by this section, such greater restrictions shall
control. All uses presently permitted in the zoning districts within
the Town of Irondequoit which also fall within the FPO Zones shall
continue to be permitted uses for these districts, except where
otherwise restricted by this section.
(3) Appeals for variances to the requirements of this section shall be
based upon Section 80.6 (formerly Section 1910.6) of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations. Any applicant to whom a
variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the
base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(4) No board or official of the Town of Irondequoit shall approve any
construction or other activity within the Town not in compliance
with the standards of Public Law No. 93-234, 93rd Congress, H.R.
8449, December 31, 1973, better known as the "Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973," and the floodplain management
requirements of Section 60.3(d) [formerly Section 1910.3(d)] and
any amendments thereto.
(5) The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Irondequoit, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Watercourse Protection District is to
preserve and protect watercourses located within the Town of
Irondequoit by regulating or controlling development in those areas
and by requiring review and permit approval prior to commencement of
any activity.
§ 235-55 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-56
230:740
B. Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Watercourse
Protection District shall be delineated on the Official Town of
Irondequoit EPOD Maps and shall include all areas in the Town of
Irondequoit as follows:
(1) All those areas within 200 feet of the center line of a natural or
man-made watercourse with an approximate channel top width
which is 100 feet or greater (see diagram below). [Amended
6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 235-56 LITTERING § 235-56
230:741
(2) All those areas within 100 feet of the center line of a natural or
man-made watercourse with an approximate channel top width
which is 50 feet or greater but less 100 feet. [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
(3) All those areas within fifty feet of the center line of a natural or
man-made watercourse with an approximate channel top width
which is less than 50 feet. [Added 2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995;
amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. Regulated activities. [Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986,
2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
(1) No person shall conduct any of the following regulated activities
within any Watercourse Protection District in the Town of
Irondequoit unless such person has applied for and obtained an
EPOD development permit pursuant to the requirements of this
section:
(a) Clearing of or constructing on any lands or areas which lie
within the Watercourse Protection District boundaries, except
that the following activities shall be exempted from the
clearing regulations of this part:
[1] Customary agricultural operations.
[2] Watercourse maintenance activities.
(b) The construction or placement of any septic tank or septic
drainage field.
§ 235-56 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-56
230:742
§ 235-57. EPOD6 - Coastal Erosion Area Protection District.
[Amended 4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988; 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
(c) Any activity which would alter the natural flow pattern of the
watercourse.
(2) All of the above regulated activities shall be subject to the EPOD
permit application procedures set forth in § 235-45.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall build or grade
within 50 feet of the center line of streams subject to stream
corridor environmental protection overlay districts.
D. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
development permit, the Town Planning Board shall consider the
effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on the public
health, safety and welfare and the protection and enhancement of
watercourses within the Town.
(2) Any applicant for a permit to undertake a regulated activity within
a Watercourse Protection District in the Town of Irondequoit shall
be required to adequately demonstrate to the Town Planning Board
that the proposed activity will in no way at present or at any in the
future adversely affect the following:
(a) Water quality.
(b) Watercourse flood-carrying capacities.
(c) Rate of sedimentation.
(d) Velocity of groundwater runoff.
(e) Natural characteristics of the watercourse.
(3) When altering the natural flow pattern of a natural or man-made
watercourse, the applicant shall prove that the alteration:
(a) Is necessary; and
(b) Will not impair the natural functions of the watercourse.
(4) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of demonstrating
that the proposed regulated activity will be conducted in
accordance with the standards and requirements listed above.
A. Purpose and statutory authority. The purpose of the Coastal Erosion
Area Protection District is to protect man-made property, natural
protective features and other natural resources along the shorelines of
Lake Ontario and Irondequoit Bay and within the Town of Irondequoit
from damage or destruction that results from severe wind and water
§ 235-56 LITTERING § 235-57
230:743
erosion. The purpose of the Coastal Erosion Area Protection District
is also to protect human life. The Coastal Erosion Area Protection
District is designed to ensure that new construction or the placement
of structures along the shoreline is located a safe distance away from
areas of active erosion; that construction of new public facilities that
might encourage private development in erosion hazard areas is
restricted; and that publicly financed erosion protection structures are
justified in terms of their overall public benefits and ability to prevent
erosion damage.
B. Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Coastal
Erosion Area Protection District shall be delineated on the Official Town
of Irondequoit EPOD Maps and shall include all coastal erosion hazard
areas designated on the final Coastal Erosion Hazard Area Map for the
Town of Irondequoit, prepared and filed by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, in accordance with the
provisions of Article 34 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law. The Coastal Erosion Area Protection District shall
include those structural hazard areas and natural protective feature
areas within the Town as defined and identified by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation on the final Coastal Erosion
Hazard Area Map for the Town of Irondequoit. Upon application for a
development permit within a Coastal Erosion Area Protection District,
the Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall refer such
application and site plan to the State Department of Environmental
Conservation in order to determine the precise boundary of the
protected area.
C. Regulated activities.
(1) No person shall conduct any of the following regulated activities
within any Coastal Erosion Area Protection District in the Town of
Irondequoit unless such person has first applied for and obtained
an EPOD development permit pursuant to the requirements of this
section:
(a) The construction or placement of any building or structure,
including movable buildings or structures.
(b) The modification or restoration of any existing building or
structure, including existing movable buildings or structures.
(c) The installation of public service distribution, transmission or
collection systems for gas, electricity, water or wastewater.
(d) Any activity or use of land which, based on a determination by
the Town Planning Board, materially alters the condition of
land, including grading, excavating, dumping, mining,
dredging, filling or other disturbance of soil.
(e) The construction, modification or restoration of erosion
protection structures.
§ 235-57 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-57
230:744
(2) Applicants for EPOD development permits within a designated
Coastal Erosion Area Protection District should examine the
development standards and permit conditions contained in this
section in order to more precisely determine which activities may
or may not require a permit in this district.
D. Exempt activities.
(1) In addition to the exempt activities which are listed in § 235-45 of
this article, beach grooming and cleanup operations and the
implementation of practices recommended in a soil and waste
conservation plan as defined in § 3, Subdivision (12), of the Soil and
Water Conservation Districts Law, as amended or changed, shall
also be exempt from the permit requirements of this article,
provided that such practices do not involve the construction or
placement of a building or structure.
(2) The permit requirements of this district shall not apply to
emergency activities that are necessary to protect the public
health, safety or general welfare. However, whenever emergency
activities are undertaken within a designated Coastal Erosion Area
Protection District, damage to natural protective features and
other natural resources shall be minimized, as much as possible.
Within two working days after the commencement of any
emergency activity within a Coastal Erosion Area Protection
District, the person or agency responsible for such activity must:
(a) Notify the Town Building Inspector and describe the
emergency and the reason(s) why the public health, safety and/
or general welfare were in jeopardy.
(b) Describe the measure(s) which were taken to protect the
public health, safety and/or general welfare and to minimize
damage to natural resources along the shoreline.
(3) If the Town Building Inspector determines that a regulated activity
undertaken without an EPOD development permit within a Coastal
Erosion Area Protection District does not meet the emergency
activity criteria of this section, then the Inspector shall order the
immediate cessation of such activity. The Town Building Inspector
may also require the removal of any building or structure that was
constructed or placed without an EPOD development permit and
the return to former conditions of any natural protective features
that were excavated, mined or otherwise disturbed without an
EPOD development permit.
E. Prohibited activities.
(1) The following activities shall generally be prohibited within any
structural hazard area, as defined and identified by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation on the final
Coastal Erosion Hazard Area Map for the Town of Irondequoit:
§ 235-57 LITTERING § 235-57
230:745
(Reserved)
(2) The following activities shall generally be prohibited within any
natural protective feature area, as defined and identified by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation on the
final Coastal Erosion Hazard Area Map for the Town of Irondequoit:
(a) Excavation, mining or dredging which diminishes the erosion
protection provided by existing natural protective features.
(3) Applicants for EPOD development permits within a designated
Coastal Erosion Area Protection District should examine the
development standards and permit conditions contained in this
section in order to more precisely determine which activities may
or may not be prohibited in this district.
F. Development standards/permit conditions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD
development permit within a Coastal Erosion Area Protection
District, the Town Planning Board shall consider the effect that the
proposed regulated activity will have on the public health, safety
and general welfare and on the protection of man-made property,
natural protective features and other natural resources along the
shorelines of Lake Ontario and Irondequoit Bay and within the
Town of Irondequoit from damage or destruction due to severe
wind and water erosion.
(2) No permit to undertake a regulated activity within a Coastal
Erosion Area Protection District in the Town of Irondequoit shall be
issued by the Town Planning Board unless the applicant can
adequately demonstrate to the Board that the proposed activity:
(a) Is reasonable and necessary when alternatives to the proposed
activity and the extent to which the activity requires a
shoreline location are considered.
(b) Will not be likely to cause a measurable increase in erosion at
the proposed site or at other locations.
(c) Prevents or minimizes, to the extent possible, adverse impacts
on existing natural protective features and their functions,
existing erosion protection structures or other natural
resources, including but not limited to significant fish and
wildlife habitats and shellfish beds.
(3) Applications for EPOD development permits for regulated activities
within designated Coastal Erosion Area Protection Districts shall
be reviewed, approved and/or conditioned on the following
standards and criteria, where applicable:
§ 235-57 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-57
230:746
(a) Movable structures constructed or placed within structural
hazard areas shall not contain any permanent foundations. Any
temporary foundations shall be removed at the time the
structure is moved. Below-grade footings shall be allowed if
satisfactory provisions are made for their removal.
(b) No movable structure within structural hazard areas shall be
placed closer than 25 feet to the landward limit of a bluff.
(c) Where there are no bluffs or dunes present, no movable
structure within structural hazard areas shall be placed within
25 feet of the landward limit of a beach.
(d) No movable structure within structural hazard areas shall be
placed or constructed so that its weight places an excessive
ground loading on a bluff.
(e) Movable structures located within an erosion hazard area must
be removed before the receding edge recedes to within 10 feet
of the most seaward point of the movable structure.
(f) Any grading, excavating or other soil disturbance conducted
within an erosion hazard area must not direct surface water
runoff over the receding edge.
(g) Dredging within natural protective feature areas that is
required to maintain or construct navigation channels or for
artificial beach nourishment shall require an EPOD
development permit.
(h) Clean sand and gravel is the only material which may be
deposited within natural protective feature areas. Any
deposition requires an EPOD development permit.
(i) An EPOD development permit shall not be required for the
construction, modification or restoration, within natural
protective feature areas, of docks, piers, wharves or other
structures that are built on floats, columns, open timber, piles
or similar openwork supports and that have a top surface area
of 200 square feet or less or that are entirely removed from the
water in the fall of each year.
(j) Excavation of bluffs shall only be a permitted regulated activity
where such activity is required as a part of the construction,
modification or restoration of an erosion protection structure.
(k) Excavation or mining of bluffs shall only be a permitted
regulated activity where such activities involve bluff cuts made
in a direction that is perpendicular to the shoreline and made
in order to provide shoreline access. The ramp slope of such
bluff cuts must not be steeper than 1 to 6 and the side slopes
must not be steeper than 1 to 3, if not terraced or otherwise
§ 235-57 LITTERING § 235-57
230:747
structurally stabilized. Side slopes and other disturbed onroadway
areas must be stabilized with vegetation or other
approved physical means. Completed roadways must be
stabilized and appropriate drainage provided.
(l) Vehicular traffic shall be prohibited on all natural protective
areas.
(m) Elevated walkways or stairways constructed solely for the
purpose of providing private pedestrian access to the beach for
an individual property owner shall not require an EPOD
development permit.
(n) Excavation or mining of dunes shall be prohibited.
(o) Pedestrian traffic across dunes must utilize elevated walkways
and stairways or other similar structures.
(p) New structures or major additions to existing structures
constructed on dunes or beaches must be built on adequately
anchored pilings that provide at least three feet of open space
between the lowest horizontal structural member, e.g., floor
joists, and the surface of the dune or beach area. This threefoot
space must be left open and free of obstructions.
(q) All erosion protection structures must be designed and
constructed according to generally accepted engineering
principles and design standards that have shown or will show a
reasonable likelihood of success, in controlling long-term
erosion on the immediate site for at least 30 years.
(r) A long-term maintenance program must be included with every
application for an EPOD development permit for the
construction, modification or restoration of an erosion
protection structure in a designated Coastal Erosion Area
Protection District. This program must include specifications
for normal maintenance of degradable materials and the
periodic replacement of removable materials.
(s) All materials used in erosion protection structures must be
durable and capable of withstanding inundation, wave impacts,
weathering and other effects of storm conditions. Individual
component materials may have a working life of less than 30
years only when a maintenance program ensures that they will
be regularly maintained and replaced as necessary to attain
the required 30 years of erosion protection.
(t) The construction, modification or restoration of erosion
protection structures must not be likely to cause any
measurable increase in erosion at the development site or at
other locations and must minimize or, if possible, prevent
adverse impacts on natural protective features, existing
§ 235-57 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-57
230:748
erosion protection structures and natural resources including
significant fish and wildlife habitats.
(4) The applicant for an EPOD development permit within a designated
Coastal Erosion Area Protection District shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the proposed regulated activity will be
conducted in accordance with the standards and requirements set
forth in this section.
§ 235-57 LITTERING § 235-57
230:749

ARTICLE XII
Open Space (OS) District
[Added 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-58. Purpose.
A. The Open Space (OS) District is designed to provide a suitable
character and stable environment for the establishment and
maintenance of recreational and open space used and activities
conducted within the Town of Irondequoit. The district is designed to
protect publicly owned lands within the Town from development
pressures and to preserve and enhance the unique and sensitive
environmental features that exist in most open space areas within
Irondequoit. The district is also designed to encourage land uses and
development patterns that respect and are consistent with those unique
and sensitive environmental features.
B. The Open Space (OS) District permits recreational and open space uses
that serve the residents and visitors to the Town and that generally
preserve and enhance the unique aesthetic and environmental qualities
of open space areas. The purpose of this district includes the following
specific goals:
(1) To ensure that development and land use activity within open space
areas along the shorelines of Lake Ontario and Irondequoit Bay is
consistent with the policies and objectives of the Town of
Irondequoit's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP).
(2) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for recreational
activities, landscaped areas and buffers, wildlife habitats and other
public uses in order to meet the various recreational and quality-oflife
needs of the Town of Irondequoit's present and future
populations.
(3) To recognize the sensitivity of open space areas as unique
environmental and recreational resources and to protect these
areas from environmentally destructive uses and activities.
(4) To encourage land use and development activity that is in harmony
with its environment and that does not conflict with the
preservation of the natural beauty of the Town's open space areas.
(5) To promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
direction of building development based upon land and soil types
and other natural features, environmental constraints,
neighborhood characteristics and overall community needs and to
protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses.
§ 235-58 LITTERING § 235-58
230:751
§ 235-59. Permitted uses.
No structure shall be erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved,
and no structure, land or premises shall be used in any district designated
on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Irondequoit as an Open Space
(OS) District except for the following principal and customarily incidental
accessory uses:
(6) To preserve areas that are naturally unsuited for development or
that have unique historical, aesthetic or environmental
significance.
(7) To protect and enhance existing park lands, playgrounds and other
publicly owned areas within the Town, to provide areas for the
development of public service facilities within the Town and to
establish a pattern of open space within the Town that contributes
to the value and attractiveness of property, the maintenance of
unique environmental areas and the general quality of life of the
residents of Irondequoit.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds, public indoor and outdoor
recreational facilities or similar public recreational uses authorized
or operated by a public agency and not operated for gain, subject to
site plan review and approval issued by the Town Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(2) Municipally owned and/or operated buildings or structures and
other strictly governmental uses and activities, including, but not
limited to, schools; museums; water collection, storage and
distribution systems; fire stations; public libraries; post offices;
governmental offices; sewer lift stations; sewage treatment plants;
etc., subject to site plan review and approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(3) Buildings or structures erected or used in connection with, but not
directly associated with, a governmental function, agency or
activity and not operated for gain, including, but not limited to,
such things as a community bandstand, Town volunteer Fire
Department and recreational facilities, historic sites, etc., subject
to site plan review and approval issued by the Town Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(4) Public or private botanical gardens, arboretums, conservatories
and other similar uses, subject to site plan review and approval
issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(5) Cemeteries, including associated facilities such as mausoleums,
columbariums, crematories and chapels, provided that no such
§ 235-58 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-59
230:752
structure or facility constructed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district
boundary line, and subject to special use permit approval issued
by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter;
(6) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities limited to golf courses,
swimming pools, skating rinks, archery ranges, playgrounds,
athletic fields or court games, operated for gain, subject to special
use permit approval issued by the Town Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(7) Private clubs or camps, private membership clubs, lodges or
fraternal organizations, neighborhood or community centers,
YMCA or YWCA or other similar use, subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(8) Zoos subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(9) Plant nurseries subject to special use permit approval issued by the
Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article
XV of this chapter.
(10) Commercial facilities incidental to the operation of public
recreational uses, including, but not limited to, such things as
refreshment stands, small concessionaire shops dispensing
sporting goods, miniature golf and similar amusement and
recreational facilities, subject to special use permit approval issued
by Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter.
(11) Public utility building or structures, including, but not limited to,
electrical substations, subject to special use permit approval issued
by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV of this chapter.
(12) Combinations of permitted principle uses based on a determination
by the Town Planning Board that such combinations are
appropriate for the proposed open space area and are compatible
with the purpose and intent of this district, subject to special use
permit approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(13) Other uses not specifically listed above but which, based on a
determination by the Town Planning Board, are deemed
appropriate for open space areas, are similar in nature to permitted
principle uses and are compatible with the purpose and intent of
this district, subject to special use permit approval issued by the
§ 235-59 LITTERING § 235-59
230:753
Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article
XV of this chapter.
B. Accessory uses (located on the same lot with a permitted principle use):
(1) Fencing subject to the provisions of § 235-69 of this chapter.
(2) Sheds, cabanas or similar accessory structures subject to those
dimensional and setback requirements applicable to private
garages and carports as noted in Article IV of this chapter.
(3) Radio, TV or CB antennas subject to the provisions of § 235-72 of
this chapter. Those structures that require a permit from the Town
Zoning Board of Appeals shall also be subject to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(4) Signage, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) All signage, with the exception of real estate signs, temporary
political signs and accessory traffic signs, shall be subject to
special use permit approval issued by the Town Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
Real estate signs shall be subject to the applicable provisions
of § 235-16 of this chapter.
(b) Signs may be illuminated with a constant source, but flashing,
neon, revolving, animated or similar type signs are prohibited.
(c) Dimensional and setback requirements for all signs oriented
towards streets or highways shall be determined. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(5) Parking of trucks, vans and other similar vehicles, subject to the
applicable provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(6) Dumpsters and other similar outdoor refuse containers or
enclosures, provided that such uses are located at least four feet
from any lot line, and subject to site plan review and approval
issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter.
(7) Outdoor storage of boats associated with public recreational
facilities, subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(8) Fishing piers, docks, wharves, boat launching ramps and similar
waterfront structures and facilities associated with public
recreational facilities, subject to all applicable state regulations
and approvals and to the applicable provisions of Article IX of this
chapter, as well as special use permit approval issued by the Town
§ 235-59 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-59
230:754
§ 235-60. Lot and bulk requirements.
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
(9) Mooring buoys or facilities associated with public recreational
facilities, subject to the applicable provisions of Article IX of this
chapter.
(10) Accessory dredging and filling associated with public recreational
facilities, subject to all applicable state regulations and approvals
and subject to special use permit approval issued by the Town
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of
this chapter.
A. Required minimum lot size. The required minimum lot sizes for all
principle uses permitted in the Open Space (OS) District shall be
established by the Town Planning Board during the site plan review and
approval process or the special use permit approval process. The
required minimum lot size shall be based on the amount of land area
necessary to adequately accommodate the proposed principle use, as
well as all parking, loading, landscaping, open space, setback and
access areas and fire lanes for such use. The required minimum lot size
shall also be based on the relative intensity of the proposed land use,
the requirements regarding the maximum percentage of lot occupancy
contained in this section, the need to protect the proposed use from
surrounding land use development patterns and the need to protect
sensitive environmental areas, significant historic or archaeological
areas or scenic views or vistas.
B. Required minimum building setbacks (required front, side and rear
yards). Setbacks of buildings and structures from all other buildings
and structures on the lot and from property lines for all other permitted
principle and accessory uses identified in this section shall be
determined by the Town Planning Board during the site plan review and
approval process or the special use permit process and shall be based
on the following requirements and guidelines:
(1) Principle buildings, parking areas and accessory structures,
excluding such facilities as docks, piers, wharves and boat ramps,
shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet inland from the high water's
edge, in order to maintain adequate access to the shore zone.
(2) Principal building, parking areas and accessory structures shall be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from any road right-of-way and a
minimum of 15 feet from any property line.
(3) Principle buildings, parking areas, accessory structures or areas of
concentrated outdoor activity shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from any residential lot or district.
§ 235-59 LITTERING § 235-60
230:755
§ 235-61. Off-street parking and loading.
(4) Principle building and accessory structure setbacks should be
established with due consideration for provisions for fire protection
services and adequate access for fire and emergency equipment
within and around the site.
(5) Principle building and accessory structure setbacks should be
established with due consideration for the protection and
preservation of unique and sensitive environmental features, the
maintenance of wooded areas, wildlife habitats, scenic vistas,
stream beds and slope areas and the requirement to adequately
buffer adjacent land uses from intense outdoor recreational
activities.
(6) Principle building and accessory structure setbacks should be
established with due consideration to the use of clustering as an
appropriate site design technique.
C. Maximum building heights.
(1) Maximum building heights for all permitted principle uses specified
in this section shall not exceed 35 feet, except where it has been
determined by the Town Planning Board during the site plan or
special use permit review and approval process that, based on a
visual analysis of the site prepared and submitted by the applicant
and reviewed by the Board, such building height would interfere
with identified scenic views or vistas or destroy the aesthetic
integrity of the waterfront area. In such cases, the Town Planning
Board shall be empowered to establish maximum principle building
heights in order to protect the scenic views and vistas and the
aesthetic character of open space areas in general.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet,
unless otherwise specified or regulated in this chapter.
D. Maximum density/maximum percentage of lot occupancy. The total
overall ground coverage of all principle and accessory buildings,
parking areas and other impervious surfaces on any lot in any Open
Space (OS) District shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area. The
remainder of the lot shall be for open space and/or landscaped areas.
A. Off-street parking spaces and loading facilities must be provided for all
uses specified in this article, in accordance with the provisions of this
article and the following additional requirements:
(1) All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any
street line or property line to provide for proper landscaping and
buffering.
B. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of parking spaces
required for a given project may be permitted by the Town Planning
§ 235-60 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-61
230:756
§ 235-62. Landscaping and buffering.
§ 235-63. Lighting.
All lighting shall be located and shielded so as to prevent the direct glare of
beams onto adjacent residential properties and streets.
§ 235-64. Noise.
All public address systems, loudspeakers or other similar sound-producing
activities shall be designed, located and operated so as to avoid any undue
disturbance or any nuisance within the surrounding area.
Board during the site plan or special use permit review and approval
process where it can be demonstrated that such a reduction will not
create overflow parking problems or traffic congestion and that the
additional space will be used for landscaping or open space within the
site. Such a reduction shall be permitted by the Town Planning Board
on a case-by-case basis.
A. When a use is the first to develop on two adjacent vacant parcels, this
first use shall be required to meet minimum setbacks, but shall not be
required to provide a buffer yard. The second use to develop shall, at
the time it is constructed, provide all additional plant material and/or
land necessary to provide the total buffer yard required between the
two uses, subject to the appropriate requirements contained in Article
IX of this chapter. Existing plant materials and/or land located on the
preexisting (first developed) land use which meet the requirements of
this section may be counted as contributing to the total buffer yard
required between it and the second (adjacent) land use to be developed.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
B. Required setbacks for parking areas shall be landscaped and buffered
as much as possible. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of
parking spaces required for a project shall be permitted by the Town
Planning Board where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that
such a reduction will not create overflow parking problems and that the
additional space will be used for landscaping or open space within the
site.
C. Outdoor storage of boats and equipment, outdoor dumpsters, sheds,
etc., shall be adequately and properly buffered using trees, berms, etc.
D. Where practical, trees with a diameter or caliper of three inches or
greater shall be retained on the site.
§ 235-61 LITTERING § 235-64
230:757

ARTICLE XIII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 235-65. Recreational ramps. [Added 2-12-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. Definition. A "recreational ramp" is defined as any structure or
improvement which is used for the purpose of riding or propelling
wheeled vehicles, including, but not limited to, skateboards, bicycles,
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, roller skates or such other similar
vehicles or devices. Small skateboard units commonly known as
"quarter-pipes" or other similar structures that are easily portable by
an individual under his or her own power are excluded from this
definition.
B. General provisions.
(1) The use and construction of recreational ramps is prohibited in RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 Zoning Districts.
(2) The use and construction of recreational ramps is allowed in C, WD,
OS and M Zoning Districts.
(3) Any recreational ramp, as defined in this chapter, shall be deemed
an accessory structure or use under all applicable provisions of this
article and shall not be constructed or maintained unless it
conforms to all applicable provisions of this article and other
provisions of this Code.
C. Regulations.
(1) Permit required. No such structure shall be constructed, where
permitted, without a building permit issued by the Code
Enforcement Division of the Town of Irondequoit.
(2) Plans to be filed. No permit shall be issued for the construction or
use of recreational ramps without site plan approval by the
Planning Board pursuant to Article XV.
(3) Structural stability. The ramp(s) shall be structurally stable, and
such determination shall be made by the Building Inspector on any
of the following basis:
(a) A certification by a professional engineer or architect licensed
by the State of New York.
(b) Manufacturer's warranty, if any.
(4) Use and maintenance. Such recreational ramp(s) shall be used and
maintained in such a way as not to be detrimental to the health and
safety of any individual or be contrary to public welfare because of
their hours of operation, noise level, location and type of outdoor
lighting and/or conduct of the person(s) using such ramp(s).
§ 235-65 LITTERING § 235-65
230:759
§ 235-66. Townhouses.
D. Waiver by Board Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon
appeal by an owner/operator, grant variances from provisions of this
section in accordance with the provisions of § 267 of New York State
Town Law, as amended or changed, and upon a determination that the
privacy, use, quiet enjoyment and value of the neighboring properties
shall not be adversely affected thereby.142
A. Where permitted. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter,
townhouses, as defined in this chapter, may be permitted in the R-4, R-5
and R-6 Residential Districts in accordance with the following
procedures and conditions.143
B. Development standards. No townhouse or clusters of townhouses shall
be erected or existing structures altered or reconstructed to become
such, except in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) Density. The overall density shall not exceed seven dwelling units
per acre.
(2) Area. Area requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,200 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 22 feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(d) Maximum building height: 30 feet, with no more than two
floors of habitable space above ground level.
(e) Minimum unit size: 960 square feet.
(f) Minimum roof pitch: one foot in four feet.
(g) Maximum length of building: 176 feet, with a minimum of six
feet of change in the building front line setback every two
units.
(h) Minimum dimension between townhouses: 40 feet between
principal buildings.
(i) Minimum parking requirements: two spaces per unit, including
at least one enclosed garage space per unit.
(j) Setbacks, including accessory buildings, shall be as follows:
142. Editor's Note: Former § 130.60E, which regulated preexisting recreational ramps and
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
143. Editor's Note: Former § 130.35B, C and D, which established the procedure for review of a
development permit for townhouses and immediately followed this section, was deleted
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
§ 235-65 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-66
230:760
[1] Front yards. No building or part thereof shall be erected or
altered in this district to be nearer to the private street line
upon which it fronts than 20 feet. No building or part
thereof shall be erected or altered in this district to be
nearer than 60 feet to the street line of a public or
dedicated road upon which it fronts. If any building
erected in this district faces a public or dedicated road, the
opposite side of which is either a R-1, R-2 or R-3
Residential District, the front yard setback shall be that
which is required by that residential district.
[2] Side yards. A side yard setback of 25 feet is required from
the line of a private road on each corner lot and/or 60 feet
from the line of a public or dedicated road. A side yard
setback of at least equal to the height of the highest
adjacent building and no less than 40 feet shall be
required between building groups.
[3] Rear yards. A setback of at least 40 feet from any other
structure or any external boundary line is required on each
lot.
[4] Other setbacks. A setback of at least 50 feet where any lot
line of the development area abuts a R-1, R-2 or R-3
Residential District shall be required.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses. The following accessory
structures and uses are permitted subject to the review of the
Planning Board of the site and as hereinafter provided. No
accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet above grade level.
(a) Private garages.
(b) Group swimming pools. Pools shall be permanently installed
and shall be subject to provisions of § 235-71 of this chapter,
except that any pool proposed as an integral part of a
townhouse project may be approved by the Planning Board as a
part of its site plan approval.
(c) Parks, playgrounds and play areas, to include structural
facilities incidental to such areas such as rest rooms,
bathhouses and clubhouses, which facilities are limited to
those that are owned in common interest.
(d) Maintenance buildings.
(4) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed so as to permit pedestrian
access to all areas of the development, including each dwelling unit
and all recreational areas. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width
of four feet and shall conform in all other ways to the Town of
Irondequoit regulations.
§ 235-66 LITTERING § 235-66
230:761
§ 235-67. Mobile home parks.
(5) Private roads. All private roads within the development shall be
constructed and surfaced with asphaltic or portland cement binder
pavement. The paved portion of the road shall have a minimum
width of 22 feet, with adequate gutters or curbs for surface water
control.
(6) Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided.
(7) Recreational areas. An area or areas equal to at least 200 square
feet per dwelling unit shall be provided for recreational use and
shall be so designated on the site plan.
(8) Maintenance. The project developer must be able to show the
Planning Board a feasible method of assuring that all common
lands in the development are properly maintained, to include
mowing and other landscape services, removal of snow and all
other project needs. No project approval can be granted without
documented evidence that satisfactory maintenance will occur.
(9) Site development plan requirements. Site plan requirements shall
be as set forth in Article XV. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
(10) Conformance certification. Upon completion of the project or any
stage thereof for which the developer shall seek a certificate of
occupancy certifying satisfactory completion of the project or
portion thereof, the developer shall submit a certificate of his or her
registered architect or licensed engineer in a form satisfactory to
the Building Inspector that the completed project, or portion
thereof, conforms to the plans therefor reviewed by the Planning
Board and approved by the Town Board. Upon receipt of such
certification and based upon required reports of Town Board or
other officials, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate
certifying the completion of the townhouse development, or portion
thereof, and shall note the issuance of the certificate on the
recorded final site development plan.
A. Special use permit required. A special use permit may be granted by
the Town Board, after a public hearing, for the establishment of a
mobile home park where such park is found by the Town Board to
comply with the purposes and standards of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Irondequoit.
B. Purpose. This chapter recognizes that mobile homes are a means of
meeting housing needs and that a mobile home park may be permitted
by the Town Board where the Town Board determines that such park is
appropriate and in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 235-66 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-67
230:762
C. Location. A mobile home park may be established in any R-4 or R-5
Residential District. Mobile homes shall not be located on any premises
within the Town of Irondequoit except in a mobile home park.
D. Permitted uses. Within any mobile home park, no building, structure,
lot or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Mobile homes as single-family units.
(2) Those permitted and accessory uses permitted in the residential
district in which the mobile home park is located.
E. Design standards.
(1) Site dimension, design and construction.
(a) The mobile home park shall be no less than 20 acres in size.
(b) The maximum number of mobile home lots in a mobile home
park shall not exceed the number of single-family units which,
in the opinion of the Town Board, would be permitted under the
requirements of the residential district in which the site is
located.
(c) All mobile homes and accessory structures shall be set back at
least 70 feet from the right-of-way line of any public street and
40 feet from all other property lines.
(d) The site shall have a street system with paved roadways a
minimum of 22 feet wide, giving access to all mobile homes
spaces and at least two access drives to and from the public
street. A system of walkways a minimum of two feet in width
shall also be provided along interior streets and leading to
public open spaces.
(e) Mobile home lots shall have the following sizes and setbacks: a
minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum lot
width of 50 feet (larger minimum lot dimensions may be
required where the Board of Appeals considers the
establishment of large lots necessary to preserve the character
of the general area); a setback of 25 feet from mobile home
park streets; and a minimum separation of 50 feet between
structures on adjoining lots.
(f) Design and construction of mobile home parks shall conform to
applicable building regulations and generally accepted
standards for mobile home parks.
(g) Open areas shall be adequate to assure privacy, natural light
and ventilation for each mobile home and sufficient for
essential outdoor uses.
§ 235-67 LITTERING § 235-67
230:763
(h) Community structures shall be structurally sound and
appropriate for their intended use and location.
(i) Community areas, including community facilities, shall be
appropriate for their intended use and location.
(j) Fences, walls and other minor constructions shall be capable of
sustaining anticipated loads.
(k) Swimming pools, playground equipment, etc., shall be
designed so as not to be a potential hazard.
(l) Walks, driveways and parking spaces shall be provided with
paved and durable surfacing so as to provide safe and easy
access under normal use and weather conditions.
(m) Wires installed above driveways and parking spaces shall have
a clearance of not less than 18 feet.
(n) Artificial lighting shall be provided to illuminate walks,
driveways and parking spaces for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.
(o) Each mobile home lot shall have:
[1] A twelve-foot wide driveway from the street.
[2] A mobile home stand capable of retaining the mobile home
in a fixed position. Such stand shall be adequately
compacted and at such elevation, distance and angle, in
relation to the accessway, as to facilitate the safe and
efficient placement and removal of the mobile home.
[3] A four-inch concrete patio, with minimum dimensions of 10
feet by 18 feet located so as to provided safe and easy
access from the mobile home.
[4] An inconspicuous fuel oil storage shelter.
[5] Suitable utility connections as specified.
(p) The following facilities shall be provided in the mobile home
park:
[1] An equipped recreation facility with an area of 50 square
feet per mobile home lot in the park, but not less than 1/2
acre.
[2] Centrally located public telephones, separate emergency
sanitary facilities for men and women and emergency
public water supplies.
§ 235-67 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-67
230:764
[3] A fire protection system in accordance with the standards
of the Fire Prevention Code applicable to the Town of
Irondequoit.144
(2) Utilities.
(a) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a water supply
connection, sanitary drainage connection and an electrical
receptacle.
(b) Utility connections, including gas connections, where
provided, shall be readily accessible at the mobile home stand
and shall have the means for safe and efficient hookup to the
mobile home.
(c) Water supply systems shall be designed to provide a sufficient
supply of potable water under adequate pressure to outlets
servicing mobile homes, community structures, drinking
fountains, hose connections, hydrants, etc.
(d) Where a public water supply system is not available, an
adequate private water supply system, approved by the
appropriate authority having jurisdiction, shall be provided.
(e) Water supply connections shall be located a safe distance from
sanitary drainage connection and shall not be subject to
surface drainage. Means shall be provided for a suitable
watertight connection, without cross-connection and danger of
freezing.
(f) A sewage disposal system shall provide each mobile home and
community structure containing plumbing fixtures with an
adequate and safe method of sewage disposal.
(g) No sewage from a plumbing system shall be disposed into the
waters of the State of New York, except where specially
approved by the authority having jurisdiction, in accordance
with Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
(h) Where a public sewage disposal system is not available, an
adequate private sewage disposal system, approved by the
appropriate authority having jurisdiction, shall be provided.
(i) Sanitary drainage connections shall be at proper locations
relative to the mobile home, and piping shall have a continuous
grade to the point of disposal. Drainage connections shall be
provided with suitable fittings to permit a watertight junction
to be made with the mobile home outlet.
(j) Gas connections, if provided, shall have a suitable gastight
connection to the mobile home.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 235-67 LITTERING § 235-67
230:765
(k) The electric system connection shall provide at least 50
amperes of current at 100-115/220-250 volts. The receptacle
or terminal box shall be of an approved weatherproof-type.
Such receptacle shall have provision for an equipment ground.
(l) A mobile home park shall be provided with facilities for the
safe and efficient storage of required fuels.
(m) Liquified petroleum gas storage containers having a capacity
exceeding 125 gallons shall be located not less than 25 feet
from the nearest mobile home structure, building and lot line
and shall not be subject to damage from moving vehicles.
(n) Fuel oil and other flammable materials shall be stored as not to
be a fire hazard.
(3) Stormwater drainage.
(a) The mobile home park shall have adequate facilities for
drainage of surface and subsurface water.
(b) Grading of the entire property shall be such as to facilitate the
safe and efficient drainage of surface water.
(c) Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers
or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where
deemed necessary.
(4) Garbage and refuse.
(a) Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be provided for
the collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and
refuse.
(b) Garbage and refuse collection points shall be so located that no
mobile home is more than 150 feet from such point.
(5) General regulations.
(a) The operation and maintenance of a mobile home park shall
comply with all other provisions of this Code.
(b) No occupied travel or vacation trailer or other form of
temporary type living units shall be permitted in a mobile home
park.
(c) Accessory structures shall be of durable construction and
appropriate for intended use and location. Such structures
shall meet all setback requirements.
F. Permit approval procedure.
§ 235-67 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-67
230:766
§ 235-68. Relocation of structures. [Added 5-18-1978 by L.L. No.
3-1978]
§ 235-69. Fencing. [Amended 8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998;
2-13-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
(1) The establishment of a mobile home park shall require approval by
the Town Board of the mobile home park after review by the
Planning Board of the site development plan for the park.
(2) The Town Board shall not act to approve any application for a
mobile home park unless it determines that such park will serve to
implement the intent and purposes as set forth in this section and
the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Irondequoit; that the
location proposed for the mobile home park is suitable and
appropriate for such a park; and that such park is otherwise in the
public interest. Such conditions and safeguards shall be attached to
the authorization as the Town Board deems necessary and
appropriate to assure continual conformance to all applicable
standards and requirements.
(3) The application for establishment of the park shall include a site
development plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Article XV. Approval of the park shall be in conformance with the
requirements of the development standards of this section, all
other applicable provisions of this Code and additional conditions
established by the Town Board in approving the mobile home park.
[Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
A. Public hearing required. No structure shall be relocated into or within
the Town of Irondequoit in any zoning district without first obtaining a
building permit after referral to the Planning Board for its
recommendation and a public hearing before and approval by the Town
Board. The procedures in Subsection B of § 235-66 shall be followed as
much as practicable, but the Planning Board and the Town Board may
waive any of the procedures that are not appropriate or applicable to
the relocation of a structure.
B. Exceptions. The following structures are not subject to this section,
provided that they do not constitute an oversize load pursuant to the
Vehicle and Traffic Law:
(1) Small utility shed.
(2) Swimming pool.
(3) Preexisting garage.
C. Application fee. A fee set in accordance with § 1-18 to defray the
expenses of the Town in processing the application under this section
shall be paid. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 235-67 LITTERING § 235-69
230:767
A. Purpose.
(1) It is the purpose of this section to regulate the location and height
of fences in all zoning districts and it shall apply to fences, walls
and any other similar construction.
(2) The intent of this section is to provide uniform enhancement,
security and privacy to property. Fencing which legally existed
prior to the adoption of this section (1964) may continue as long as
it is kept in substantial repair. The replacement or repair of such
fencing may occur only in-kind.
B. Definitions. Fences shall be defined and regulated by their function and
purpose such as boundary, privacy, decorative and safety fences as
defined in § 235-4 of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. General requirements.
(1) All fences, with the exception of snow fences as defined in this
section, shall require a building permit.
(2) All fencing must be constructed within property boundaries.
(3) Proposed fencing over Town easements within property boundaries
are subject to approval from the Department of Public Works.
(4) Fencing shall be constructed of materials commercially available
for fencing purposes and shall be uniform in appearance.
(5) The most finished side of a fence must face the adjoining property.
(6) Height of fencing is to be measured from the top of the fence to the
ground directly beneath the fence.
(a) Fencing must follow the natural contour of the land.
(b) Commercially manufactured decorative caps located on top of
the fence posts shall be excluded from the height
measurement, but posts and caps shall not exceed 12 inches in
height and width.
(7) Where a side yard of a lot abuts a rear yard of another lot, fencing
may be permitted to be six feet high.
(8) No back-to-back boundary fences shall be permitted unless an
abutting fence is owned by an adjacent property owner.
(9) Snow fences for the purposes of providing a wind block for drifting
snow shall be permitted between November 1 and April 15. A
three-foot setback from the front property line shall be required for
all such fencing. Placement of such fencing shall not cause drifting
snow on adjacent property or public sidewalks and streets.
§ 235-69 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-69
230:768
(10) Barbed wire and electrified fences shall be subject to Zoning Board
of Appeals' approval prior to the issuance of a permit.
(11) Single strand wire fences or anchoring of any fence post by means
of a guy wire or guy wires shall be prohibited.
(12) Fence height on vacant lots shall be limited to four feet in height.
Such fencing shall not extend beyond the average front setback of
adjoining dwellings on either side.
(13) For the purposes of regulating fencing, a lot which adjoins a limited
access highway shall be regarded as an interior lot and not as a
through lot or corner lot.
(14) A 30-foot setback from the front and back property line shall be
required for all "through lot" fencing. Through lot fencing shall be
limited to a maximum height of four feet in height.
D. Boundary fences. Four-foot-high side yard fencing shall be permitted
from the front foundation line of the principal building to the rear lot
line. Six-foot rear yard fencing shall be permitted from the rear
foundation line of the principal building to the rear lot line. The front
foundation line shall be defined as the portion of the principal building
that is nearest the side and front lot lines as measured from each side of
the structure. The rear foundation line shall be defined as the portion of
the principal building that is nearest to the side, rear and front lot lines
as measured from each side of the structure. Attached garages shall be
included in such measurements. Stoops, steps, open and enclosed
porches and similar entranceways and decks shall not be considered in
the setback determination.
E. Front yard decorative fencing.
(1) Front yard fencing shall not exceed 42 inches in height.
(2) Fencing must be of open-type construction (split rail, picket or the
like). Solid and chain link type fencing shall not be allowed.
(3) Such fencing shall be limited to a maximum total length of 32 linear
feet and set back a minimum of three feet from the front property
line to allow for safe visual clearances and sidewalk snow removal.
F. Corner lots. Rear and side street yard fencing on a corner lot shall be
permitted to extend toward the street for purposes of boundary fencing,
provided that a minimum setback of three feet from the property line
which parallels the street is maintained. The height of fencing shall be
as set forth in Subsection D above, with the narrower lot frontage
treated as the front.
G. Privacy fencing. Privacy fencing within the buildable area (area within
the setback lines) for primary structures on a lot may be a maximum of
eight feet high in the rear yard only.
§ 235-69 LITTERING § 235-69
230:769
H. Fences located on decks. A fence may be erected on a deck provided
that said fence:
(1) Is located in the rear yard.
(2) Complies with setback regulations for the principal buildings.
(3) Does not exceed six feet in height as measured from the top of the
fence to the walking surface of the deck beneath the fence.
I. Nonresidential use on property. Fencing to be located on a property
used for other than a single-family and two-family residence shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board. Exceptions for
repair or replacement of existing conforming fencing may be made by
the Director, and/or his or her designee.
J. Deer protective fencing. No permit shall be required; however, the
location, type and design of such fence shall be subject to review and
approval by the Director.
K. Walls.
(1) Walls or retaining walls which are under 18 inches in height shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(2) All retaining walls exceeding 18 inches in height designed to retain
earth shall require a building permit and must comply with the
following requirements.
(3) Manufactured walls. The property owner must provide written
proof to the Town's Building Department that the installer will
construct such walls according to the manufacturer's specifications
and accepts all liability in the event of failure.
(4) A professional engineer's or registered architect's original seal and
signature shall be required on drawings submitted for a building
permit for nonmanufactured walls.
(5) Walls, regardless of the location, shall be exempt from the height
restrictions of fences as long they are designed to retain earth on
property slopes. The grade can not be changed to accommodate
such walls and drainage courses must be considered during design
so as to not affect adjoining property.
(6) Walls which will affect the toe of a slope in a steep slope EPOD area
and are greater than four feet in height shall be subject to an EPOD
permit approval by the Planning Board prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
L. Maintenance.
(1) Fences, walls and other similar construction must be maintained at
all times in good and substantial condition. Dilapidated, rotted,
§ 235-69 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-69
230:770
§ 235-70. Keeping of animals and poultry.
§ 235-71. Private swimming pools.
rusted and broken fences and walls must be repaired, replaced or
removed.
(2) Metal fences subject to rust must be painted with a protective
covering that is uniform in appearance.145
A. In any residential district, no lot may be used or occupied and no
structure may be erected, maintained or used for the raising, harboring
or housing of pigeons, swine, goats, rabbits, cows, horses, poultry,
foxes, mink, skunks or any fur-bearing animals, unless application is
made to and a special use permit is granted by the Board of Appeals,
subject to such terms and conditions as may be appropriate in the
particular case, and in conformity with the following subsection.
B. The Board may consider, where it is material in each case and among
the other relevant factors, any danger to neighboring property, noise or
offensive emission of odors or fumes and any detriment to the health,
safety, morals or the general welfare of the community and whether
such use is appropriate to the particular location. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing herein contained shall prohibit the raising or
harboring of domestic animals or poultry on any farm within the Town
of Irondequoit, as defined in this chapter (see § 235-4).
A. Accessory structure. Any swimming pool, as defined in this chapter,
shall be deemed an accessory building or structure under all applicable
provisions of this chapter, and no such swimming pool shall be
constructed or maintained unless such pool conforms to applicable
provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code.
B. Plans to be filed. No permit shall be issued for the construction or
maintenance of any such swimming pool unless or until the
construction plans, plumbing plans, filtering system plans and a
location map have been filed with the Building Inspector in conformity
with the following provisions:
(1) The swimming pool and appurtenances thereto shall be so located
as to conform to the setback provisions of this chapter as they apply
to accessory buildings, i.e., not less than four feet from any side
line or rear line. The distance from any other building or structure
on the premises shall not be less than four feet from the pool apron
or deck, whichever is closest.
(2) Percentage of lot occupancy. The area of the principal and
accessory buildings (inclusive of in ground or permanent
aboveground swimming pools) on any lot measured horizontally
145. Editor's Note: Former § 130.63, dumping grounds, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
§ 235-69 LITTERING § 235-71
230:771
shall not exceed 50% of the area of the lot. This condition may be
waived for portable aboveground swimming pools, provided that all
other requirements are in compliance.
(3) Fencing. Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence or other
barrier meeting all applicable requirements of the Residential Code
of New York State and shall otherwise comply in all respects with
such Residential Code. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
(4) The drainage facilities for such pool shall not interfere with the
public water supply system, existing drainage and sewage
facilities, the property of others or with the public highways.
(5) (Reserved)146
(6) The filtering equipment shall be adequate to permit the
maintenance of good quality water in the pool. The Building
Inspector shall be governed by the recommendations or the
approval of the appropriate Health Department.
(7) The use or maintenance of swimming pools shall comply with the
following in such character, intensity and duration as not to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual or contrary to the
public welfare, as herein set forth.
(a) Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used or maintained in
connection with a swimming pool of any type must be so placed
or positioned that the directed light therefrom is not directed
toward any abutting properties.
(b) Noises.
[1] The operation of any radio, phonograph or other electronic
device in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence shall be
prohibited.
[2] No person using a private swimming pool shall indulge in
disorderly or noisy or disturbing conduct or act in any
manner as to annoy, disturb or be offensive to any
neighboring householder.
C. Waiver by Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may waive the
provisions of Subsection B as to size and location of such pool, after a
public hearing duly called for such purpose, upon a determination that
the neighboring property shall not be adversely affected thereby.
146. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding the structural stability of a pool, was
repealed 7-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007.
§ 235-71 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-71
230:772
§ 235-72. Radio or television antennas.
D. Other pools or tanks. Any type of private pool, tank or other enclosure
of water not defined as a swimming pool which, however, has electrical
equipment shall require a permit which shall be issued in conformance
with Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.147
E. (Reserved)148
F. Corner lot. Any swimming pool of any type installed or erected on a
corner lot shall be contained within an area behind the building line as
measured from each street. No pool shall be less than four feet from
any property line.
A. Permit not required for certain structures. An antenna structure may be
installed without necessity of a building permit on or at any building
within the following limits:
(1) A maximum of 16 feet height above the roof or ridge pole shall be
required, except that a single vertical pole may not exceed 21 feet
above the roof or ridge pole.
(2) A freestanding antenna tower may not extend above the ground
more than 21 feet.
B. When permit required. Any antenna structure exceeding the above
height restriction and up to a forty-five-foot maximum requires
submission of evidence of structural stability to the Building Inspector,
and when acceptable, a building permit will be issued for the same. All
structures shall be subject to a reasonable determination of structural
stability by the Building Inspector. Specification of manufacturer may
be used by the Building Inspector as a guide to determine structural
stability. Alterations which do not affect structural stability will not
require another permit.
C. Approval by Board of Appeals. Any antenna structure over 45 feet in
height and exceeding the above restriction shall require submission of
evidence of structural stability as in Subsection B above and approval
by the Board of Appeals.
D. Preexisting structures. Preexisting antenna structures, including those
on temporary permits, shall be permitted without the necessity of
obtaining a building permit hereunder.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 130.63E, which regulated existing pools and immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
148. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Portable pools, was repealed 7-17-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007.
§ 235-71 LITTERING § 235-73
230:773
§ 235-73. Keeping of dogs and cats. [Amended 8-18-1998 by L.L.
No. 1-1998; 8-21-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001]
There shall be no more than two dogs or three cats harbored per dwelling
unit in any residential district in the Town of Irondequoit as an accessory
use, except as follows:
§ 235-74. Flammable liquid storage tanks. [Amended 2-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
The installation or alteration to increase the capacity of any flammable
liquid storage tank or other containers in any zoning district shall not be
made until a review and report is made by the Planning Board and the Fire
Marshal certifies that the installation or alteration conforms to Chapter 98,
Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 235-75. Residential parking and driveway space.
The total area devoted to driveway and parking for premises designed or
used primarily for residential purposes shall not exceed 35% of the required
front yard.
§ 235-76. Additional waterfront regulations.
A. Special use permit for three or more dogs or four or more cats.
Harboring or keeping of three or more adult dogs (six months or older)
or more than three adult cats (three months or older) shall require
securing a special use permit from the Animal Control Officer. A special
use permit shall be subject to revocation if, in the judgement of the
Town Clerk or Animal Control Officer, the keeping of such dogs or cats
shall constitute a public nuisance. Such permit shall be subject to
review annually by the Animal Control Officer to ensure that the
conditions of the special use permit are enforced.
(1) The Animal Control Officer may consider, where it is material in
each case and among the other relevant factors, any danger to
neighboring property or children, noise or offensive emission of
odors or fumes and any detriment to the health, safety, morals or
the general welfare of the community and whether such use is
appropriate to the particular location.
A. All properties or parcels of land within the Town of Irondequoit that
contain at least 15 feet of shoreline frontage on either Irondequoit Bay
or Lake Ontario shall be permitted those specific accessory structures
listed in § 235-32C, subject to the regulations and restrictions listed in
that section.
B. Any development proposed within the boundaries of the Town of
Irondequoit's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program shall be subject
to the applicable landscaping and buffering requirements for the
particular land use and circumstances as listed in § 235-35.
§ 235-73 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76
230:774
C. Maximum building heights for those uses that are permitted within the
Waterfront Development District but that are proposed in other zoning
districts within the Town of Irondequoit's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program boundary shall be subject to the applicable
restrictions outlined in § 235-33C. Any development that is proposed on
property located within any zoning district included in the Town of
Irondequoit's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program boundary shall
also be subject to the requirements for submission of a visual resource
analysis as part of the site plan review process and as described in
Article XV.
D. Principal or accessory buildings or structures proposed for any
properties or parcels of land within the Town of Irondequoit that
contain at least 15 feet of frontage on Lake Ontario or Irondequoit Bay
shall be required to maintain a minimum setback from the water's edge
of 25 feet. In addition, maximum required setbacks of principle
buildings and accessory structures on such properties shall be
established by the Town of Irondequoit Planning Board during the site
plan review process, with due consideration to the protection and
preservation of sensitive environmental features and maintenance of
the wooded character of the shore zone area, as well as scenic views
and vistas.
E. Signage proposed for any development located on property that
contains at least 15 feet of frontage on Lake Ontario or Irondequoit Bay
shall be required to meet the requirements of § 235-32C(7).
§ 235-76 LITTERING § 235-76
230:775

ARTICLE XIIIA
Adult Uses
[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
§ 235-76.1. Uses permitted.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter 76, Amusement Devices, or
Chapter 194, Special Events, adult use and entertainment establishments,
as herein defined, shall only be allowed in M Manufacturing Districts as
specifically set forth in this Code and only to the extent that it is consistent
with local law and the New York State Penal Law relating to exposure,
obscenity or lewdness.
§ 235-76.2. Purposes.
The primary purposes of this article are as follows:
§ 235-76.3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate an adult
use and entertainment establishment unless the premises wherein the same
is conducted, maintained or operated is licensed in the manner prescribed
herein. Adult use and entertainment establishments operating prior to the
adoption of this article shall apply for a license within 20 days after its
enactment.
§ 235-76.4. License application.
A. To preserve the character and quality of life in the Town neighborhoods
and business areas.
B. To control such documented harmful and adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the surrounding areas as: decreased property value; the
attraction of transience; parking and traffic problems; increased crime
(including prostitution, rape and assaults in the vicinity of such uses);
loss of business for surrounding nonadult uses; and the deterioration of
neighborhoods.
C. To maintain property values.
D. To prevent crime.
E. To protect retail trade.
F. To restrict minors' access to adult uses.
G. To maintain the general welfare, safety and morals for the Town of
Irondequoit residents.
A. Any person desiring to procure an adult use and entertainment license
shall make application therefor to the Town Board, upon a form to be
§ 235-76.1 LITTERING § 235-76.4
230:777
furnished by the Town Clerk. Such form shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth and social security or tax
identification number of the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or
other association.
(3) If a partnership, the names, addresses, dates of birth and social
security numbers of all persons having an interest in the
partnership.
(4) If a corporation, the names, addresses, dates of birth and social
security numbers of all officers, directors and managers, specifying
their corporate status.
(5) If a corporation, the name of each stockholder having 10% or more
of the total outstanding shares of any class of stock. There shall
also be given the number of shares held by the stockholder and his
or her percentage of the total outstanding shares of stock.
(6) The name, address, date of birth and social security number of each
and every employee and manager of the premises at the time of the
license application. Thereafter, if a license is issued, the licensee is
required to notify the Town Clerk of any additional or change of
employees and managers, together with the foregoing information.
(7) If any of the persons named in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6)
are citizens of a country other than the United States, their names
and country of citizenship.
(8) The applicant's place of previous employment.
(9) Whether any person mentioned in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) and
(6) has been engaged individually as an operator or manager of an
adult use and entertainment establishment or similar business
within the last five years and, if so, the name of such business, its
address and the length of time such person operated or managed
such business.
(10) Whether any person mentioned in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) and
(6) has ever had an adult use and entertainment or similar license
revoked or suspended and whether such person has been convicted
of operating or managing such a business without a license and, if
so, the full particulars.
(11) Whether any person mentioned in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) and
(6) has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the
full particulars.
(12) If the license is for an adult cabaret, whether any person mentioned
in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) and (6) has ever been convicted of
§ 235-76.4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.4
230:778
violating any ordinance or law relative to the sale of intoxicating
liquor.
(13) Whether any person mentioned in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5) and
(6) has ever been convicted of violating any ordinance or law
relating to public morality and decency.
(14) The name of the adult use and entertainment establishment under
which the applicant will operate and the location.
(15) Whether the premises upon which the proposed adult use and
entertainment establishment is to be conducted complies with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,149
the Town of Irondequoit Municipal Code and any and all other laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations relating to health and sanitation.
(16) Whether the premises complies with the requirements of this
article of the Town of Irondequoit relating to and regulating adult
use and entertainment establishments, providing for the licensing
thereof, regulating the conduct of persons therein, defining
offenses and providing penalties for the violation thereof.
(17) The nature of the adult use and/or entertainment to be conducted.
(18) The area of the floor space to be used by the public, the maximum
number of rooms to be occupied by the public and the maximum
number of tables in each occupied room and the number of
entrances and exits.
(19) Whether any part of the premises to be used will be used as a hotel,
rooming house or lodging house and, if so, the full particulars.
(20) If the application is for an adult cabaret or an adult motel, two
copies of a scale drawing prepared by a licensed architect, affixed
to the application, showing the dimensions of all occupied rooms;
the locations of all tables; the width of aisles between tables; the
width of aisles between tables and walls, posts, poles, bars, stages
and other fixtures, appurtenances and appliances; and the location
of all exits, exit signs and emergency lighting.
(21) The County Health Department permit number, if required.
(22) The days and hours of operation of the proposed adult use and
entertainment establishment.
(23) In addition to the foregoing, any and all reasonably relevant
information concerning its application to operate an adult use and
entertainment establishment when requested to do so by
authorized officials of the Town.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 235-76.4 LITTERING § 235-76.4
230:779
§ 235-76.5. Review of application; public hearing; issuance of
license. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
B. Said application shall be signed and duly verified by the applicant
before an officer authorized to administer oaths in the form as set forth
below. No such applications shall be granted to conduct such adult use
and entertainment establishment on premises which do not conform to
the requirements of this article and all laws and regulations of the State
of New York and all ordinances and regulations of the Town of
Irondequoit.
C. The application shall be signed in the following form:
State of New York: County of Monroe, SS:
_______________, being duly sworn, deposes and says; I am the
_________________, above-named applicant, and make this affidavit for
the purpose of obtaining from the Town of Irondequoit a license to
operate an adult use and entertainment establishment as provided in
an ordinance relating to and regulating cabarets, providing for the
licensing thereof, regulating the conduct of persons therein, defining
offenses and providing penalties for the violation thereof. I have
personal knowledge of the matters stated in the foregoing application,
and the statements therein contained are true.
_______________________
Sworn to before me this
_____ day of ______ 19___.
_________________________
Notary Public: Monroe County
D. Each applicant, manager of any proposed adult use and entertainment
establishment and any security guards shall submit two sets of
fingerprints and photographs to the Town of Irondequoit Police
Department. The fingerprints and photographs of each such person
shall be taken by the Town of Irondequoit Police Department, and the
applicant shall pay any fees required. If the applicant is a company or
corporation, then two full sets of fingerprints of a principal officer of
said company or corporation shall be provided in accordance with this
subsection. The Irondequoit Police Department shall forward the
applicant's fingerprints to the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services (DCJS) and shall be responsible for reviewing criminal
history record information disseminated by the DCJS. A certified check
or money order, in the amount specified by and made payable to the
DCJS to cover the cost of processing fingerprints, shall accompany the
application.
A. The Town Board, upon presentation of such application and before
acting upon the same, shall refer such application to the Irondequoit
§ 235-76.4 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.5
230:780
Police Department and the Director of Development Services for a full
investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein and as
to any or all other matters which might tend to aid said Town Board
in determining whether or not such application should be granted. The
investigation by the Chief of Police shall also include an examination
into the present and projected noise, traffic and public safety impacts
of any proposed adult use and entertainment establishment. Said
Department of Police and Director of Development Services shall,
within 30 days after any application has been referred to them, furnish
a written report to the Town Board containing the result of their
investigation.
B. Upon the receipt of the written report provided for in Subsection A
above, the Town Board shall, upon at least 10 days' notice to the
applicant, hold a public hearing upon such application, at which the
applicant shall be given an opportunity to establish by competent
evidence that the applicant or anyone owning an interest in an adult use
and entertainment establishment shall comply with all of the
requirements of this article and all other laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Town of Irondequoit. If, after such hearing, the Town
Board shall find from a preponderance of the evidence that the
foregoing facts have been established, it shall issue the applied-for
license. If, after such hearing, the Town Board shall find that the
foregoing facts have not been established by competent evidence, the
application shall be denied. The action of the Town Board after such
hearing shall be final. The Town Board may deny the application if:
(1) The report of the Chief of Police, based on police reports filed in his
or her office, shall show that, within the prior twenty-four-month
period, the applicant or anyone owning an interest in the proposed
adult use and entertainment establishment has been convicted of
two or more of any of the following:
(a) Exceeding occupancy limits.
(b) Gambling.
(c) Locked exit doors when premises are occupied by a person or
persons.
(d) Obstructed exits and/or aisles.
(e) Inoperable or nonexistent exit signs.
(f) No smoke detectors.
(g) Permitting disorderly premises (which shall mean fights or
assaults in or about the premises or riots or other disturbances
of a similar nature in or about the premises).
(2) The report of the Chief of Police, based on police reports filed in his
or her office, shall show that any of the following have taken place
§ 235-76.5 LITTERING § 235-76.5
230:781
§ 235-76.6. License fee; term; license not transferable. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
There shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the time an application is filed
for a license pursuant to this article a license fee set in accordance with
§ 1-18, per annum, for an adult use and entertainment license and such
other fee as the Town Board may determine by resolution, provided that
in the event that a license is granted after the first of July of any year, the
license fee shall be 1/2 of the amount of the annual license fee. The term of
a license shall be for a period of one year, commencing with January 1 and
terminating at the end of the following December, except that an original
in the last 36 months, arising out of the operation or maintenance
of the premises for which the license is applied for or has been
granted hereunder:
(a) A fire resulting in death or serious physical injury as defined in
Penal Law § 10.00, Subdivision 10, as amended or changed, in
which one or more fire code violations existed on the premises
at the time of the fire.
(b) Death or serious physical injury as defined in Penal Law
§ 10.00, Subdivision 10, as amended or changed, taking place
on the premises at the time or arising out of an incident or
incidents on the premises and taking place in close proximity
in time and place to the premises.
(c) A riot as defined in Penal Law § 240.05, as amended or
changed, took place upon the premises or arising out of an
incident on the premises and taking place in close proximity
thereto in time and place.
(3) The applicant or anyone owning an interest in any proposed adult
cabaret has, within three years preceding the date of such
application, been convicted of violating any laws or ordinances
relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor.
(4) The applicant or anyone owning an interest in any proposed adult
use and entertainment establishment has ever been convicted of a
crime.
(5) The applicant or anyone owning an interest in the proposed adult
use and entertainment establishment has ever been convicted of
violating any laws of ordinances relating to public morality and
decency.
C. A failure to comply with the requirements of this article and all laws and
regulations of the State of New York and all ordinances and regulations
of the Town of Irondequoit, which failure, in the judgment of the Town
Board, adversely affects or tends to affect the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Irondequoit, shall
be a violation.
§ 235-76.5 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.6
230:782
license shall be effective from the date the license is granted to the end
of the month of December. Renewal applications shall be submitted to the
Town Board at least 30 days prior to expiration of the license. Renewals
of licenses shall be effective for the one-year term described above. Such
license shall not be transferable and shall not authorize the person to whom
it is granted to conduct an adult use and entertainment establishment at
any other location other than that specified therein.
§ 235-76.7. License revocation.
§ 235-76.8. Employees dancing or having refreshments with patrons
prohibited.
No licensee, person owing, managing or operating or conducting an adult
cabaret shall allow or permit any person employed by him or her in the
capacity of an entertainer or servant or otherwise to approach or accost any
guest to dance with or have refreshments with such employee as aforesaid
during the hours of their employment, nor shall any person in the premises
A. The Town Board reserves the power unto itself to suspend or revoke any
license issued under the provisions of this article at any time where the
same was procured by fraud or false representation of fact or for the
failure to comply with the provisions of this article or the laws and
regulations of the State of New York and the Town of Irondequoit by the
person holding such license or any of his or her servants, agents or
employees if, in the judgment of the Town Board, said violation
adversely affects or tends to affect the protection of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Irondequoit or the
conviction of the person holding the license of any crime or an offense
involving moral turpitude or the conviction of the person holding such
license of any law or ordinance relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor
or the conviction of any of his or her servants, agents or employees of
any crime or an offense involving moral turpitude or immoral conduct is
permitted on the licensed premises or is occasioned in the vicinity of
such premises as a result of its existence.
B. At least three days before suspending or revoking any license, the Town
Board shall cause to be mailed to the holder of the license, at the
address at which the adult use and entertainment establishment is
being conducted, a notice stating the time and place of the hearing
concerning the suspension or revocation at which the licensee shall be
entitled to be heard and introduce evidence. The action of the Town
Board relative to such suspension or revocation shall be final, provided
that whenever any person to whom a license has been granted under
the provisions of this article shall be convicted of violating any of the
provisions thereof, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence of
facts sufficient to warrant revocation of the license held by such person.
Upon the suspension or revocation of a license for premises hereunder,
it shall be unlawful to use or occupy any portion of said premises as an
adult use and entertainment establishment.
§ 235-76.6 LITTERING § 235-76.8
230:783
of an adult cabaret approach any person who is an employee of the owner
or manager or operator in the capacity of an entertainer or servant or
otherwise during the hours of their employment for the purpose of inducing
any such person so employed to dance with or have refreshments with such
guests.
§ 235-76.9. Booths and boxes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any adult use and entertainment establishment to
have, permit or maintain any boxes or booths closed by any door, screen,
curtain or other device. It shall be unlawful for any adult use and
entertainment establishment to have, permit or maintain any box or booth
with an entrance thereto on any side other than the side which faces the
center of the main room.
§ 235-76.10. Hiring (or employment) of minors prohibited; good
morals required.
It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or person
in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment to employ as an
entertainer in such place any person who is not at least 18 years of age and
of good moral character.
§ 235-76.11. Right of entry.
It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or person
in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment to refuse
admission to any peace officer or building or fire inspector or any other
official or employee of the Town of Irondequoit charged with the duty of
enforcing this article. Said officers or employees shall have free access at
all times to all adult use and entertainment establishments.
§ 235-76.12. Minors prohibited; disorderly persons excluded.
It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager, employee
or person in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment
to admit or permit to be or remain in and about the licensed premises
any minor under the age of 18 years, any lewd or dissolute person, any
common prostitute, any drunken or boisterous person or any person under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.
§ 235-76.13. Persons required to leave premises upon or order to do
so.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, any lewd or
dissolute person, any common prostitute, any drunken or boisterous person
or any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any person
whose conduct, while present in said place, in any way tends to corrupt the
public morals to be or remain in or about any adult use and entertainment
establishment after being notified by the management or a peace officer to
leave the premises.
§ 235-76.8 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.14
230:784
§ 235-76.14. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in a
boisterous manner or to use any profane, obscene or indecent language in
or about any adult use and entertainment establishment or the hallways or
entrance thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person while dancing in any
adult cabaret to conduct himself or herself in an obscene manner as defined
in the Penal Law of the State of New York. It shall be unlawful for any person
to bring into or have in his or her possession or partake of any intoxicating
liquors in any place designated in this article as an adult cabaret. This shall
not apply to intoxicating liquors lawfully sold in the adult cabaret under the
provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
§ 235-76.15. Falsifying age prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any misrepresentation or false
statement as to his or her own age or that of any other person for the
purpose of obtaining admission to any adult use and entertainment
establishment.
§ 235-76.16. Noise levels.
§ 235-76.17. Responsibilities of management.
A. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or
person in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment to
permit on the premises any entertainment amplified by a mechanical
device of such an intensity, character and duration as to disturb the
peace, tranquillity and good order of the people of the Town of
Irondequoit or which otherwise violates this chapter and Chapter 160,
Noise, of the Town of Irondequoit.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate an adult use and entertainment
establishment unless the premises are soundproofed or provision is
made so that no amplification or excessive noise is audible beyond the
property lines of the parcel upon which the adult use and entertainment
establishment is situated.
A. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or
person in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment to
permit any disorderly, noisy, riotous or tumultuous conduct or loitering
on the premises so licensed.
B. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or
person in charge of any adult use and entertainment establishment to
permit any entertainment or exhibition of a lewd, suggestive, vulgar or
immoral type or to use therein any indecent or obscene language or to
sing any song of any lewd or vulgar character or to behave in any
manner intending to corrupt the public morals. Where any of the
aforementioned activities are defined by the Penal Law of the State of
New York, such definition shall be controlling.
§ 235-76.14 LITTERING § 235-76.17
230:785
§ 235-76.18. Posting of license required.
Each license issued hereunder shall be kept posted at the main entrance of
every place licensed hereunder.
§ 235-76.19. Entrances and exits.
§ 235-76.20. Interior and exterior lighting.
During the period that an adult use and entertainment establishment is
occupied by patrons, it shall be illuminated by sufficient natural or artificial
light to permit a person to read in every portion thereof nine-point print of
the kind generally used in the average daily newspaper. No light on any part
of the premises shall be permitted to shine beyond the property line of the
premises.
§ 235-76.21. Security.
Each adult cabaret licensed hereunder shall maintain adequate security
during hours of operation to ensure the public peace and order. The
provision of this section shall require each adult cabaret to employ not
less that one unarmed, uniformed security guard registered in accordance
with Article 7 of the General Business Law, as amended or changed, per
every 100 patrons or portion thereof. Security guards shall be required to
wear a uniform of distinctive or characteristic design which shall consist of
matching shirt, pants and hat bearing an insignia designating their security
status.
§ 235-76.22. Compliance with laws and regulations.
The licensee and all stockholders, officers, directors, agents, employees
and concessionaires shall at all times strictly and promptly conform to and
C. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, owner, proprietor, manager or
person in charge of an adult use and entertainment establishment to
permit any noise, disturbance, misconduct, disorder, act or activity in
the licensed premises or in the area in front of or adjacent to the
licensed premises or in any parking lot provided by the licensee for use
by the licensee's patrons which, in the judgment of the Town Board,
adversely affects or tends to affect the protection, health, welfare,
safety or repose of the inhabitants of the Town of Irondequoit or results
in the licensed premises becoming a focal point for police attention or is
offensive to public decency.
A. Outside doors shall remain closed at any time during the hours of
operation except for the opening of such doors to permit the entrance
or exiting of employees or patrons or where the Police Department
orders otherwise.
B. All entrances and exits shall remain unlocked while there are patrons in
the premises, and all such exits shall be clearly marked.
§ 235-76.17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.22
230:786
comply with all laws, provision, rules, regulations and requirements of all
federal, state and municipal authorities and agencies having jurisdiction,
with respect to the premises and the conduct and operation of the licensed
business therein and thereat, now in force or hereafter adopted during any
license period.
§ 235-76.23. Regulations; violations; penalties.
Adult use and entertainment establishments, as defined above, are to be
restricted as to location in the following manner in addition to any other
requirements of this Code:
A. They shall be located only in an M Manufacturing District and shall not
be allowed in any M Manufacturing District that is also a WD
Waterfront Development District and/or an M Manufacturing District
which is proposed to be rezoned to a WD Waterfront Development
District.
B. The primary entrances of any adult use establishment must be at least
700 feet from the property lines of any and all residences or
residentially zoned property, schools, day-care facilities, churches (or
other religious places of worship), parks, playgrounds or other areas
where large numbers of minors may congregate, open space or
greenbelt areas or governmental facilities.
C. A distance of at least 1,000 feet, measured from the outside walls of the
structures, must be maintained between any adult use entertainment
establishment and any other adult use entertainment establishment.
D. All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building. Regardless of
location or distance, no one who is passing by an enclosed building
having a use governed by the provisions of this article shall be able to
visually see any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual
activity by virtue of any display which depicts or shows said area or
activity. This requirement shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
window or other opening.
E. This subsection is enacted pursuant to the New York State Penal Law
§ 245.02, as amended or changed:
(1) A person is guilty of promoting the exposure of a person when he or
she knowingly conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates or
furnishes any public premises or place where a person appears in a
state of nudity, as defined herein, or where a person appears in
such a manner that the private or intimate parts of his or her body
are unclothed or exposed.
(2) Promoting the exposure of a person is a violation, punishable by
either a fine of $500, assessed by and payable to the Town;
additionally, the offender shall be liable to the Town for any
expense or loss or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such
violation, including reasonable attorney's fees; a term of
§ 235-76.22 LITTERING § 235-76.23
230:787
§ 235-76.24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
Violation of any provision this article shall be deemed a Class A violation of
the Town of Irondequoit Municipal Code, punishable by and through § 1-16,
Penalties for offenses, of the Town of Irondequoit Code.
§ 235-76.25. Nonconforming uses.
Any nonconforming use which was lawfully existing at the time of the
enactment of this article shall become conforming or terminate within one
year from the effective date of this article or risk the imposition of the
above-referenced penalties.
imprisonment, fixed by the court, not to exceed 15 days; or both.
Additionally, this article may be enforced by injunction issued by
any court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this article
shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate
and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 235-76.23 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-76.25
230:788
ARTICLE XIV
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 235-77. General provisions. [Amended 6-19-1986 by L.L. No.
7-1986; 1-21-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988; 11-20-2001 by L.L. No.
19-2001; 12-18-2001 by L.L. No. 23-2001]
A. Permanent off-street automobile storage, parking or standing space
shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained by the owner of the
property for each building which, after the effective date of this chapter,
is erected, enlarged or altered for use for any of the following purposes,
as set forth: at the time of the erection of any building or structure; at
the time any building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity
by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area; or before
conversion from one zoning use or occupancy to another. Such space
shall be deemed to be required open space associated with the
permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon
in any manner. No required front or side yard or portion thereof, other
than driveways, in any R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-6 Residential District
shall be utilized to provide parking spaces required in this chapter.
B. Vehicle parking or storage space maintained in connection with an
existing and continuing principal building, structure or land use on the
effective date of this chapter shall be continued and may not be counted
as serving a new building, structure, addition or land use; nor shall any
required parking space be substituted for any off-street loading and
unloading space, nor any required loading and unloading space be
substituted for a parking space.
C. No off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be used or
designed, arranged or constructed to be used in a manner that will
obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, alley, adjoining
property, loading space or access route.
D. The parking spaces provided, along with their driveways and
passageways, shall be so graded and drained so as to dispose of all
surface water accumulation within the area and shall be surfaced with
an asphaltic or portland cement binder pavement so as to provide a
durable and dustless surface. A place for such parking spaces is to be
included with the plans for the construction of building(s) and other
structure(s) and presented to the Building Inspector at the time
application for building permits are to be filed. Such parking areas are
to be kept free of obstructions and unsightly objects. All parking areas
shall be provided with additional peripheral areas adequate for snow
storage. Intersections of parking areas with sidewalks or street
pavements must be made in an approved manner.
E. Screening and landscaping. All off-street parking areas for more than
five vehicles shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins or
faces residential premises. Such screening may be accomplished by
deciduous and/or evergreen plantings, initially not less than three feet
§ 235-77 LITTERING § 235-77
230:789
§ 235-78. Site requirements.
in height on a reserved buffer strip, or a solid fence or unpierced
masonry wall not less than four feet in height. All plantings, fencing or
wall so used shall be properly maintained by the owner or owners of the
screened parking lot.
F. Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used or maintained for the purpose of
illuminating any off-street parking area shall be so arranged or
positioned that the light therefrom is not directed toward any abutting
properties.
G. Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet, with an access lane of 25
feet, except in R-R, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
H. Driveways and passageways for R-R, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential
Districts referred to in Subsection D above, that are installed or
enlarged after the effective date of this section, shall be at least eight
feet in width and have a two-foot minimum setback from the adjoining
lot line(s).
I. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ENLARGED — An increase in size, including widening or extending in
any direction.
J. Exemptions.
(1) Reconstruction, repair or resurfacing of any preexisting driveway,
which remains within the original, existing dimensions of said
driveway, shall be exempt from this section.
(2) Recreational vehicles, as outlined in § 235-104 of this Code, are
exempt from this section.
K. Permits. A permit is required for installation of a driveway, pursuant to
§ 198-6 of this Code, from the Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways.
A. Location of required spaces.
(1) General provision. All required off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot as the building or use they serve, except
as otherwise provided.
(2) Group facilities. In any business or manufacturing district, required
off-street parking spaces may be provided in group parking
facilities designed to serve two or more buildings or uses on
different adjoining lots, provided that:
(a) The total parking spaces in such group facility shall not be less
than the sum of the requirements for the various uses
computed separately.
§ 235-77 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-78
230:790
§ 235-79. Specific off-street parking requirements.
Unless another regulation provides otherwise, off-street parking
requirements shall be as follows:
Use Number of Spaces
Amusement facilities 1 for every 3 customers computed on
the basis of maximum servicing
capacity any 1 time
Apartment houses 2 for each apartment
Auditoriums 1 for every 3 seats occupied at
maximum capacity
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Churches Same as auditoriums
Clubhouses and permanent
meeting places of veterans,
business, civic, fraternal, labor
and other similar organizations
1 parking space for every 40 square
feet of aggregate floor area in the
dining room of such building, plus 1
additional space for every 2 persons
regularly employed on the premises
Docking facilities [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
At least 0.6 for each boat dockage
Funeral homes Inside parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the business,
plus 1 space for every 40 square feet
of total area
Industrial plants and facilities,
excluding retail sales
Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of
such industrial use, plus 1 parking
space for every 3 employees on the
premises at the maximum employment
on a single shift
Libraries Same as retail businesses
Medical facilities
(b) All required parking spaces shall be contiguous to the lot on
which the buildings or uses are located.
B. All areas counted as required off-street parking shall be unobstructed
and free of other uses.
C. In any case where required off-street parking spaces are not provided
on the same lot with the building or use they serve, such off-street
parking spaces shall be subject to deed, lease or contract restrictions,
approved by the Town Board, binding the owner, his or her heirs or
assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout
the life of such use.
§ 235-78 LITTERING § 235-79
230:791
Use Number of Spaces
Medical clinics 4 for each doctor.
Medical offices Same as offices
Motels 1 parking space for each rental unit,
plus 1 additional space for every 2
persons regularly employed on the
premises
Motor vehicle service stations Same as retail businesses
Nursing homes 1 parking space for every 2 beds
computed on the basis of the
maximum bed capacity of the
structure
Offices 1 parking space for every 200 square
feet of office space. In R-1, R-2 and R-3
districts, the amount of parking and
access lanes for professional offices
shall not cover more than 50% of any
required side or rear yards
Post offices Same as retail businesses
Public assembly Same as auditoriums
Public and private elementary and
high schools
Same as auditoriums
Public garages Same as retail businesses
Recreational centers and facilities Same as amusement centers
Residences 2 for each dwelling unit
Restaurants
Drive-in restaurants 6 for each 125 square feet total
building floor area
Sit-down restaurant 1 parking space for every 3 seats
including stools
Take-out/sit-down restaurant 1 for every 3 seats or 1 for each 100
square feet of total building floor area,
whichever is higher
Take-out restaurant 1 parking space for each 100 square
feet of total building floor area
Retail businesses with less than
100,000 square feet of gross
leasable area (GLA) [Amended
9-27-2005 by L.L. No. 11-2005]
4.5 for each 1,000 square feet of GLA
Self-service laundries and drycleaning
self-service plants
1 parking space for each 2 washing
machines or for each 2 dry-cleaning
machines
§ 235-79 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-79
230:792
Use Number of Spaces
Shopping centers exceeding
300,000 square feet gross
leasable area (GLA) [Amended
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988;
4-21-1988 by L.L. No. 9-1988;
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993;
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
9-27-2005 by L.L. No. 11-2005]
3.3 for each 1,000 square feet of GLA
Skating rinks Same as amusement centers
Theaters Same as auditoriums
Warehouses Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the business,
plus 1 parking space for each 2
persons regularly employed on the
premises
Wholesale businesses Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of
such business, plus 1 parking space
for each 2 persons employed on the
premises based on maximum seasonal
employment
Any use not defined above Same as retail businesses
§ 235-79 LITTERING § 235-79
230:793

ARTICLE XV
Site Plan Review
[Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-80. Purpose.
The Town of Irondequoit considers the comprehensive review of site
development plans for major principal land uses prior to the issuance
of building permits to be an essential element of local land control. The
site plan review and approval process outlined in this article is designed
to ensure that proposed development projects are constructed based on
accepted engineering, architectural and site design standards and
principles. Site plan review allows developers and Town representatives to
discuss and agree on the most appropriate methods of land development
based on a variety of considerations and criteria. The site plan review
process ensures that development proposals are analyzed for their impacts
on local growth, public facilities and infrastructures, as well as surrounding
land uses and natural features. The site plan review process also ensures
that potential adverse impacts of development are minimized.
§ 235-81. Authority. [Amended 2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995;
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998; 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
A. The Town of Irondequoit Planning Board, in accordance with the
provisions of § 274-a of New York State Town Law, as amended or
changed, shall have the authority to review and approve site
development plans for the following uses prior to the issuance of any
building permits:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) All principal uses permitted in this chapter, with the exception
of single-family dwellings.
(b) A change of use in any preexisting structure involving any
permitted principal use, provided that the change in use is not
to a single-family dwelling.
(c) Additions or structural alterations to any of the permitted
principal uses, with the exception of single-family dwellings,
provided that such additions or alterations will affect overall
parking requirements on the site or have otherwise been
determined, by the Town Department of Planning and Zoning,
to require site plan review and approval from the Town
Planning Board.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Garages, carports or parking structures for multifamily
dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, condominiums, or
§ 235-80 LITTERING § 235-81
230:795
§ 235-82. Sketch plan conference.
other similar uses that exceed the dimensional requirements of
§ 235-8G of this chapter.
(b) Outdoor, in-ground community swimming pools for multifamily
dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, condominiums, or
other similar uses.
B. The Town of Irondequoit Planning Board shall be authorized to review
any site plan before it on a site-specific basis. The Town of Irondequoit
Planning Board shall have the power to approve or disapprove any
portions of the site plan on a site-specific basis based upon said
portions' compliance with New York State law and any and all
provisions of the Town of Irondequoit Code. The site-specific review
shall require an engineer or architect's stamp on proposed site plans
and a letter of credit (LOC) to ensure compliance with approved plans.
A note to this effect will be placed on the filed map(s).
C. Conceptual site plan approvals shall be mandatory and shall be open to
citizen participation in a public hearing forum after notice pursuant to
Town Law § 264, as amended or changed.
A. At the time of application for preliminary site plan approval, the
applicant shall indicate whether or not an optional sketch plan
conference with the Town Planning Board is desired. The Planning
Board itself may also choose to require such a conference with the
applicant, depending on the nature and complexities of the proposed
project. The sketch plan conference shall be conducted at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Town Planning Board, but shall not be a
public hearing. The purpose of the sketch plan conference shall be to
present to the Town Planning Board, for initial review, discussion and
comment, a design concept or plan for the development of a parcel or
parcels of land within the Town. During the conference, the applicant
and the Planning Board shall review and discuss the basic site design
concept and generally determine the information to be required and
provided on the preliminary site plan. No formal action shall be taken
on the plan or the application at the time of the sketch plan conference.
B. At such a conference, the applicant should provide a written statement
outlining the proposed project, along with a conceptual design sketch,
and the following additional information:
(1) The general location of the site with respect to existing and
proposed streets and rights-of-way, buildings and other facilities
and natural features.
(2) Specific identification of all properties, subdivisions, streets and
easements within 200 feet of the parcel.
(3) General identification of all existing utilities in the area.
§ 235-81 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-82
230:796
§ 235-83. Preliminary application. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
(4) Identification of internal streets or traffic circulation patterns, if
any, of the proposed development.
(5) Location of all existing and proposed structures on the site and
designed uses for each.
(6) Identification of existing zoning classification(s) of the property and
all adjacent properties and any restrictions on land use of the site.
(7) Identification of existing natural features on the site.
(8) A map of site topography with contour intervals of no more than
five feet. If general site grades exceed 5% or portions of the site
have susceptibility to erosion, flooding or ponding, a soils overlay
and a topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than
two feet of elevation shall be provided.
(9) A completed environmental assessment form (EAF) for those
projects designated as "Type I" or "unlisted actions," as designated
by the Town Board under Chapter 123, Environmental Quality
Review.
C. Following the sketch plan conference, the Town Planning Board may
suggest to the applicant changes in the preapplication sketch involving
street layouts, traffic patterns, access building sizes, shapes and/or
locations, landscaping techniques, preservation of natural features or
other matters which, in the opinion of the Board, would improve the site
design concept.
A. All preliminary applications for site plan approval shall be made in
writing on the appropriate forms and shall include (as required by the
Town Planning Board and/or Town Department of Planning and Zoning)
drawings, maps or other relevant data containing any or all of the
following information (maps and drawings submitted as a part of
preliminary site plan approval applications shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor and
certified by the seal and signature of such engineer, architect or
surveyor):
(1) A drawing title block indicating the name and address of the
applicant and persons responsible for preparation of such drawing.
(2) A North arrow, scale, original date and last revision date for all
maps.
(3) An area or location map showing that portion of the applicant's
property under consideration, the applicant's entire adjacent
holdings and all properties, subdivisions, streets and easements
within 200 feet of the applicant's property.
§ 235-82 LITTERING § 235-83
230:797
(4) Identification of the boundaries of the property plotted to scale;
dimensions of the site and total acreage.
(5) The current zoning of the property and any proposed zoning
changes.
(6) The location of existing watercourses.
(7) A grading and drainage plan showing existing and proposed
contours and methods of on-site drainage and/or water retention,
in accordance with Chapter 196, Stormwater Management.
(8) The location, setbacks, heights and proposed use for all buildings
and structures.
(9) Typical floor plans and elevations for all buildings.
(10) The location of any docks, piers, moorings or similar accessory
structures.
(11) The location, design and traffic circulation patterns for all parking
areas and truck delivery areas showing all ingress and egress
points, driveways, drive aisles, etc.
(12) The location and size of all curb cuts.
(13) Descriptions of provisions for pedestrian access and circulation,
including sidewalks, handicapped parking areas and ramps,
crosswalks and pavement parking, including any easements for
public access along shoreline areas.
(14) The size, nature and location of any outdoor storage area; the
location of any outdoor fencing, including the size, height and type
of construction.
(15) The location, design and construction materials of all existing or
proposed site improvements, such as drains, culverts, retaining
walls, outdoor storage tanks, retention ponds, air-conditioning
units and waste disposal units, etc.
(16) A description of the method of sewage and stormwater disposal
and location, design and construction materials of such facilities.
(17) A description of the method of securing public water and the
location, design and construction materials of such facilities.
(18) The location of fire lanes and other emergency zones, including the
location of all existing and proposed fire hydrants.
(19) The location, size, design and construction material of all proposed
signs.
(20) The location, design and construction materials of all energy
distribution facilities, including electrical, gas and solar energy and
§ 235-83 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-83
230:798
descriptions of provisions for solar energy use, energy conservation
or other environmental design techniques.
(21) The location and proposed development of all buffer areas,
including existing and proposed vegetative cover, and the location
of all existing stands of trees on the site.
(22) The location and design of outdoor lighting facilities.
(23) A designation of the amount of building area to be used for retail
sales or similar commercial activity, if any, and an estimate of the
maximum number of employees to be on the site at any one time.
(24) A general landscaping plan and planting schedule, including
locations and types of trees and shrubbery to be planted.
(25) An identification of all additional Town, county, state and federal
permits, variances and/or other approvals that are necessary in
order to complete the project as proposed and an identification of
all development permits required, if any, under the provisions of
the zoning regulations of the Town's environmental protection
overlay districts.
(26) Any other data, information, maps or drawings that are deemed
necessary by the Town Planning Board and/or Town Department of
Planning and Zoning in order to make a decision regarding the
application for preliminary site plan approval.
(27) For site plan review applications for development proposed within
500 feet of Irondequoit Bay or the Lake Ontario shoreline, a soil
survey containing the following information:
(a) A two-foot contour map on a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or larger scale.
(b) One soil boring 48 inches deep or deeper per two acres of
development.
(c) One deep hole pit eight feet deep or deeper per 10 acres of
development (at least one pit per development site).
(d) A map showing the location of soil borings and deep hole pits.
(e) A map showing the separation of intensive soil units (soil map).
(f) Soil descriptions, unless keyed to county soil survey
descriptions.
(g) A log of soil borings and deep hole pits.
(h) A summary letter written and signed by a professional soil
scientist.
§ 235-83 LITTERING § 235-83
230:799
§ 235-84. Review and approval of preliminary site plan. [Amended
2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
(28) A visual analysis of the proposed development site which identifies
all significant scenic views and vistas, and a cultural resource
analysis of the site which identifies all significant historic,
architectural, archaeological or other cultural buildings and
structures.
B. A letter of intent prepared by the applicant or his or her designated
representative or agent shall accompany the preliminary site plan
application and shall include a statement outlining the proposed
project, the owner of the property and any proposed building, the
project builder or contractor (if known), a proposed construction
schedule, the principals involved in the financing of the project and any
other information deemed necessary by the Town Department of
Planning and Zoning. Such additional information may include data on
the nature and legal status of existing or proposed easements, a
description of all deed restrictions or covenants applicable to the
property, etc.
C. Appropriate fees to cover the costs of processing the application for
preliminary site plan approval shall accompany the application and
shall be paid to the Town Clerk upon filing with the Town Planning
Board. Such fees shall be established by the Town Board by resolution;
may, from time to time, be changed by the Board; and shall not be
refundable.
D. The owner or operator of a proposed marina or harbor area may be
required to submit information that estimates water quality, current
patterns and intensities of boat activity, shoreline alterations and any
other conditions which may be altered by the construction of the marina
or boat basin for a period of one year after completion of the facility.
A. The Town Planning Board's review of a preliminary site plan application
shall include but shall not be limited to the following considerations:
(1) The adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian access and
circulation into and through the site (including separations of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic), location and design of walkway
structures, control of intersections where vehicular and pedestrian
traffic converge and overall pedestrian convenience and safety in
the site and the adequacy of facilities designed to assist
handicapped persons using the facility.
(2) The adequacy and arrangement of vehicular access and circulation
into and through the site (including separation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic), location and design of driveways, drive aisles and
curb cuts.
§ 235-83 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-84
230:800
(3) The adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping on the site for use as visual and/or noise deterring
buffers between adjoining land uses or as natural design elements
to enhance the aesthetic aspects of the project.
(4) In the case of an apartment building, townhouse, condominium or
other form of multifamily dwelling, the adequacy of usable open
space areas for playgrounds and/or other recreational activities.
(5) The adequacy, location and design of parking facilities, loading and
unloading areas and docking facilities.
(6) The adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
(7) The location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, exterior
lighting and signage.
(8) The adequacy of water supply to the site and sewage and refuse
disposal facilities.
(9) The protection of solar access on adjacent or neighboring
properties.
(10) The protection of adjacent properties and the general public
against noise, glare and unsightliness or other objectionable
influences.
(11) The adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas
with moderate- to high-susceptibility to flooding and ponding and/
or erosion.
(12) The proposed grading of the site.
(13) The adequacy of all temporary and permanent provisions to control
erosion from the site, maintain existing vegetation and wildlife
habitats within the site and deal with peculiar soil types on the site
and other similar site environmental problems.
(14) The adequacy, design and location of fire lanes, emergency access
zones or other similar areas intended to provide ingress and egress
for emergency vehicles and the adequacy and location of fire
hydrants.
(15) Provisions for snow storage and/or removal.
(16) The proposed construction schedule or phasing of the project and
its relationship to overall project design.
(17) The requested or potential use of provisions of § 278 of New York
State Town Law, as amended or changed, to permit or require
clustering of development away from sensitive environmental
areas.
§ 235-84 LITTERING § 235-84
230:801
(18) General project conformance with accepted planning, engineering
and site design standards and criteria.
(19) The adequacy, location and design of shoreline/erosion protection
structures.
(20) The adequacy, size, location and design of boat docking facilities,
fishing piers, slips, catwalks, boat launching ramps and other
similar facilities.
(21) The adequacy of provisions of pedestrian access to the shore zone
for particular sites.
(22) The aesthetic and architectural qualities of the proposed project,
particularly building styles and construction materials used as they
relate to any unique characteristics of a particular site and the
surrounding natural environment.
(23) The nature and adequacy of protection of identified significant
scenic views or vistas or significant cultural resources on the site.
B. Planning Board action on preliminary site plan.
(1) The Town Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed preliminary site plan. Such a public hearing shall be
conducted within 62 days of the date of receipt of the application
for preliminary site plan approval and shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least five days
prior to the public hearing. The Town Department of Planning and
Zoning shall be responsible for notifying, by mail, all property
owners within 200 feet of the property involved in the preliminary
application of the date and place of said public hearing at least five
days prior to such meeting.
(2) Prior to the approval of any development application by the Town
Planning Board, the Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall
review such application and make recommendations to the Board
concerning the project. Such recommendations, shall include an
identification of any variances required for the project and/or
possible problems with the general site plan design, parking or
building layouts, ingress or egress, building density or setbacks,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation and other land use, site
design, zoning or environmental problems or concerns. Such
recommendations may also include possible alternative design
solutions. The Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall be
responsible for all other Town permit procedures for any given
project or proposed development, including the Town
environmental quality review process and the procedures for
obtaining development permits within environmental protection
overlay zoning districts.
§ 235-84 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-84
230:802
§ 235-85. Final site plan application. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L.
No. 8-1998]
(3) The Town Department of Planning and Zoning shall be responsible
for referring, as necessary or required, any development project to
the various departments or agencies prior to any final action being
taken by the Town Planning Board on the application. The Town
Department of Planning and Zoning shall also be responsible for
referring certain site development plans to the Monroe County
Department of Planning for an advisory review and report in
accordance with the provisions of § 239-m of the General Municipal
Law, as amended or changed, prior to any final action being taken
on the application by the Town Planning Board.
(4) Within 62 days of the receipt of an application for preliminary site
plan approval, the Town Planning Board shall act on it. If no
decision to deny such an application is made within said sixty-twoday
period and upon completion of all other requirements by the
applicant, the preliminary site plan shall be considered approved.
The sixty-two-day time limit for action on the preliminary site plan
may be extended by mutual consent or agreement of the Town
Planning Board and the applicant. The Planning Board's action
shall be in the form of a written statement to the applicant stating
whether or not the preliminary plan is approved, disapproved or
approved with conditions. The Planning Board may incorporate a
statement of findings into the decision and must clearly state the
reasons for the action being taken.
(5) The Town Planning Board may approve an application for site plan
review when, based on the information presented at the public
hearing, it has been determined that the project will adequately
and appropriately address the considerations and criteria listed
above. The Town Planning Board may place reasonable restrictions
or stipulations on such applications in order to ensure that the
project will adequately and appropriately address the
considerations and criteria listed above.
(6) The Planning Board's decision shall refer to a specific site plan
drawing by date and number and may include recommendations of
desirable modifications to be incorporated into the final site plan.
Conformance with said modifications shall be considered a
condition of project approval. If the preliminary site plan is
disapproved, the Planning Board's decision shall clearly state the
reasons for such denial. In such a case, the Planning Board may
recommend further study of the site plan and resubmission to the
Board after it has been revised or redesigned.
A. After receiving preliminary approval, with or without modifications,
from the Planning Board on a preliminary site plan and approval for all
necessary permits and curb cuts from state and county officials, the
applicant may prepare a final detailed, site plan and submit it to the
§ 235-84 LITTERING § 235-85
230:803
§ 235-86. Review and approval of final site plan. [Amended
2-14-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
Planning Board for approval. If more than six months has elapsed since
the time of the Planning Board's action on the preliminary site plan
and if the Planning Board finds that conditions may have changed
significantly in the interim, the Planning Board may require a
resubmission of the preliminary site plan and an additional public
hearing for further review and possible revision prior to accepting the
proposed final site plan for review.
B. The final detailed site plan shall conform substantially to the
preliminary site plan that has received preliminary plan approval. It
shall incorporate any revisions or other features that may have been
recommended by the Planning Board at the preliminary review. In
addition to that provided elsewhere in this chapter, the Planning Board
may require a letter or credit, bond or maintenance bond for any facility
or improvement that is indicated as part of the plan, such as parking
areas and buffer and screen devices. All such compliances shall be
clearly indicated by the applicant on the appropriate submission.
C. In addition to final detailed site plans, the following additional
information shall accompany an application for final site plan approval:
(1) A record of application for an approval status of all necessary
permits from Town, county and state departments or agencies.
(2) An estimated project construction schedule.
(3) Submission of all proposed easements agreements.
(4) Submission of evidence of firm financial commitments for project
construction and permanent financing for completion of the
project.
(5) Any other information or data necessary by the Town Department
of Planning and Zoning and/or Town Planning Board.
D. Such review shall take place at a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Town Planning Board, but shall not require a public hearing.
E. If the final detailed site plan is substantially different from the approved
preliminary plan, then the applicant shall present any modifications to
the Planning Board as a preliminary site plan in accordance with the
approval procedures found in this section. The Planning Board shall
then determine whether or not the modified plan is still in keeping with
the intent of the Planning Board resolution which approved the
preliminary site plan. If a negative decision is reached, the site plan
shall be considered disapproved.
§ 235-85 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-86
230:804
A. Within 62 days of receipt of the application for final site plan approval,
the Planning Board shall render a decision to the Director of
Development Services. If no decision is made within the sixty-two-day
period, and upon completion of requirements to be met, the final site
plan shall be considered approved. However, the sixty-two-day time
period may be extended by mutual consent of the Town Planning Board
and the applicant. The Planning Board's decision shall clearly refer to a
specific site plan by drawing number and date.
B. Upon approval of the final site plan and payment by the applicant of all
fees and reimbursable costs due to the Town, the Planning Board shall
endorse its approval on a copy of the final site plan and shall forward
such copy to the Town Building Inspector. Upon disapproval of a final
site plan, the Planning Board shall so inform the Director of
Development Services and the Director of Development Services shall
deny a building permit to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also
notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision and its reasons for
disapproval or approval. Town Planning Board approval of a final site
plan shall expire after one year from the date of such decision, unless a
building permit has been taken out within such time period, for work
indicated on the final site plan and substantial site development and/or
construction has begun. An application for preliminary or final site plan
approval that has been denied by the Town Planning Board may not be
resubmitted to the Board for a period of one year from the date of such
decision, unless such plan has been changed or revised to reflect the
concerns and recommendations of the Planning Board indicated in its
notice of denial.
C. In taking action on applications for final site plan approval, the Town
Planning Board shall ensure that, to the extent possible, the
requirements of this chapter have been met or that appropriate
variances have been granted by the Town Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Town Planning Board may impose additional restrictions or conditions
on applications for final site plan approval beyond the general
requirements of this chapter, but within the scope and authority of this
section, if it determines that such restrictions or conditions are
necessary to ensure project conformance with generally accepted
planning, engineering and design standards and criteria to minimize
the project's adverse impact on adjacent land uses and other physical
and environmental features or are directly related to the, health, safety
or general welfare of the community. Such additional restrictions or
conditions shall be in the form of a resolution of approval to be signed
by the applicant as a condition of final site plan approval. Final site plan
approval cannot be granted for any project until all necessary variances
from the Town Zoning Board of Appeals have been granted and/or all
use permits from the Town Board have been granted and a review or
referral has been received concerning the project from the Monroe
County Division of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the
provisions of § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, as amended or
changed.
§ 235-86 LITTERING § 235-86
230:805
§ 235-87. Possible actions on preliminary and final applications.
The Town Planning Board may take any one of the following actions on an
application for preliminary or final site plan review:
D. Upon approval of the final site plan, the Town of Irondequoit Planning
Board shall authorize the Town Engineer and/or the Director of
Planning and Zoning and/or the Director of Development Services to
enter any portion of the area covered on the site plan to ensure that
construction is in compliance with final site plan requirements. The
applicant shall consent to this entry or be subject to revocation of final
site plan approval.
E. Upon approval of the final site plan, the applicant shall certify through
its engineers that development of the project substantially complies
with final site plan approval every 60 days or at such other and further
period of time as may be deemed necessary by the Town Engineer.
Failure to submit the required certification in a timely fashion shall
empower the Town of Irondequoit to halt development and conduct the
necessary engineer's inspection at the expense of the applicant.
A. Preliminary approval: the application is given preliminary site plan
approval as presented.
B. Preliminary approval with modifications: the application is given
preliminary site plan approval subject to certain modifications being
made in the plan that will be on the final site plan.
C. Disapproval: the application for site plan approval is denied based upon
reasons stated in the decision.
D. Disapproval without prejudice: the application for site plan approval is
denied based upon reasons stated in the decision. However, the
Planning Board may reconsider the application if substantial changes
are made in the site plan design or overall project concept. A new
application fee for the Planning Board is required and an additional
public hearing is required if and when the new plans are submitted.
E. Final approval: the application is given final site plan approval as
presented.
F. Final approval with modifications or conditions: the application is given
final site plan approval subject to certain modifications or conditions
contained in the decision or resolution of approval to be signed by the
applicant.
G. Reserve decision: further action on an application for site plan approval
is postponed pending receipt of additional information or data.
H. Tabled: the preliminary site plan hearing is postponed pending receipt
of additional information, appearance of applicant or a representative,
etc.
§ 235-86 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-87
230:806
§ 235-88. Costs.
Costs incurred by the Town Planning Board for consultation fees or other
extraordinary expenses in connection with the review of a proposed site
plan that are over and above the basic application fee shall be charged to
the applicant at a rate as established by the Town Board.
§ 235-89. Coordination of review. [Amended 12-15-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
Whenever the particular circumstances of a proposed development require
compliance with either special use permit procedures as found in this
chapter or requirements of Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, or local SEQR
regulations,150 then the Town Planning Board and Town Department of
Planning and Zoning shall attempt to integrate, where possible, site plan
review as required by this section with the procedural and submission
requirements for such other compliance.
I. Recommendation for approval: Town Board referral or application for
site plan review is given a recommendation of approval, with or without
modifications, for further action by the Town Board.
J. Recommendation for denial: Town Board referral or application for site
plan review is given a recommendation of denial, with reasons, for
further action by the Town Board.
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 123, Environmental Quality Review.
§ 235-87 LITTERING § 235-89
230:807

ARTICLE XVI
Special Use Permits
[Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 235-90. Authority.
A. Issuance of permits. [Amended 9-27-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005]
(1) The Town of Irondequoit considers the review and approval of
special use permits for major principal land uses prior to the
issuance of building permits to be an essential element of local land
use control. The special use permit review and approval process
outlined in this article is designed to ensure that certain proposed
development projects meet a predetermined set of standards and
criteria prior to approval, based on the nature of the land use
involved and the characteristics of the site proposed for that land
use. These standards and criteria are designed to ensure that
development costs of proposed projects are minimized or
eliminated altogether. The special use permit review and approval
process ensures that development proposals are analyzed for their
impacts on local growth, public facilities and infrastructure, as well
as surrounding land uses and natural features. The process is also
designed to ensure that land resources are utilized in the most
appropriate and desirable manner.
(2) Except as otherwise provided for in this article with respect to the
authority of the Town of Irondequoit Planning Board to issue
special use permits within the Waterfront Development (WD),
LaSalles Landing (LLD) and River Harbor (RH) Districts, the
Irondequoit Town Board shall issue all other special use permits
required under this zoning law.
B. The Town of Irondequoit Planning Board, in accordance with the
provisions of § 274-b of New York State Town Law, as amended or
changed, shall have the authority to issue special use permits for the
following uses permitted within the Waterfront Development (WD)
District only, prior to the issuance of any building permits:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar
uses.
(b) Townhouses, row houses and other similar uses. [Amended
3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(c) Commercial parks, playgrounds or beaches, amusement parks,
golf courses, tennis/racquetball clubs or other similar uses
operated for gain.
§ 235-90 LITTERING § 235-90
230:809
(d) Private clubs or camps, private membership clubs, lodges or
fraternal organizations, neighborhood or community centers,
YMCA or YWCA or other similar uses.
(e) Sit-down restaurants.
(f) Motels, hotels or boatels.
(g) Yacht clubs or other similar uses.
(h) Marinas, boat docks, docking basins, boat launching ramps,
including related retail sales of pleasure boats, marine and
fishing supplies, and other similar uses.
(i) Boat service, repair, rental and storage facilities or other
similar uses.
(j) Stores, shops and boutiques designated for festive retail uses
and activities.
(k) Public utility buildings or structures, including, but not limited
to, electrical substations.
(l) Combinations of permitted principal uses based on a
determination by the Town Planning Board that such
combinations are appropriate for the proposed waterfront area
and are compatible with the purpose and intent of this district,
as well as the goals and policies of the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program (LWRP). Each such proposed use shall
be subject to special use permit review and approval.
(m) Other uses not specifically listed above but which, based on a
determination by the Town Planning Board, are deemed
appropriate for waterfront areas; are similar in nature to
permitted principal uses; and are compatible with the purpose
and intent of this district, as well as the goals and policies of
the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP).
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Radio, TV or CB antennas that require a permit from the Town
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(b) All signage, with the exception of real estate signs, temporary
political signs and accessory traffic signs.
(c) Outdoor storage of boats.
(d) Fishing piers, wharves, boat launching ramps and similar
waterfront structures and facilities.
(e) Accessory dredging and filling.
§ 235-90 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-91
230:810
§ 235-91. Permit application. [Amended 4-21-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
A. An application for special use permit review and approval shall be made
in writing on the appropriate forms and shall be filed with the Town
Department of Planning and Zoning. An application for special use
permit review and approval shall require and be made in tandem with
an application for site plan review and approval for the proposed
project. These two applications shall be subject to the information
submission requirements and shall follow one review and approval
process as outlined in this section. The application for special use
permit review and approval shall be considered during the public
hearing on the preliminary site plan. No additional fee shall be required
of the applicant in order to process the special use permit application.
B. Transportation impact analysis.
(1) A transportation impact analysis, to be prepared by the applicant,
submitted with the application for special use permit approval and
reviewed by the Town Planning Board, shall be required as a
condition of a special use permit application in the following cases:
(a) Any development which will have direct access to a collector or
arterial road.
(b) Any residential development which proposes to have more
than 25 dwelling units.
(c) Any use which will generate in excess of 100 trips per day. (The
cumulative transportation impacts of adjacent development on
the existing road network shall also be considered when
determining trip generation rates.)
(d) Any development located on a street, road or highway that
provides a direct access to Irondequoit Bay or to Lake Ontario.
(2) The transportation impact analysis shall include the following:
(a) A description of the proposed site and the existing highway
network within one mile of the site.
(b) A detailed description of road conditions and characteristics,
including grade, pavement widths and surface conditions.
(c) The locations of intersections, traffic signals and public
transportation facilities.
(d) A description of existing traffic conditions, including average
daily traffic volume, design hour volume and roadway and
intersection service levels for each road or highway included in
the project.
§ 235-91 LITTERING § 235-91
230:811
(e) A determination of the development's anticipated
transportation impact using standard trip generation rates and
accepted traffic modeling methodologies that consider the
effects on adjacent development and provision for access
controls.
(f) A detailed description of the proposed local street system for
the development site.
C. An application for special use permit review and approval for all
principal uses permitted within the Waterfront Development (WD)
District shall be accompanied by a natural resource inventory and
visual analysis for the proposed development site that identifies all of
the environmentally sensitive or unique areas within the site, including
but not limited to steep slopes, wetlands, woodlots, floodplains, scenic
views and vistas and wildlife habitats. The natural resource inventory
shall also indicate how the proposed development will impact these
areas and what mitigating measures will be taken to minimize any
adverse impacts. The visual EAF addendum, prepared by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, shall be used to
supply information for the visual impact analysis required above.
D. Historic and/or cultural analysis.
(1) An application for special use permit review and approval for all
principal uses permitted within the Waterfront Development WD
District shall be accompanied by an analysis of the proposed
development site for significant historic or cultural resources. The
criteria for evaluating significant historic or cultural sites shall be
the quality of significance in American or local history,
architecture, archaeology and culture that is present in districts,
sites, buildings, structures and objects of state and local
importance that possess integrity of locations, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling and association and:
(a) That are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
(b) That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our
past;
(c) That employ distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction or that represent the work of a master
or that possess high artistic values or that represent significant
and distinguishable entities whose components may lack
individual distinction; or
(d) That have yielded or may be likely to yield information
important in prehistory or history.
(2) A preliminary records check by the Rochester Museum and Science
Center shall be prepared in the early stages of the project review
§ 235-91 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-91
230:812
§ 235-92. Review of application; grant or denial of permit.
and shall be submitted b the applicant with the initial project
application to identify potentially historic areas.
(3) Developers shall allow historical and archaeological officials access
to the project site during excavation operations.
(4) The developer, in cooperation with local officials and the Rochester
Museu and Science Center staff, shall preserve architecturally
significant structures and make a photographic and statistical
record of those that must be destroyed.
A. Approval by the Town Planning Board of any special use permit shall be
contingent on a finding by the Board, based on the information
submitted and testimony made at the public hearing, written project
reviews by the appropriate agencies and a recommendation from the
Monroe County Division of Planning and Zoning, that the proposed
project or development will, as applicable:
(1) Provide adequate and safe site access.
(2) Provide adequate site utility service, including water supply,
sewage and refuse disposal.
(3) Be compatible with and enhance, to the extent possible, the
existing natural features of the site and the surrounding area.
(4) Provide adequate year-round site fire protection services.
(5) Relate, in an adequate and appropriate manner, to the depth of bay
water adjacent to the site.
(6) Relate, in an adequate and appropriate manner to and in general
be compatible with, the existing land use and zoning pattern in the
immediate area.
(7) Comply, to the greatest extent possible, with the applicable site
design criteria and other zoning district requirements outlined in
this chapter.
(8) Provide public access to the shore zone to the extent possible and
desirable given the nature of the site and proposed use.
B. Approval by the Town Planning Board of any special use permit shall be
contingent on a finding by the Board, based on the information
submitted and testimony made at the public hearing, written project
review by the appropriate agencies and a recommendation from the
Monroe County Division of Planning and Zoning, that the proposed
project or development will not, as applicable:
(1) Adversely effect the orderly development and character of the
surrounding neighborhood.
§ 235-91 LITTERING § 235-92
230:813
(2) Cause an inappropriate or undesirable number of similar uses to be
concentrated in the immediate area.
(3) Be a nuisance to neighboring land uses in terms of the production
of obnoxious or objectionable noise, dust, glare, odor, refuse,
fumes, vibrations, unsightliness, contamination or other similar
conditions.
(4) Create undue hazards or dangers to the general public or to
persons in the vicinity of the project from fire, explosions,
electricity, radiation, crowds, traffic congestion, parking of
automobiles or other similar conditions.
(5) Cause undue harm to or destroy existing sensitive natural features
on the site or in the surrounding area or cause adverse
environmental impacts, such as severe erosion and/or
sedimentation, slope destruction, flooding or ponding of water or
degradation of water quality.
(6) Be incompatible with the type, extent and direction of building
development for the site and surrounding area, as proposed in the
Town of Irondequoit Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof and as
adopted by the Town Planning Board.
(7) Be incompatible with any of the official policies of the Town of
Irondequoit Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP).
(8) Destroy or adversely impact significant historic and/or cultural
resource sites.
(9) Require an unnecessary or destructive amount of dredging, filling
or other disturbance of the waters of Irondequoit Bay or Lake
Ontario.
C. The Town Planning Board shall review the application for special use
permit approval based on the criteria and considerations listed above.
Should the applicant, based on the findings of the Board, fail to meet
any one of the criteria or requirements listed above, either because of
the basic nature and design of the project or the lack of appropriate
mitigating measures, the request for approval of the special use permit
shall be denied. Should the applicant, based on findings of the Board,
meet all of the criteria or requests listed above, either because of the
basic nature and design of the project or the inclusion of appropriate
mitigating measures, then the request for approval of a special use
permit shall be granted. The applicant shall then require approval of
the project's preliminary site plan from the Town Planning Board.
Procedures for the further review of the site plan application shall
follow those particular requirements as outlined in this section. The
Town Planning Board may approve an application for a special use
permit subject to appropriate conditions and/or the inclusion of
mitigating measures that will ensure compliance with the criteria and
requirements listed above. In such a case, no further review or action
§ 235-92 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-92
230:814
on the special use permit application shall be required. However, failure
to comply with the conditions of the special use permit shall be
considered a violation of this chapter shall result in the application of
the appropriate penalties and/or fines as outlined in Article XIX of this
chapter and the possible revocation of other permits.
D. As a part of the special use permit review and approval process, the
Town Planning Board shall be empowered, in accordance with the
provisions of § 278 of New York State Law, as amended or changed, to
establish, change and/or modify lot size, building setback, building
height and other dimensional requirements for specific principal and/or
accessory uses as listed in the Waterfront Development (WD) District.
In making such determinations, the Town Planning Board shall be
guided by the appropriate requirements and considerations listed
above for review of the special use permit application, as well as the
policies of the Town of Irondequoit Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program (LWRP). Dimensional requirements for these uses, as
reviewed and approved by the Town Planning Board, shall be
incorporated into the site plan design through the preliminary site plan
review process.
§ 235-92 LITTERING § 235-92
230:815

ARTICLE XVII
Administration
§ 235-93. Subdivision and resubdivision. [Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L.
No. 4-1986]
The Town Planning Board, in accordance with the provisions of § 278 of
New York State Town Law, as amended or changed, is empowered,
simultaneously with the approval of a plat or plats pursuant to Chapter
204, Subdivision of Land, to modify applicable dimensional provisions of
this chapter. The Town Planning Board shall make such modifications based
on a finding that such modifications will enable and encourage a flexibility
of design and development of land in such a manner so as to promote
the most desirable and appropriate use of land; facilitate the adequate
and economical provision of streets and utilities; and/or will preserve and
protect the natural and scenic qualities of open land, as well as the unique
and sensitive environmental areas within the Town.
§ 235-94. Appeals. [Amended 5-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986;
9-27-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005]
Any person aggrieved by any decision by the Town Planning Board or by the
issuance of a special use permit by the Town Board may apply to the New
York State Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under the provisions
of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceedings must be
instituted within 30 days after the filling of a decision of such Board in the
office of the Town Clerk.
§ 235-95. Enforcement officer.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector. No building permit
or certificate of occupancy shall be granted by him or her for any purpose,
except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable provisions of the Code of the Town and laws and rules and
regulations of the State of New York and any other authority having
jurisdiction.
§ 235-96. Building permits.
No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally altered
until a permit therefor has been issued by the Building Inspector. All
applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the requirements
of Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention and this chapter.
No permits shall be issued for additions to dwellings where such additions
will increase the total ground floor area to beyond 150% of the minimum
floor area designated for all residential districts as indicated in Articles IV,
V, VI and VII.
§ 235-97. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 235-93 LITTERING § 235-97
230:817
§ 235-98. Construal of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of
the public health, morals, safety or the general welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter or sections thereof are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances
or other sections of this chapter, the most restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
§ 235-99. Amendments. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The Town Board may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition
or on recommendation of the Planning Board, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter pursuant to the provisions of the Town Law
applicable thereto. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred to
the Planning Board for a report prior to the public hearing thereon. If the
Planning Board fails to report therein within 62 days after referral, the
Town Board may act without such report.
A. Compliance with Chapter 98. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued
as provided in Chapter 98, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
B. Issuance of new certificate. Upon the written request from the owner,
the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any
existing lawful nonconforming use and occupancy of a building or land
after verification by an inspection of the same, provided that there are
no violations of law or orders of the Building Inspector or Board of
Appeals pending at the time of issuing such certificate.
§ 235-97 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-99
230:818
ARTICLE XVIII
Board of Appeals
§ 235-100. Establishment; membership. [Amended 4-3-1980 by L.L.
No. 1-1980]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Town Law applicable thereto, there is
hereby established a Board of Appeals of seven members to be appointed by
the Town Board, which shall also designate the Chair thereof, each member
to serve for a term of five years. Vacancies occurring in said Board shall
be filled in a like manner for the unexpired term. Members of the Board
of Appeals and the Chair thereof heretofore appointed and designated by
the Town Board shall continue to hold office during the term for which
appointed and until his or her successor is appointed.
§ 235-101. Powers and duties. [Amended 2-12-1987 by L.L. No.
1-1987; 12-15-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
A. General powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall possess all the
powers and perform all the duties conferred by statute and by this
chapter or any amendments thereto. The Board of Appeals, consistent
with the provisions of the Town Law applicable thereto, shall determine
its own rules of conduct and procedure.
B. Review. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and review
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building
Inspector pursuant to this chapter and in accordance with its rules of
procedure.
C. Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision, the Board of Appeals may
decide questions involving the interpretation of this chapter.
D. Special and temporary use permits.
(1) Wherever a special or temporary use permit is required under the
provisions of the chapter, the Board of Appeals may, upon
determination that the purposes of this chapter will be served and
after due public notice and public hearing and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant a special or
temporary use permit. The same procedure shall follow as provided
by law in relation to an application for a variance.
(2) Any special or temporary use permit granted under the provisions
of this subsection shall become null and void unless exercised
within one year from the date when the decision of the Board
granting said special or temporary permit becomes final, either by
expiration of the time for review of the same by a court or by the
final judgment of the court in the case of court review. However, the
time to exercise said permit may be extended, for good cause
shown, upon written application to the Director of Planning and
Zoning made prior to the expiration of the time limit. The Director
§ 235-100 LITTERING § 235-101
230:819
of Planning and Zoning, upon 30 days' notice to the Board which
granted the original approval of said permit, may extend the time
to exercise said permit for successive periods not to exceed six
months each.
E. Variances.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant variances in
accordance with the provisions of § 267 of the Town Law, as
amended or changed.
(2) Any variance granted under the provisions of this subsection shall
become null and void, unless a building permit is obtained and
work is commenced within one, year from the date when the
decision of the Board of Appeals becomes final, either by expiration
of the time for review of the same by a court or by the final
judgment of the court in the case of court review. However, the time
to obtain a building permit and/or to commence work may be
extended, for good cause shown, upon written application to the
Director of Development Services made prior to the expiration of
the time limit. The Director of Development Services may extend
the time to obtain a permit and/or commence work for successive
periods not to exceed six months each.
§ 235-101 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-101
230:820
ARTICLE XIX
Penalties
§ 235-102. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-4-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
six months, or both, for a conviction of a first offense; for a conviction of
a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine of not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction of a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine of not less than $700 nor
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both. Each weeks' continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
§ 235-103. Abatement of violations.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter or of any regulation made under
authority conferred hereby, the Building Inspector or other proper official,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action of
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to
restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about such premises.
§ 235-102 LITTERING § 235-103
230:821

ARTICLE XX
Recreational and Commercial Vehicles
[Added 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 235-104. Recreational vehicles.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the parking of
recreational vehicles in all districts zoned for residential use in the
Town so as to reduce hazardous traffic conditions, protect those
districts from polluted air, excessive noise, trash and refuse; protect the
residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their
residences, preserve the character of those districts as residential, to
promote efficiency in the maintenance of those streets, preserve the
value of property, protect the safety of pedestrians and maintain the
general health and welfare of the residents of those districts.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARK — To place a recreational vehicle for the purposes of convenient
departure from or return to the vehicle in connection with a planned
trip, outing or vacation, including the process of loading or unloading
the vehicle and preparation of the vehicle, for a period of less than 10
days.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular type that can be towed,
hauled or driven and primarily designed for temporary living
accommodations, recreational, camping and travel use and including
but not limited to a travel trailer, camper, motor home, tent trailer,
camping trailer, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer, jet
ski, jet ski trailer, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), ATV trailer and utility trailer.
STORE — To place a recreational vehicle for the purposes of
preserving, protecting and securing it for a period in excess of 10 days.
UTILITY TRAILER — An open or enclosed trailer not to exceed six feet
wide by 12 feet long.[Added 7-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
C. Zoning districts. This section shall apply to R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5
and residential uses in R-6 Zoning Districts. All nonresidential uses in
R-6, C, WD and M Zoning Districts require a special use permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals for the parking and/or storage of recreational
vehicles.
D. Garage storage. Storage of recreational vehicles within a completely
enclosed garage with the door(s) closed shall be permitted in all zoning
districts.
E. Front yard requirements.
(1) From April 1 to November 1 of any calendar year, one recreational
vehicle may be parked or stored on a front yard driveway or other
hard surfaced parking area.
§ 235-104 LITTERING § 235-104
230:823
§ 235-104.1. Commercial vehicles.
(2) Such recreational vehicle shall have a minimum setback of four feet
from the front property line(s) and three feet from any side
property line.
F. Side yard requirements.
(1) One recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in one of either
side yards.
(2) Such recreational vehicle shall have a minimum setback of three
feet from the side property line.
G. Rear yard requirements.
(1) Up to two recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in the rear
yard.
(2) Such recreational vehicles shall have a minimum setback of four
feet from the rear and side property lines.
(3) The total area covered by accessory structures and recreational
vehicles shall not exceed 50% of the rear yard.
H. General requirements.
(1) At any given time, no more than two recreational vehicles shall be
parked or stored in the open on the premises.
(2) Recreational vehicles stored on the premises must be owned by the
occupant of the premises.
(3) Recreational vehicles shall not have fixed connections to electricity,
water, gas or sanitary facilities, nor shall any recreational vehicle at
any time be used for living or housekeeping purposes while on the
premises.
(4) Any such recreational vehicle shall be kept in good repair and in
working condition, with current license plate and/or registration,
unless stored within a garage.
(5) Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored upon any public
highway or right-of-way.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the parking of
motor vehicles in all districts zoned for residential use in the Town so as
to reduce hazardous traffic conditions, protect those districts from
polluted air, excessive noise, trash and refuse; protect the residents
from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences,
preserve the character of those districts as residential, to protect the
public highways from excessive wear and tear, to promote efficiency in
the maintenance of those streets, preserve the value of property,
§ 235-104 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-104.1
230:824
protect the safety of pedestrians and maintain the general health and
welfare of the residents of those districts.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed for or primarily used
for commercial purposes in conjunction with a business.
C. Zoning districts. This section shall apply to R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5
and R-6 Zoning Districts.
D. General requirements. The following requirements shall apply:
(1) Gross vehicle weight (GVW) up to 10,500 pounds as indicated on
the manufacturer's rating label.
(2) One such vehicle per dwelling unit.
(3) Personal use by occupant of the dwelling unit. [Amended
7-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
(4) No parking or storage of such vehicles on vacant lots or lots
without a principal structure unless a special use permit is
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(5) Parking within a public highway or right-of-way is prohibited.
(6) Occupants shall submit proof of ownership and vehicle weight
when requested by the Building Inspector. [Amended 7-18-2000
by L.L. No. 5-2000]
E. Restrictions. The following vehicle types are prohibited:
(1) Dump trucks.
(2) Construction equipment/trailers.
(3) Tow trucks.
(4) Buses.
(5) Semitractors and trailers.
(6) Step-vans.
(7) Freight vans/trucks.
(8) Flatbed/stake bed truck.
(9) Sanitation equipment.
(10) All other vehicles exceeding any two of the following dimensions:
(dimensions to exclude mirrors and ornamentation):
(a) Overall body height of 90 inches (7.5 feet).
§ 235-104.1 LITTERING § 235-104.1
230:825
(b) Overall body length of 240 inches (20 feet).
(c) Overall body width of 96 inches (eight feet).
F. Exceptions. Exceptions shall be allowed as follows:
(1) Personal vehicles used by handicapped person(s).
(2) Construction vehicles and equipment while actively and necessarily
employed in construction or other real property improvements.
(3) Commercial vehicles used in the normal course of pickup and
delivery.
(4) Vehicles on agricultural or farm properties if used in the normal
course of agricultural or farm business.
(5) Recreational vehicles.
(6) Parking of vehicles within an enclosed garage.
§ 235-104.1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-104.1
230:826
ARTICLE XXI
Signs
[Added 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 235-105. Purposes.
The purposes of these sign regulations are to encourage the effective use of
signs as a means of communication in the Town; to maintain and enhance
the aesthetic environment and the Town's ability to attract sources of
economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic
safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property: and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these
sign restrictions. This article is adopted under the zoning authority of the
Town in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in Chapter 235,
Zoning.
§ 235-106. Applicability; effect.
A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained
in the Town only in conformance with the standards, procedures,
exemptions, and other requirements of this article. The effect of this article,
as more specifically set forth herein, is:
§ 235-107. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth
in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined
in the Zoning Law of the Town shall be given the meanings set forth in
such law. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained
in § 235-108. All other words and phrases shall be given their common,
ordinary meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section
headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used
in the interpretation of this article.
A. To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in other
zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this
article;
B. To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and incidental to the
principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to
the substantive requirements of this article, but without a requirement
for permits;
C. To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in limited
circumstances in the public right-of-way;
D. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this article; and
E. To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 235-105 LITTERING § 235-107
230:827
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light
source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy
or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and
not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this article. A sign on which the
only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or
temperature shall be considered a time and temperature portion of a sign
and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this article.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Development Services of the Town or his or
her designee.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision
or other entity.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no
parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone" and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off
the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
LOT — Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the
boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of
§ 235-107 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-107
230:828
record, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer
of ownership.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of
a marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this article.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERSON — Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization or
partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including
but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal
uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages
and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a district zoned for residential
uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering
such service at such location conforms with all requirements of this chapter.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTERNAL — Any sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such
that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof
by a space of more than six inches.
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
§ 235-107 LITTERING § 235-107
230:829
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of or identify the purpose of a person or entity or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
STREET — A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well
as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property,
including but not limited to alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives,
highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails or other thoroughfares.
STREET FRONTAGE — The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins
a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest
distant lot line intersecting the same street.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
ZONE LOT — A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size
to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use and that
can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning
regulations.
§ 235-108. Computations.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height:
A. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which
is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall
be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits
of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the
display itself.
B. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
§ 235-107 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-108
230:830
§ 235-109. Signs allowed on private property with and without
permits.
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 24 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction or the
newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the
sign.
D. Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a zone lot. The
permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be
computed by applying the formula contained in Table A,151 regarding
maximum total sign area, to the lot frontage, building frontage or wall
area, as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign
area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is
oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the
lot's total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building or
wall area frontage on that street.
A. Signs shall be allowed on private property in the Town in accordance
with, and only in accordance with, Table A.152 If the letter "P" appears
for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed without prior permit
approval in the zoning districts represented by that column. If the letter
"S" appears for a sign in a column, such sign is allowed only with prior
permit approval in the zoning districts represented by that column.
Special conditions may apply in some cases. If the letter "N" appears for
a sign type in a column, such a sign is not allowed in the zoning districts
represented by that column under any circumstances.
B. Although permitted under the previous subsection, a sign designated by
an "S" or "P" in Table A shall be allowed only if:
(1) The size, location and number of signs on the lot conform with the
requirements of Tables B and C which establish permitted sign
dimensions by sign type, and with any additional limitations listed
in Table A.
151. Editor's Note: The tables are located at the end of this chapter.
152. Editor's Note: The tables are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-108 LITTERING § 235-109
230:831
§ 235-110. Permits required.
§ 235-111. Design, construction and maintenance.
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 235-112. Signs in the public right-of-way.
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
(2) The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of Table
D, Permitted Sign Characteristics, and with any additional
limitations on characteristics listed in Table A.
A. If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of this article is to be
placed, constructed, erected or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the
lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement,
erection or modification of such a sign in accordance with the
requirements of § 235-116.
B. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a
sign permit for such sign in accordance with § 235-116.
C. No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in
accordance with § 235-112 and the permit requirements of § 235-119.
D. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed
sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this article
(including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the
Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan in effect for the
property.
A. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of New York State
Uniform Building Code and the electrical code of the Town at all times.
B. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all signs
shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently
attached to the ground, a building or another structure by direct
attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
C. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this
code, at all times.
A. Permanent signs. Permanent signs, including:
(1) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, identify public property, convey public information
and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(2) Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
§ 235-109 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-112
230:832
§ 235-113. Temporary signs. [Amended 8-18-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998]
(3) Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes or facilities; and
(4) Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public
right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of Table A153 of this
article.
B. Temporary signs. Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued
in accordance with § 235-119, which shall be issued only for signs
meeting the following requirements:
(1) Such signs shall contain no commercial message; and
(2) Such signs shall be no more than two square feet in area each.
C. Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, a public utility company or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right-of-way.
D. Other signs forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property,
except in conformance with the requirements of this article, shall be
forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other
remedies hereunder, the Town shall have the right to recover from the
owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and
disposal of such sign.
A. Political signs. Temporary political signs shall be permitted without a
building permit subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(1) Only one nonilluminated, nonmoving sign per zoning lot shall be
permitted per candidate.
(2) Maximum total area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed
eight square feet; however, there shall be no area limitation on
window signs.
(3) No sign shall be permitted on fences, trees or utility poles.
(4) Political signs shall only be permitted during the time period 45
days prior and five days after an election.
(5) Political signs shall be exempt from the general enforcement
provisions of Chapter 235, Zoning.
B. Real estate signs.
(1) Residential uses. One nonilluminated, nonflashing sign not
exceeding six square feet in area and advertising only the
prospective sale or rental of the premises on which the sign is
153. Editor's Note: The tables are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-112 LITTERING § 235-113
230:833
§ 235-114. Signs exempt from regulation.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this article:
§ 235-115. Signs prohibited.
All signs not expressly permitted under this article or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are
prohibited in the Town. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
located shall be permitted. The sign can not be located within four
feet of a property line(s).
(2) Nonresidential uses. One nonilluminated, non-flashing sign not
exceeding 32 square feet advertising only the prospective sale or
rental of the premises on which the sign is located shall be
permitted. The sign can not be located within 10 feet of a property
line(s).
(3) Development. One nonilluminated, non-flashing sign not exceeding
50 square feet in area advertising the approved development of the
premises on which the sign is located shall be permitted. The sign
can not be located within 10 feet of a property line(s).
A. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal,
state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
B. Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located;
C. Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
D. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, but only
between November 15 and January 15; and
E. Traffic control signs on private property, such as "stop," "yield" and
similar signs, the face of which meets Department of Transportation
standards and which contains no commercial message of any sort.
A. Beacons;
B. Pennants;
C. Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background,
except those exempt under the previous section;
D. Inflatable signs and tethered balloons; and
E. Whipsails/windsails. [Added 12-18-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
§ 235-113 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-116
230:834
§ 235-116. General permit procedures.
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of
all sign permits under this article:
§ 235-117. Permits to construct or modify signs.
Signs identified as "P" or "S" on Table A154 shall be erected, installed or
created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign construction
permit from the Director. Such permits shall be issued only in accordance
with the following requirements and procedures.
A. Applications. All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the
Director on an application form or in accordance with application
specifications published by the Director.
B. Fees. Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the
applicable fees, which shall be established by the governing body of the
Town from time to time by resolution.
C. Completeness. Within five days of receiving an application for a sign
permit, the Director shall review it for completeness. If the Director
finds that it is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the
Director finds that it is incomplete, the Director shall, within such fiveday
period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which
the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the
applicable sections of this article.
D. Action. Within seven days of the submission of a complete application
for a sign permit, the Director shall either:
(1) Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application conforms in every respect to the requirements of this
article; or
(2) Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of
this article. In case of a rejection, the Director shall specify in the
rejection the section or sections of the local law or applicable plan
with which the sign(s) is inconsistent.
A. Permit for new sign or for sign modification. An application for
construction, creation or installation of a new sign or for modification of
an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the
dimensions, design, structure and location of each particular sign. One
application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot.
B. Inspection. The Director shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for
which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign
is issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at
154. Editor's Note: The tables are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-116 LITTERING § 235-117
230:835
§ 235-118. Sign permits; continuing.
The owner of a zone lot containing signs requiring a permit under this
article shall at all times maintain in force a sign permit for such property.
Sign permits shall be issued for individual zone lots.
§ 235-119. Portable, temporary and special event sign permits
(private property). [Amended 12-21-2004 by L.L. No. 14-2004;
12-18-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
A permit is required for portable, temporary, and special event signs on
private property and subject to review and approval by the Director of
Development Services.
such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is
not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall
lapse and become void. If the construction is complete and in full
compliance with this article and with the building and electrical codes,
the Director shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying
the sign(s) and the applicable permit by number or other reference.
If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance
with this article and applicable codes, the Director shall give the owner
or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30
days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected.
If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall
lapse. If the construction is then complete, the Director shall affix to the
premises the permanent symbol described above.
A. Lapse of sign permit. A sign permit shall lapse automatically if the
business license for the premises lapses, is revoked or is not renewed. A
sign permit shall also lapse if the business activity on the premises is
discontinued for a period of 60 days or more and is not renewed within
30 days of a notice from the Town to the last permittee, sent to the
premises, that the sign permit will lapse if such activity is not renewed.
B. Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be
freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a
business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such
application as the Director may require and paying any applicable fee.
The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require
approval.
A. General requirements.
(1) Portable/temporary signs shall not be attached to fences, trees, or
light/utility poles, nor shall signs be placed within public rights-ofway
or be placed so as to obstruct or impair the vision of motorists.
(2) Portable/temporary signs shall be placed so as to permit an
unimpeded pedestrianway.
§ 235-117 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-119
230:836
(3) Portable/temporary signs shall be professional in appearance and/
or commercially manufactured (including lettering surface and
frame).
(4) Portable/temporary signs shall not be illuminated or have motion
(i.e., oscillate, spin).
(5) Pennants, inflatable signs, whipsails/windsails, and tethered
balloons are prohibited (§ 235-115).
(6) Banner signs, unless attached to the principal building, are not
permitted.
(7) Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels are not
permitted.
(8) Maintenance. All portable/temporary signs shall be maintained in a
safe condition at all times so as not to be detrimental to the public
health and safety. All signs shall be kept upright, level, taut, clean,
and unfaded and be maintained in overall good appearance.
(9) Portable/temporary signs are permitted within Town, county and
state rights-of-ways during road construction to notify and direct
motorists and pedestrians safely to temporary entrances to
properties. Sign location and size to be determined by
Commissioner of Public Works to ensure signage will not obstruct
or impede visual or physical access of motorists and pedestrians.
B. Business and multiresidential portable/temporary signs.
(1) Perimeter portable/temporary (freestanding) signs.
(a) One perimeter portable/temporary sign per business or
apartment complex.
(b) Maximum size of lettering surface area is 42 inches by 30
inches (8.75 square feet) and a frame of one inch by one inch.
(c) Maximum height is 42 inches as measured from ground level to
top of the sign.
(d) Front setback shall not be closer than 10 feet from the paved
surface and/or the back edge of the road gutter of any roadway.
Signs may not be located within the right-of-way. Side and rear
setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from property lines.
However, if the constraints of the site make the ten-foot side
setback impractical, then the minimum setback may be
reduced to five feet, provided that the temporary sign will not
impede the vision or access of motorists and/or pedestrians.
(e) Plaza perimeter portable/temporary signs must also adhere to
the following:
[1] Minimum distance between such signs is 40 feet.
§ 235-119 LITTERING § 235-119
230:837
[2] Maximum number per street front is one per 100 feet, but
in all cases no more than five perimeter portable signs per
street front.
(2) Nonperimeter portable/temporary signs (signs located near entry
of building).
(a) One nonperimeter portable/temporary sign per business or
apartment complex entrance.
(b) Maximum size of lettering surface area is 42 inches by 36
inches (10.5 square feet) and a frame of one inch by one inch.
(c) Maximum height is 42 inches as measured from ground level to
top of the sign.
(d) Such sign shall have a minimum front setback of 30 feet from
the front property line or be located within 10 feet of the
building as long as the minimum side and rear setbacks from
property lines are 10 feet.
(3) Banner signs: one banner sign attached to the principal building
per business or apartment complex. Maximum size of banner: three
feet high by eight feet wide.
C. Grand openings portable/temporary signs.
(1) Banner signs.
(a) Term: maximum of two weeks prior to opening and four weeks
once opened.
(b) Number: maximum of two banners attached to the building.
(c) Size: maximum three feet high by eight feet wide.
(2) Portable perimeter and nonperimeter signs same as above in
Subsection B(1).
D. Educational, charitable, public service, civic or religious events
portable/temporary signs.
(1) Two perimeter portable/temporary signs.
(2) Three nonperimeter portable/temporary signs.
(3) Two banners (special event or celebration).
E. Other portable/temporary signs.
(1) Contractor signs (siding, roofing, painting, construction,
landscaping, etc.).
(a) Shall not be permitted within rights-of-way.
§ 235-119 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-119
230:838
§ 235-120. Permits for signs in the public right-of-way.
Permits for temporary private signs in the public right-of-way shall be
issued in accordance with the following conditions:
§ 235-121. Time of compliance: nonconforming signs and signs
without permits.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other
premises on which exists a sign that does not conform to the requirements
of this article or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall
be obligated to remove such sign or, in the case of a nonconforming sign, to
bring it into conformity with the requirements of this article.
§ 235-122. Violations.
(b) Location permitted on the property where work is currently
being performed. Signs shall not be closer than 10 feet from
the paved surface and/or the back edge of the road gutter of
any roadway. Side and rear setback shall be a minimum of 10
feet from property lines. In all cases, signs shall not obstruct or
impede the vision of motorists.
(c) Signs shall be removed upon the completion of the work to be
performed or 30 days, whichever comes first. In the case of
landscaping, the signs shall be removed within three days of
completion of work, with a minimum distance between such
signs of 1,000 feet.
(d) There shall be a maximum of one sign per contractor working
on property per year.
A. Term and number of permits. The term of such a permit shall be seven
days. No more than one permit for temporary signs shall be issued to
any applicant in any calendar year.
B. Number of signs. No more than one sign may be erected under one
permit.
A. Lapse of nonconforming sign permit. A nonconforming sign permit shall
lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under
which any other sign permit may lapse and become void.
B. Sign removal required. A sign that was constructed, painted, installed
or maintained in conformance with a permit under this article but for
which the permit has lapsed or not been renewed or for which the time
allowed for the continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired shall
be forthwith removed without notice or action from the Town.
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this article and shall be
subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this
article and by state law:
§ 235-119 LITTERING § 235-122
230:839
§ 235-123. Enforcement and remedies.
(1) To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such or the zone lot
on which the sign is located;
(2) To install create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such a permit;
(3) To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such or the zone lot
on which sign is located;
(4) To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this article or for which the sign permit
has lapsed; or
(5) To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued
violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this article.
B. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this
article shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this article.
A. Any violation or attempted violation of this article or of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected or
abated, as the case may be, by injunction or offer appropriate
proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this article shall be
considered a violation of the zoning law of the Town. The remedies of
the Town shall include the following:
(1) Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the
same zone lot;
(2) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the
nonconformity;
(3) Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the Town
under the zoning law;
(4) Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be
imposed by such court under the zoning law; and
(5) In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the Town
under the applicable provisions of the zoning law and building code
for such circumstances.
B. The Town shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time
to time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the
zoning law.
§ 235-122 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-123
230:840
C. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent
that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof. Such remedy shall
remain available for other violations or other parts of the same
violation.
§ 235-123 LITTERING § 235-123
230:841

ARTICLE XXII
Regulation of Telecommunications
[Added 11-17-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998; amended in its entirety
4-16-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 235-124. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Establish a local policy concerning the erection of commercial
wireless telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures,
towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes and poles.
(2) Protect persons from unsafe structures and equipment; to promote
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town and
others; and to provide standards for safe provision of wireless
telecommunications consistent with applicable federal and state
regulations.
(3) Establish clear local guidelines and standard time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of wireless
telecommunications providers and services.
(4) Protect the Town's interest in siting telecommunications towers,
communications towers, telecommunications facilities, accessory
facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas,
satellite dishes and poles in a manner consistent with sound land
use planning, while also allowing wireless telecommunications
services providers to meet their technological and service
objectives; and to protect the natural features and aesthetic
character of the Town.
(5) Minimize unnecessary local regulation of wireless
telecommunications providers and services.
(6) Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive wireless
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the
businesses, institutions and residents of the Town.
(7) Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of
the Town for telecommunications purposes on a competitively
neutral basis.
(8) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way
held in public trust by the Town.
(9) Assure that the Town's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public rights-of-way are
fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such
costs.
§ 235-124 LITTERING § 235-124
230:843
§ 235-125. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — A facility or structure serving
or used in conjunction with a communications tower and located on the
same lot as the communications tower, including utility or transmission
equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
AFFILIATE — A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with
another person.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals. Such signals shall include but are not limited to
radio, television, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS)
and microwave communications.
CLEAR ZONE — The area surrounding a standard wireless
telecommunication facility that is free and clear of structures, public rightsof-
way, parking lots, navigable water and other such areas that could be
hit by structural failure, falling debris and other such dangers, with the
exception of accessory facilities or structures associated with the tower.
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES — The Town Department of Development
Services.
DISH ANTENNA — See "antenna."
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FREESTANDING TOWER — See "communications tower."
(10) Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Town and the
residents of the Town for permitting private use of the public
rights-of-way.
(11) Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the Town comply with local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Town.
(12) Enable the Town to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry
competition and technological development.
B. This article shall be construed and administered so as to not unduly
hamper reasonably satisfactory reception of satellite television signals.
This article is intended to comply fully with the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
§ 235-124 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-125
230:844
MICROWAVE — A method of providing line-of-sight telecommunications
bandwidth by means of a series of antennas, transmitters and reflectors on
towers.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES — Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, joint-stock companies, firms,
partnerships, limited liability companies or other entities or individuals.
POLE — See "wireless telecommunications facility, support structure."
PSC — New York State Public Service Commission.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY (PROW) — Includes all streets owned by the Town
and utility easements and other easements granted to the Town, as those
terms are defined herein, but only to the extent of the Town's right, title,
interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such
streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any parabolic dish, antenna or other transmitting
device or equipment of whatever nature or kind, the primary purpose of
which is to receive or to transmit television, radio, light, microwave or other
electronic signals, waves and/or communication from space satellites.
SATELLITE DISH — See "satellite antenna."
SEQRA — State Environmental Quality Review Act.
SPECIAL USE — A use which is deemed allowable within a given zoning
district, but which is potentially incompatible with other uses and,
therefore, is subject to special standards and conditions of such use, and is
subject to the approval of the Town Board.
STATE — New York State.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — See "wireless telecommunications."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — See "wireless telecommunications
carrier."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — See "wireless telecommunications
facility."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — See "wireless telecommunications
provider."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — See "wireless telecommunications
service."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS — See "communications tower."
TOWER — See "wireless telecommunications facility, support structure."
TOWN — The Town of Irondequoit.
UTILITY EASEMENTS — Any easement owned by the Town and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes or any other
public purpose not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
§ 235-125 LITTERING § 235-125
230:845
UTILITY FACILITY — The plant, equipment and property, including but not
limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
PROW of the Town and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications service.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of
audio, video, data and other information by wire, radio, light and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Every person that
directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages a plant,
equipment or property within the Town, used or to be used for the purpose
of offering telecommunications service.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The communications
tower, and/or accessory facility or structure, used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, CO-LOCATION — Siting
additional telecommunications facilities on an existing structure or pole
using the same base or support structure, without the need to construct a
new base structure. Co-location may include siting multiple facilities from
the same provider or from more than one provider in the same location.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, NEW — The establishment
of a telecommunications facility on a base structure where no such facility
presently exists.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, SMALL-CELL OR
MICROCELL — An exterior facility, excluding a satellite dish antenna,
established for the purpose of providing wireless voice, data and/or image
transmission within a designated service area. A small-cell
telecommunications facility must not be staffed and consists of one or
more antennas attached to a support structure or building. Antennas may
not be larger than a maximum height of four feet and a maximum width
of two feet, six inches. These unit types are defined under the Federal
Telecommunications Act and will be processed in accordance with this
article.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, STANDARD — Any
exterior facility, including an antenna, antenna array or other
communications equipment, excluding a satellite dish antenna or smallcell
telecommunications facility, established for the purpose of providing
wireless voice, data, and image transmission within a designated service
area and which includes equipment consisting of personal wireless services,
as defined in federal law, including by Federal Communications Commission
orders or regulations. A telecommunications facility must not be staffed. A
telecommunications facility consists of one or more antennas attached to a
support structure and related equipment. Equipment may be located within
a building or an exterior equipment cabinet.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, STEALTH — Any
telecommunications facility that is integrated into an architectural feature
§ 235-125 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-125
230:846
of a structure or the surrounding landscape so that the facility and its
purpose to provide wireless services is not visually apparent or prominent.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, SUPPORT STRUCTURE
— A monopole, tower, utility pole, existing light pole, building or any other
freestanding self-supporting structure or replacement of equivalent
dimensions which can safely support the installation of a
telecommunications facility.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Every person who
provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The providing or
offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received,
of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming
information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of
any closed transmission medium, excluding cable television service.
§ 235-126. Application of article.
§ 235-127. Exceptions.
The following are exempt from the application of this article:
A. No wireless telecommunications facility of any type, support structure,
accessory facility or structure, tower, antenna, satellite antenna,
satellite dish and/or pole shall hereafter be used, erected, moved, or
reconstructed unless the required approval(s) have been granted under
the provisions of this article.
B. No existing structure shall be modified to serve as a
telecommunications tower, communications tower, telecommunications
facility, accessory facility or structure, tower, antenna, satellite
antenna, satellite dish and/or pole unless such modification is made in
conformity with this article.
A. The repair, maintenance of existing wireless telecommunication facility
telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures, towers,
antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles.
B. Antennas used solely for residential household television and radio
reception.
C. Satellite antennas one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter,
building-mounted, installed according to manufacturers
recommendations, adequately secured and meeting all electrical code
requirements regardless of zoning for the districts in which they are
located. For safety reasons, no such satellite antenna shall be placed on
a fire escape, placed so as to impair ingress or egress to a building or
structure nor placed within 10 feet of a power line.
§ 235-125 LITTERING § 235-127
230:847
§ 235-128. Registration required; purpose of registration;
exceptions.
D. Freestanding satellite antennas for residential use, behind the principal
structure and four feet from the lot line.
E. Satellite antennas measuring two meters (78.74 inches) or less in
diameter, building-mounted, installed according to manufacturer's
recommendations, adequately secured, meeting all electrical code
requirements and located in C Business or M Manufacturing Districts.
For safety reasons, no such satellite antenna shall be placed on a fire
escape, placed so as to impair ingress or egress to a building or
structure nor placed within 10 feet of a power line.
F. Any tower or antenna not more than 70 feet in height, any satellite dish
not more than six feet in diameter, owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator, or used exclusively as a
receiver-only facility.
G. Lawful or approved uses existing prior to the effective date of this
article.
A. Except as provided in this article, all telecommunications carriers
having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the
Town shall register with the Town Clerk pursuant to this article on
forms to be provided by the Town, which information shall include the
following:
(1) The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates, subsidiaries, joint ventures and partnerships.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration
statement.
(3) A description of the registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the Town.
(4) A description of the telecommunications services that the
registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or
providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the
Town.
(5) Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is
subject to public rights-of-way licensing or franchising.
(6) Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
organization or receipt of the telecommunications services
provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an
occupation or privilege subject to any municipal
telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other tax imposed
by the Town.
§ 235-127 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-128
230:848
§ 235-129. Administrative review.
(7) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied
for and received any certificate of authority required by the State of
New York to provide telecommunications services or facilities
within the Town.
(8) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant or any
affiliate has applied for and received any construction permit,
operating license or standard wireless telecommunication facility
approvals required by the FCC to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the Town.
B. The purpose of registration is to:
(1) Provide the Town with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who
offer or provide telecommunications services within the Town, or
that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the Town.
(2) Assist the Town in enforcement of this article.
(3) Assist the Town in collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due to the
Town.
(4) Assist the Town in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
C. Exceptions to registration. The following telecommunications carriers
and providers are excepted from registration under this article:
(1) Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated by the
federal government, the state or any political subdivision of the
state, for its own use.
(2) Any person who provides telecommunications service solely to
itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building,
or between closely located buildings under common ownership or
control, provided that such company or person does not use or
occupy any public rights-of-way of the Town.
A. Modifications to existing approved standard wireless
telecommunication facility. Replacement of existing antennas and
modifications and/or additions to equipment at existing standard
wireless telecommunication facilities and support structures may be
reviewed and approved administratively by the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee. No board approvals are required
unless the proposed equipment changes and/or additions would
noticeably alter the appearance of the previously approved wireless
telecommunications facility(ies).
§ 235-128 LITTERING § 235-129
230:849
§ 235-130. Microcell locations requiring site plan approval.
§ 235-131. Standard wireless communication facilities in
manufacturing and commercial districts.
Standard wireless telecommunication facilities and support structures,
accessory facilities and structures, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite
dishes and/or poles shall be permitted in any of the following high-intensity
use districts upon issuance of a final site plan approval by the Town
(1) Application for a building permit is required and structural analysis
must be submitted with all other required application
documentation.
B. Wireless microcell wireless telecommunication facility. The following
microcell installations may be reviewed and approved administratively
by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee and
proceed directly to the building permit application:
(1) Installation of microcell wireless telecommunications equipment on
existing and/or replacement utility poles in the same location in the
right-of-way, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) Microcell antenna is no greater than four (feet) in height.
(b) Microcell support structure (pole) is no greater than 50 feet in
height.
(c) Compliance with licensing and/or permitting requirements set
forth in Chapter 199 of the Irondequoit Town Code.
(d) Pole-mounted equipment is designed to minimize visual
impacts in the right-of-way.
(2) Installation of microcell wireless telecommunication equipment on
commercial, institutional and multifamily residential buildings
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) Microcell antenna is no greater than four feet in height above
the existing roofline.
(b) The design, location and color pallette of the microcell antenna
and related equipment minimize visual impacts on the existing
building.
A. Any microcell locations requiring construction of a new structure in
new location must obtain site plan approval by the Town Planning
Board under the procedures set forth in the Code of the Town of
Irondequoit and consistent with New York State Town Law § 274-a.
B. Any microcell facility that exceeds any of the conditions set forth in
§ 235-129B.
§ 235-129 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-131
230:850
Planning Board under the procedures set forth in the Code of the Town of
Irondequoit and consistent with New York State Town Law § 274-a:
§ 235-132. Standard wireless communication facilities permitted in
other districts.
Standard wireless telecommunication facilities and support structures,
accessory facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas,
satellite dishes and/or poles are permitted in the following districts, other
than those identified in § 235-131 of the Code of the Town of Irondequoit,
only upon the issuance of a special use permit by the Town Board under the
procedures set forth in § 235-135A of this article and New York State Town
Law § 274-b:
§ 235-133. Standard wireless communication facilities prohibited in
certain districts.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary,
telecommunications towers, communications towers, telecommunications
facilities, accessory facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite
antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles shall not be permitted in the
following zoning and environmental protection overlay districts, even where
such districts may fall into the categories of potentially permitted districts
as defined in §§ 235-131 and 235-132 of the Code of the Town of
Irondequoit:
A. C Business District.
B. M Manufacturing District.
A. R-R Single-Family Residential Rural District.
B. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
C. R-2 Single-Family Residential District.
D. R-3 Single-Family Residential District.
E. R-4 Multifamily Residential District.
F. R-5 Multifamily Residential District.
G. R-6 Residential District.
A. EPOD (1) Wetlands Protection District.
B. EPOD (2) Steep Slope Protection District.
C. EPOD (3) Woodlot Protection District.
D. EPOD (4) Floodplain Protection District.
E. EPOD (5) Watercourse Protection District.
§ 235-131 LITTERING § 235-133
230:851
§ 235-134. Height and clear zone.
§ 235-135. Procedure for special use permit and site plan approval.
F. EPOD (6) Coastal Erosion Area Protection District.
G. WD Waterfront Development District.
H. LLDD LaSalle's Landing Development District.
A. The maximum height for standard wireless telecommunications
facilities permitted under this article, including any antennas,
extensions or other devices extending above the structure of the tower,
measured from the ground surface immediately surrounding the site
shall be no greater than 200 feet.
B. For safety purposes, any standard wireless telecommunication facility
shall have a clear zone which shall have a radius not less than the
height of such tower.
A. A special use permit shall be obtained as follows:
(1) All applications for a special use permit shall be by written
application on forms provided by the Department of Planning and
Zoning and include a site plan as described in § 235-135B of the
Code of the Town of Irondequoit. Upon receipt, such application,
together with all supporting documents, shall be provided to the
Town Planning Board for its review and recommendations to the
Town Board.
(2) Public hearing; application deemed complete.
(a) Within 62 days of the receipt of the completed application,
together with all supporting documents, the recommendation
of the Town Planning Board and upon completion of all SEQRA
requirements, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to Town Law § 274-b for the approval of a special use
permit. The Town Board shall review the application for
compliance with the provisions of this article and shall
determine that the location of the proposed
telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or
structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite
dishes, and/or poles are in accordance with the principles and
requirements stated herein.
(b) An application shall be deemed complete when the Department
of Planning and Zoning provides a statement that the applicant
has complied with all the terms and conditions of the
application form for a special use permit as the same may be
determined from time to time by the Town Board.
§ 235-133 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-135
230:852
B. Site plan approval.
(1) Application and site plan. All applications for site plan approval
shall be by written application on forms provided by the
Department of Planning and Zoning. The application shall include a
site plan setting forth specific site data on a map, which shall be
prepared to scale and in sufficient detail and accuracy and which
shall show the following:
(a) The location of property lines, utilities and permanent
easements.
(b) The location of the communications towers, together with guy
wires and guy anchors, if applicable.
(c) A side elevation or other sketch of the standard wireless
telecommunication facility showing the proposed antennas.
(d) The location of all structures on the subject property and all
structures on any adjacent property within 200 feet of the
property lines of the subject property, together with the
distance of these structures to the proposed communications
tower.
(e) The names of all adjoining landowners as appears on the Town
Assessor's records.
(f) The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing,
landscaping and/or screening.
(g) The location and nature of proposed utility easements and
access roads, if applicable.
(h) Inventory of other commercial telecommunications towers,
communications towers, telecommunications facilities,
accessory facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite
antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles within a two-mile radius
of the proposed site.
(2) Such site plan applications required under this section shall also
include:
(a) Any environmental assessment forms as required under
SEQRA.
(b) Systems, a grid or map of all of the record owner's and
applicant's existing telecommunications towers,
communications towers, telecommunications facilities,
accessory facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite
antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles in the Town and
adjacent municipalities, and telecommunications towers,
communications towers, telecommunications facilities,
accessory facilities or structures, towers antennas, satellite
§ 235-135 LITTERING § 235-135
230:853
antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles proposed or projected
by the owner/applicant for installation or construction for a
period of two years before and after the subject application.
This shall be a good faith estimate of such proposed or
projected telecommunications towers, communications
towers, telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or
structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite
dishes and/or poles with attached data supporting such an
estimate.
(c) A brief statement with supporting documentation providing
sufficient technical evidence demonstrating the record owner's
or applicant's need to place telecommunications towers,
communications towers, telecommunications facilities,
accessory facilities or structures, towers, antennas, satellite
antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles within the Town. Such
evidence may include but is not limited to such technical data
showing field coverage, overlapping coverage with other
telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or
structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite
dishes and/or poles, field strength tests and other pertinent
technical information showing that the record owner or
applicant cannot fulfill its obligations to its consumers, unless
such telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure,
tower, antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is
erected within the Town.
C. Preference for higher-intensity use districts.
(1) The Town Board or Town Planning Board shall express a preference
that the proposed facility be located in a higher-intensity use
district or on higher-intensity use property, provided that there is a
technologically and economically feasible and available location. A
guideline for the preference, from most favorable to least favorable
district/property, shall be as follows:
(a) Property with an existing structure suitable for collocation.
(b) Industrial/commercial districts.
[1] M Manufacturing District.
[2] C Business District.
(c) Municipal or government-owned property.
(d) Residential districts.
[1] R-6 Residential District.
[2] R-5 Multifamily Residential District.
§ 235-135 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-135
230:854
[3] R-4 Multifamily Residential District.
[4] R-3 Single-Family Residential District.
[5] R-2 Single-Family Residential District.
[6] R-1 Residential District.
[7] RR-Rural Residential District.
(2) Any request by the Town Board or Town Planning Board for
information on a preferred alternate site shall not unreasonably
delay the application.
D. Shared use.
(1) At all times, shared use of existing standard wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be preferred to the construction
of new communications towers. Additionally, where such shared
use is unavailable, location of antennas on preexisting structures
shall be considered. An applicant shall be required to present an
adequate report, inventorying existing standard wireless
telecommunication facilities within a reasonable distance of the
proposed site and outlining opportunities for shared use of existing
facilities and use of other preexisting structures as an alternative to
a new construction.
(2) In the case of new communications towers, the applicant shall be
required to submit a report demonstrating good faith efforts to
secure shared use from existing communications towers. Copies of
written requests and any responses received thereto concerning
shared use shall be provided by the applicant.
(3) The applicant must examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole to
accommodate future demand for commercial broadcasting and
reception facilities as defined by the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
by the FCC. The scope of this analysis shall be determined by the
Town Board for special use permits or the Town Planning Board for
site plan approvals. This requirement may be waived, provided that
the applicant demonstrates that the provisions of future shared use
of the telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is not feasible
and an unnecessary burden, based upon:
(a) The number of foreseeable FCC licenses for commercial
telecommunications purposes available for the area;
§ 235-135 LITTERING § 235-135
230:855
(b) The kind of standard wireless telecommunication facility site
and structure proposed;
(c) The number of existing and potential licenses without standard
wireless telecommunication facility spaces/sites;
(d) Available spaces on existing and approved communications
towers; and
(e) Potential adverse visual impacts created by a standard wireless
telecommunication facility designed for shared usage.
E. Design standards and aesthetics. In order to minimize any adverse
aesthetic impacts on neighboring properties to the extent possible, a
board may impose reasonable conditions on the applicant, including but
not limited to the following:
(1) All telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures,
towers, antennas, satellite antennas satellite dishes and/or poles
shall be sited to have the least practical adverse visual effect on the
environment.
(2) Reasonable landscaping consisting of trees or shrubs to screen the
base of the telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures,
towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles,
and/or to screen the telecommunications towers, communications
towers, telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or
structures, towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes
and/or poles to the maximum extent possible from adjacent
property. Existing on-site trees and vegetation shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible. Such conditions are to be consistent
with the provisions set forth in § 235-135I and J of the Code of the
Town of Irondequoit.
(3) Telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures,
towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes, and/or poles
shall be designed and sited so as to avoid, whenever possible,
application of FAA lighting and painting requirements.
Telecommunications towers, communications towers,
telecommunications facilities, accessory facilities or structures,
towers, antennas, satellite antennas, satellite dishes and/or poles
shall not be artificially lighted except when required by the FAA or
other governmental regulations. Standard wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be painted a galvanized finish or
matte gray unless otherwise required by the FAA or other
governmental regulators.
(4) No telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
§ 235-135 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-135
230:856
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole shall contain
any signs or advertising devices. Warning signs shall be excepted.
(5) Accessory facilities and structures shall maximize use of building
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the natural
surroundings.
F. Setbacks.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all standard
wireless telecommunication facilities must be set back a minimum
distance equal to the clear zone applicable to the proposed
communications tower.
(2) All accessory structures or facilities shall also comply with the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
G. Radio frequency effects. The Town hereby recognizes the impact of
federal laws [Telecommunication Act of 1996, Public Law 104, Section
704 (February 8, 1996), as amended or changed] on the ability of the
Town to regulate telecommunications carriers, facilities, providers,
services and towers on the basis of radio frequency emissions and,
therefore, the Town expressly adopts the federal law mandate in this
area when exercising the Town's regulatory power in this area.
H. Traffic, access and safety.
(1) A road turnaround and a minimum of one parking space shall be
provided to assure adequate emergency and service access.
Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
Road construction shall be consistent with standards for private
roads and shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and
vegetation removal. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil
erosion potential. Public road standards may be waived in meeting
the objective of this subsection.
(2) In the event of disturbance to a public right-of-way, a one-time fee
of $1 per linear foot and $1,000 per street crossing foot shall be
assessed.
(3) All standard wireless telecommunication facilities and guy anchors,
if applicable, shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight feet in
height or sufficiently protected from trespassing or vandalism by
other acceptable means.
I. Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to
the maximum practical extent and no cutting of trees exceeding four
inches in diameter (measured at a height of four feet off the ground)
shall take place prior to approval of the special use permit and/or site
plan approval. Clear-cutting trees in single or contiguous areas
exceeding 20,000 square feet shall be prohibited.
§ 235-135 LITTERING § 235-135
230:857
J. Screening. Deciduous or evergreen tree plantings may be required to
screen portions of the standard wireless telecommunication facility
from nearby residential property as well as from public sites known to
include important views or vistas. Where the site abuts residential or
public property, including streets, the Town Planning Board or Town
Board may require reasonable landscaping consisting of trees or shrubs
to screen the base of the standard wireless telecommunication facilities
from adjacent property.
K. Surety for performance.
(1) The owner of record of the premises upon which the
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is located shall
be required to execute and file with the Town Clerk of the Town an
irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit or other form of
security acceptable to the Town Attorney as to form and manner of
execution, in an amount sufficient for the faithful performance of
the terms and conditions of this article, the conditions of the special
use permit or site plan approval issued hereunder, for the
observation of all Town local laws or ordinances, to cover the
maintenance of the telecommunications tower, communications
tower, telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure,
tower, antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole as the
case may be during its lifetime, and provide for its removal and
disposal.
(2) The amount of such irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit
required shall be determined by the Town Board in its special use
permit review or the Town Planning Board during site plan
approval, where no special use permit is required. In the event of
default upon the performance of any such conditions, the
irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit or security shall be
drawn upon by the Town, which shall be entitled to maintain an
action thereon. The irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit or
security shall remain in full force and effect until the removal of the
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole and the site is
fully restored.
(3) Further, when any telecommunications tower, communications
tower, telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure,
tower, antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is
reconstructed, changed or altered in such a manner that approval
of a special use permit by the Town Board and/or site plan approval
by the Town Planning Board is required under this article, the
owner of record of the premises upon which such reconstruction,
changes or alterations occur shall be required to execute and file
with the Town Clerk of the Town an irrevocable and unconditional
§ 235-135 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-135
230:858
letter of credit or other security acceptable to the Town Attorney as
to form and manner of execution, in an amount sufficient to cover
the original amount required under this section for the existing
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole plus an
additional amount that reflects the increased burden such a
reconstruction, change or alteration places on the subject
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole in accordance
with this section.
L. Expiration. The special use permit or site plan approval shall expire
upon:
(1) The failure to commence active operation of the
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole within six
months of the issuance of a special use permit by the Town Board
and final site plan approval by the Town Planning Board;
(2) The discontinuance of the active and continuous operation of the
telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole for a
continuous period of six months, regardless of any reservation of an
intent not to abandon or discontinue the use of such facilities or of
an intent to resume active operations; or
(3) From time to time, the Town Board or the Town Planning Board, at
the Town Board's discretion, may review the special use permit or
site plan approval to determine if the requirements, conditions and
restrictions of this article are being substantially complied with in
good faith. In the event that, upon review, the Town Board finds
that a telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is in violation
of the approved building and site plans, the requirements,
conditions and/or restrictions of this article or the terms and
conditions of the special use permit are not being substantially
complied with, the enforcement procedures shall be invoked and/or
the special use permit shall be revoked within 90 days of written
notice by certified mail from the Department of Development
Services unless the requirements, conditions and restrictions are
complied with within said ninety-day period. In the event that such
requirements, conditions and/or restrictions can not be corrected
within 90 days, then compliance with the same shall be commenced
within 90 days of receipt of such written notice.
§ 235-135 LITTERING § 235-135
230:859
§ 235-136. Removal of obsolete and/or unused facilities.
§ 235-137. Administration and enforcement.
M. Conditions. The boards may impose such reasonable conditions and
restrictions on a special use permit or site plan approval as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed telecommunications tower,
communications tower, telecommunications facility, accessory facility
or structure, tower, antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or
pole.
A. If the use of any telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole is discontinued, the
provider and/or owner shall notify by certified mail addressed to the
Town Director of Developmental Services within 90 days of such
discontinuance. If the facility will be retained, the telecommunications
provider and/or owner shall establish that the facility will be reused,
and all necessary approvals obtained, or a demolition permit shall be
obtained, and the facility removed, within one year. Upon good cause
shown, the Director of Developmental Services may extend the oneyear
period for demolition and removal for a period not to exceed one
additional year.
B. Approval of a new telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower,
antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole, or the expansion
or modification of any existing standard wireless telecommunication
facility or accessory facility or structure, shall be conditioned upon the
owner's and applicant's agreement to remove such standard wireless
telecommunication facility or accessory facility or structure once it is
no longer used. Removal of such obsolete and/or unused standard
wireless telecommunication facility or accessory facility or structure
shall take place within one year of cessation of its use.
A. Public hearings. No action shall be taken by the Town Board to issue a
special use permit, by the Planning Board to issue site plan approval or
the Town Zoning Board of Appeals to grant use or area variances until
after public notice and hearing. Proper notice of a hearing before a
board shall be given by legal notice published in the official newspaper
of the Town at least 10 days before the date set for a public hearing, and
written notice shall be mailed to the applicant or his agent at the
address given in the application to be considered. The applicant shall be
responsible for notifying, by first-class mail, all property owners of
record within 500 feet of the outside perimeter or boundary line of the
property involved in the underlying application of the time, date and
place of such public hearing and such notice shall be sent at least five
business days prior to such hearing. Notice shall be deemed to have
been given if mailed to the property owner at the tax billing address
§ 235-135 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-137
230:860
§ 235-138. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 235-139. Fees.
Fees for applications and permits under this article shall be established and
may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 235-140. Collocation of wireless telecommunication facilities of
the Department of Public Safety of Monroe County.
Prior to approval of the construction of a telecommunications tower,
communications tower, telecommunications facility, accessory facility or
structure, tower, antenna, satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole as
contained herein, the applicant must contact the Superintendent of Public
Safety Communications of the County of Monroe to determine the feasibility
of collocating County of Monroe emergency communication equipment on
the telecommunications tower, communications tower, telecommunications
facility, accessory facility or structure, tower, antenna, satellite antenna,
satellite dish and/or pole. The applicant must demonstrate that collocation
of County of Monroe emergency communication equipment on the
applicant's proposed telecommunications tower, communications tower,
telecommunications facility, accessory facility or structure, tower, antenna,
satellite antenna, satellite dish and/or pole will not meet the siting needs of
the County of Monroe.
§ 235-141. Inconsistency.
All other local laws and ordinances of the Town inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such
repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all other
respects this article shall be in addition to such other local laws or
listed on the property records of the Town Assessor or at the property
address.
B. Waivers. The Town Board may waive or vary any requirements in
§ 235-137 of the Code of the Town of Irondequoit for good cause shown.
A. Penalties shall be as provided in § 235-102 of the Code for the Town of
Irondequoit.
B. In addition to the penalties provided under this section, the Town Board
may also maintain an action or proceeding to prevent, correct or
restrain any violation of this article.
C. In the event that a penalty is assessed against the applicant or the
record owner of the subject premises in accordance with this section
and remains unpaid for a period of six months, then, in that event, the
special use permit and/or site plan approval shall expire in accordance
with § 235-135L of this article.
§ 235-137 LITTERING § 235-141
230:861
ordinances regulating and governing the subject matter covered by this
article.
§ 235-142. Unconstitutionality and illegality.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
paragraph, word, section or part thereof not directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 235-143. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Law § 27.
§ 235-141 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-143
230:862
ARTICLE XXIII
R-7 Residential District
[Added 9-25-2001 by L.L. No. 12-2001; amended 1-22-2002 by L.L.
No. 1-2002; 6-22-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
§ 235-144. Legislative intent and purpose.
In recognition of the needs of the Town's large and growing elderly
population for a variety of housing types and levels of care, the intent and
purpose of this article is to:
§ 235-145. Establishment of district boundaries.
At the request of an applicant or on its own initiative, the Town Board
may establish an R-7 Residential District, following a public hearing in
accordance with the requirements of the New York State Town Law.
§ 235-146. District requirements.
A. Encourage and, where appropriate, provide for independent as well as
assisted-living communities and community-care facilities as a housing
option so that the elderly have the opportunity and ability to remain
residents of the Town of Irondequoit as their housing needs change, as
recommended in the Town Master Plan and Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) Program.
B. Allow flexibility in the provision of housing with a continuum of levels of
care to satisfy the economic, social, psychological, social and healthcare
needs of the elderly.
C. Protect to the maximum practicable extent the aesthetic character of
the Town of Irondequoit, the property values of the community and the
general health, safety and welfare of the public by ensuring that the
location, nature, design and intensity of said housing will:
(1) Be in harmony with the surrounding land uses with respect to
building height, mass, density and architectural context.
(2) Not adversely affect the orderly pattern of development in the area
where it is located.
(3) Not alter the essential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) Not create a hazard to public health, safety or welfare.
(5) Not be detrimental to free and safe flow of traffic.
A. Age of residents.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, each housing unit in the R-7
District shall be occupied by at least one senior citizen (62 years
old or older).
§ 235-144 LITTERING § 235-146
230:863
§ 235-147. Permitted uses.
§ 235-148. Lot and bulk requirements.
(2) A nonsenior may reside with a senior citizen partner.
A. Permitted principal uses. The following principal uses shall be
permitted in an R-7 District subject to site plan review and approval by
the Planning Board pursuant to Article XV of this chapter:
(1) Multifamily housing designed to provide living quarters and
assistance with daily living activities such as, but not limited to,
meals, housekeeping, laundry, travel and transportation, personal
care, shopping and medication, etc.
B. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the R-7 District when developed in
conjunction with the principal permitted use and subject to site plan
review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article XV of
this chapter:
(1) Garages for private, noncommercial use of the residents and other
vehicles and equipment used on the premises.
(2) Garden or tool sheds for use by the residents and property
maintenance.
(3) Gazebos, swimming pools, decks and courts for private use of the
residents.
(4) Any other structures or uses customarily used to provide needed
facilities.
A. The required lot size, yards and density shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: five acres of net buildable area of a site as
determined by the Planning Board through a site capacity
worksheet analysis pursuant to Article XI, § 235-47F of the Town of
Irondequoit Code.
(2) Minimum front and rear yard: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 50 feet or the building height, whichever is
greater.
(4) Maximum density: to be based on a minimum net buildable lot area
of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Building height. The maximum height of structures shall be 30 feet.
C. Impervious area ratio and building coverage.
(1) The maximum impervious area ratio shall be 60% of the net
buildable area.
§ 235-146 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-148
230:864
§ 235-149. Parking.
The required parking shall be a combination of:
§ 235-150. Signage and accessory structures.
The location, size and height of any project identification or other signs and
any accessory structures shall be determined by the Planning Board during
the site plan review and approval process.
(2) The maximum building coverage shall be 25% of the net buildable
area.
D. Dwelling size. The total floor area for a congregate dwelling unit shall
be a minimum of 400 square feet for a one-bedroom unit plus 80 square
feet for each additional bedroom, and the minimum floor area for an
assisted-living unit shall be 280 square feet.
E. The maximum total building area including all accessory use areas and
structures shall be limited to 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit,
including any habitable space in the basement.
A. One parking space for each employee on the premises at the maximum
shift; plus
B. One parking space each for any vehicles used in the project; plus
C. One parking space for every 10 assisted living units; plus
D. One parking space for every one independent congregate living units;
E. Two parking spaces for each independent detached, semidetached or
townhouse unit;
F. Visitor parking at the rate of one parking space for every 10 living units,
including service and delivery vehicles.
§ 235-148 LITTERING § 235-150
230:865

ARTICLE XXIV
River Harbor (RH) District
[Added 9-25-2001 by L.L. No. 13-2001; amended 1-22-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
§ 235-151. Purpose; goals.
A. The River Harbor (RH) District is designed to provide a suitable
character and stable environment for the establishment and
maintenance of water-dependent and/or water-enhanced uses and
activities along the east bank of the Genesee River near the Port of
Rochester. The district is also designed to promote appropriate
residential and economic development and to provide improved public
access to the riverfront. Other goals of the district include the
protection of the unique and sensitive environmental features that exist
along the riverfront and to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. The River Harbor (RH) District permits moderate-to-high-density
residential development, as well as certain commercial and recreational
and open space uses that serve the residents of and visitors to this
district and that generally benefit from and enhance the unique
aesthetic and environmental qualities in the vicinity of the Town's
riverfront area. The purpose of this district includes the following
specific goals:
(1) To ensure that development and land-use activity along the east
bank of the Genesee River near the Port of Rochester is consistent
with the policies and objectives of the Town of Irondequoit's local
waterfront revitalization program (LWRP). and complementary, as
much as possible, to the zoning regulations and LWRP policies of
adjacent areas of the city of Rochester.
(2) To provide sufficient space in appropriate riverfront locations for
public access, residential development, recreation activities,
certain commercial activities and other water-dependent and/or
water-enhanced uses, in order to meet the various economic,
housing and recreation needs of the Town of Irondequoit's present
and future populations.
(3) To recognize the sensitivity of riverfront area as a unique
environmental and recreational resource and to protect these areas
from environmentally destructive uses and activities.
(4) To provide for a desirable mix of commercial uses and active and
passive recreational opportunities that take advantage of the
unique locations and characteristics of the Town's riverfront area.
(5) To encourage development that is appropriately designed and in
harmony with its environment and that does not conflict with the
preservation of the natural beauty of the Town's riverfront area.
§ 235-151 LITTERING § 235-151
230:867
§ 235-152. Permitted uses.
No structure shall be erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved,
and no structure, land or premises shall be used in any district designated
on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Irondequoit155 as a River Harbor
(RH) District, except for the following principal and customarily incidental
accessory uses with a special use permit and site plan approval from the
Town Planning Board per Articles XVI and XV of Chapter 235, Zoning, of the
Town of Irondequoit Code and in conformance with the design guidelines
pursuant to this chapter.
(6) To promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
direction of building development based upon land and soil types
and other natural features, environmental constraints,
neighborhood characteristics and overall community needs; to
protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings and to
protect the Town's tax revenue base.
(7) To permit development in areas which, by virtue of their location,
topography, accessibility, relationship to surrounding land uses,
zoning patterns and natural features and availability of public
services and utilities, are best suited for a particular purpose.
(8) To encourage a flexibility of design, preservation of unique
environmental features and maintenance of the aesthetic quality of
riverfront areas by permitting the Town Planning Board to establish
minimum dimensional requirements for permitted principal and
accessory uses and to review other pertinent design aspects of
such proposed projects.
(9) To preserve, wherever feasible, the existing vegetation to prevent,
as much as possible, significant problems of erosion, sedimentation
and drainage, both during and after construction.
(10) To encourage and facilitate water-dependent and water-enhanced
recreational development within the riverfront zone as permitted
principal uses or as accessory uses where compatible with the
primary purpose of the proposed development.
(11) To promote the development, maintenance and/or extension of
public access to the riverfront where practical and feasible and
where such access relates to and is compatible with the primary
purpose of the proposed development or activity.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
155. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-151 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-152
230:868
(2) Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses.
(3) Townhouses, single-family attached dwellings, row houses and
other similar uses.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds or similar public recreational uses
authorized or operated by a public agency and not operated for
gain.
(5) Commercial parks, playgrounds, tennis/racquetball clubs or other
similar uses operated for gain.
(6) Buildings or structures erected or used in connection with, but not
directly associated with, a governmental function, agency or
activity and not operated for gain, including, but not limited to,
such things as a community bandstand, volunteer fire departments,
ambulance service stations, and recreational facilities, historic
sites, etc.
(7) Private clubs or camps, private membership clubs, lodges or
fraternal organizations, neighborhood or community centers,
YMCA or YWCA or other similar uses.
(8) Restaurants or eating establishments, including takeout food
businesses but excluding drive-thru food or beverage stands.
(9) Motels, hotels or boatels.
(10) Yacht clubs or other similar uses.
(11) Marinas, boat docks, docking basins, boat-launching ramps,
including related retail sales of pleasure boats, marine and fishing
supplies.
(12) Car-top boat and canoe sales, display and launch areas.
(13) Boat building and boat construction facilities, including boat
service, repair, rental and storage.
(14) Stores, shops and boutiques designated for festive retail uses and
activities.
(15) Employment and travel agencies.
(16) Personal service shops such as hair/beauty salons, pharmacies,
dry-cleaning and laundry shops (pickup service only).
(17) Professional offices for attorneys, physicians, physical therapy,
physicians' associates and specialists' assistants, chiropractic,
dentistry and dental hygiene, veterinary medicine, nursing,
podiatry, optometry, ophthalmic dispensing, engineering and land
surveying architecture, landscape architecture, land use planning,
accountants, shorthand reporting, psychology, speech pathologists,
audiologists, occupational therapy and other similar professionals.
§ 235-152 LITTERING § 235-152
230:869
(18) Real estate and insurance offices.
(19) Banks and related financial services offices.
(20) Baking, confectionery, dressmaking, tailoring shops, provided that
all goods or products manufactured or processed shall be sold at
retail on the premises and not more than five persons shall be
employed at the site at one time.
(21) Public utility buildings or structures, including, but not limited to,
electrical telephone and cable substations.
(22) Combinations of permitted principal uses based on a determination
by the Town Planning Board that such combinations are
appropriate and compatible with the purpose and intent of this
district as well as the goals and policies of the Town's local
waterfront revitalization program (LWRP).
B. Principal use restrictions and/or additional requirements. All principal
uses permitted within a River Harbor (RH) District shall be subject to
the following restrictions and/or additional requirements:
(1) Any of the uses permitted in this section that require the use of an
area other than within an enclosed building may be conducted in
whole or in part outside of such building or absent such building,
subject to special use permit and site plan approval issued by the
Town Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Articles
XVI and XV of this chapter.
C. Accessory uses (located on the same lot with a permitted principal use):
(1) Home occupations subject to the applicable provisions of Article IV
of this chapter.
(2) Private garages and carports subject to the applicable provisions of
Article IV of this chapter.
(3) Swimming pools subject to the provisions of § 235-71 of this
chapter.
(4) Fencing subject to the provisions of § 235-69 of this chapter.
(5) Radio, TV or CB antennas and telecommunication towers subject to
the provisions of Article XXII of this chapter.
(6) Dumpsters and other similar outdoor refuse containers or
enclosures, provided that such uses are located at least four feet
from any lot line.
(7) Gazebos and other similar outdoor features for the use and
enjoyment of district residents subject to a special use permit and
site plan approval requirements of this chapter.
§ 235-152 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-152
230:870
(8) Parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles for
residential use are subject to the applicable provisions of Article XX
of this chapter.
(9) Waterfront structures and facilities.
(a) Fishing piers, docks, wharves, boat-launching ramps and
similar waterfront structures and facilities, when such uses are
clearly accessory or incidental to the primary, principal use of
the property, subject to all applicable state regulations and
approvals and subject to special use permit and site plan
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Articles XV and XVI of this chapter.
[1] Similar waterfront structures and facilities shall include:
[a] Facilities for the pumping out of marine holding tanks;
[b] Facilities for waste oil collection;
[c] Facilities for the sale and dispensing of fuel and
lubricants for boats and boatyard equipment;
[d] Facilities for the storage of fuel; and
[e] Facilities for the sale of food and beverages for offpremises
consumption and the sale of fishing and
boating supplies.
[2] The following additional requirements shall apply to all
such structures and facilities:
[a] The construction of such structures and facilities shall
be undertaken in such a way so as not to impair water
quality, cause harm to fish spawning grounds, destroy
the natural beauty of the riverfront, reduce the
stability of steep slope areas, cause erosion or
sedimentation problems along the riverfront, impede
views and vistas, create hazards for navigation,
interfere with the public use and enjoyment of the
water surface or riverfront, or otherwise threaten the
public health and safety.
[b] Design standards for piers, docks and wharves shall
be determined based on the information contained in
Plate 1, entitled "Dock, Slip and Boat Basin
Standards," at the end of the Waterfront Development
(WD) District.156
[c] Such structures and facilities shall only be
constructed of materials which are stable, chemically
156. Editor's Note: Plate 1 is included in this chapter following § 235-35.
§ 235-152 LITTERING § 235-152
230:871
inert and insoluble and which will have no adverse
effects on water quality. Such materials shall also be
Coast Guard approved.
[d] The amount of grading, dredging, earthmoving and
disturbance of land above and below water during the
construction of such structures and facilities shall be
minimized as much as possible and shall be consistent
with the permit requirements of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and the
United States Army Corps of Engineers.
[e] To permit the free circulation of water, reduce the
effects of fluctuating water levels and prevent adverse
modifications of the riverfront, piers, docks and
wharves shall be of floating construction wherever
feasible and shall not be of rock-filled cribbing, sheet
piling, closely spaced piling or such other construction
which would significantly impair water circulation.
[f] There shall be no superstructure permitted above the
decks of piers, docks or wharves except those
structures that are accessory to marinas.
[g] No pier, dock or wharf shall be constructed in a
configuration other than straight or T-, L-, U- or Fshaped.
[h] The width of any pier, dock or wharf shall not exceed
eight feet.
[i] Every pier, dock or wharf that is constructed shall
have a minimum clearance or setback of 10 feet from
adjacent property lines, as extended at a ninetydegree
angle from the riverfront, to allow adequate
vessel access to neighboring riverfront parcels.
[j] Piers, docks or wharves that are 40 feet or longer in
length shall, during the hours of darkness, be lighted
in such a manner so as to not constitute a hazard to
navigation.
[k] Lighting of the surface of any pier, dock or wharf shall
be provided in such a manner so as not to produce any
offensive glare when viewed from the water or the
land. The use of lowmast lighting fixtures and
deflector shields to direct the light downward shall be
required to reduce or eliminate glare.
[l] The number of private piers, docks or wharves
permitted per each waterfront lot used for single-
§ 235-152 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-152
230:872
§ 235-153. Lot and bulk requirements for residential uses.
family residential purposes shall not exceed the
following:
[i] One hundred feet or less of water frontage: a total
of one such structure.
[ii] One hundred one feet to 250 feet of water
frontage: a total of two such structures.
[iii] Two hundred fifty-one feet to 500 feet of water
frontage: a total of three such structures.
[iv] Each 150 feet of water frontage in excess of 500
feet: one additional structure shall be allowed.
[m] The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per
each waterfront lot used for multifamily, townhouse or
condominium purposes shall not exceed one such
structure per residential unit built.
[n] The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per
each waterfront lot used for commercial purposes
shall not exceed three such structures per lot. The
construction of more than three such structures per
commercially used lot shall be subject to a
determination by the Town Planning Board that such
additional structures are needed to accommodate
anticipated boat traffic and can be developed on the
site without adversely affecting existing
environmental conditions or natural features.
(b) Accessory dredging and filling, when clearly incidental to the
principal use permitted on the parcel, subject to all applicable
state regulations and approvals and to special use permit
approval issued by the Town Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Articles XV and XVI of this chapter.
A. Required minimum lot size.
(1) No new principal building or structure to be used as a single-family
dwelling shall hereafter be erected on any lot in a River Harbor
(RH) District, unless such lot shall have a minimum area of 5,000
square feet per dwelling unit. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
(2) No new principal building or structure to be used as a townhouse,
single-family attached dwelling, row house or other similar use
shall hereafter be erected on any lot in a River Harbor (RH)
District, unless such lot shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square
feet per dwelling unit.
§ 235-152 LITTERING § 235-153
230:873
(3) No new principal building or structure to be used as a multifamily
dwelling, apartment building or other similar use shall hereafter be
erected on any lot in a River Harbor (RH) District, unless such lot
shall have a minimum area of 2,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Required minimum building setbacks (required front, side and rear
yards).
(1) In order to establish suitable front, side and rear yards, principal
buildings and accessory structures for single-family dwellings
hereafter erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved in a
(RH) River Harbor District shall be subject to the applicable
setback provisions of Article IV of this chapter. Notwithstanding
this requirement, the Town Planning Board, in accordance with the
provisions of § 278 of New York State Town Law, as amended or
changed, shall be empowered to modify the setback requirements
and other applicable provisions of this chapter with respect to the
approval of a plat or plats. The purpose of this authorization is to
enable and encourage a flexibility of design and development of
land in such a manner so as to promote the most appropriate use of
land, to facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets
and utilities, and to encourage and maintain adequate public
access to the riverfront. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
(2) No residential building shall be located nearer than 20 feet to a
zone district boundary or to any nonresidential use within the River
Harbor (RH) District.
(3) The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks for attached
dwellings, townhouses, row houses, multifamily dwellings,
apartment buildings and other similar uses shall be subject to the
applicable setback requirements of Article VI of this chapter.
C. Height restrictions.
(1) Maximum building heights for single-family dwellings shall not
exceed 35 feet. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
(2) Maximum building heights for attached dwellings, townhouses,
row houses, multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings and other
similar uses shall be determined by the Town Planning Board
during the site plan review and approval process and shall be based
on a visual analysis of the site prepared and submitted by the
applicant as a part of that review. The Town Planning Board shall be
empowered to establish maximum principal building heights and
locations in order to preserve the aesthetic integrity of riverfront
areas and to protect any scenic views or vistas identified in the
visual analysis.
(3) Accessory structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet
unless otherwise specified or regulated in this chapter.
§ 235-153 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-153
230:874
§ 235-154. Lot and bulk requirements for nonresidential uses.
D. Lot coverage and impervious area ratio.
(1) Ground coverage for principal and accessory buildings on any lot
with a single-family dwelling shall not exceed 35% of the total area
of such lot measured horizontally. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 2-2015]
(2) The maximum impervious area ratio for any lot with a single-family
dwelling shall not exceed 60% of the total area of such lot
measured horizontally. [Amended 3-19-2015 by L.L. No.
2-2015]
(3) Ground coverage for principal and accessory buildings on any lot
for residential use, other than single-family attached dwellings,
shall not exceed 30% of the total area of such lot measured
horizontally.
(4) The maximum impervious area ratio for any lot for residential use,
other than single-family dwellings, shall not exceed 60% of the total
area of any lot measured horizontally. [Amended 3-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 2-2015]
E. Minimum building size.
(1) No detached single-family residential dwelling shall contain a total
livable floor area of less than 1,100 square feet and a ground floor
area of less than 900 square feet.
(2) In determining the floor area of a detached single-family residential
dwelling, the measurements shall be made along the exterior of the
main foundation walls of the building and shall exclude any portion
of uncovered porches, breezeways or garages.
(3) Attached single-family dwellings, townhouses, row houses or other
similar uses shall have a total livable floor area of at least 1,100
square feet and a ground floor area (exclusive of garage) of at least
550 square feet.
(4) Multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings or other similar uses
shall have a total livable floor area at least 480 square feet for a
one-bedroom unit, plus 100 square feet for each additional
bedroom. Notwithstanding the foregoing, studio apartments shall
be permitted with a livable floor area of at least 360 square feet for
each unit.
F. Private garages. Each detached single-family residential dwelling shall
have an attached private garage with a maximum area of 900 square
feet and having frontage of not more than 30 feet.
A. The required minimum lot size for all other nonresidential principal
uses permitted in the River Harbor District (RH) shall be established by
§ 235-153 LITTERING § 235-154
230:875
§ 235-155. Off-street parking and loading.
the Town Planning Board during the special use permit and site plan
review and approval process. The required minimum lot size shall
be based on the amount of land area necessary to adequately
accommodate the proposed principal use, as well as all parking,
loading, landscaping, open space, setback and access areas and fire
lanes for such use. The required minimum lot size shall also be based on
the relative intensity of the proposed land use and the need to protect
or buffer the proposed land use from sensitive environmental areas,
significant historic or archaeological areas or scenic views or vistas.
B. Height restrictions. Maximum building heights for all permitted
nonresidential principal uses specified in this section shall not exceed
60 feet, except where it has been determined by the Town Planning
Board during the special use permit and site plan review and approval
process that, based on a visual analysis of the site plan prepared and
submitted by the applicant and reviewed by the Board, such building
heights would interfere with identified scenic views or vistas or destroy
the aesthetic integrity of the riverfront area. In such cases, the Town
Planning Board shall be empowered to establish maximum principal
building heights in order to protect the scenic views and vistas and the
aesthetic character of the area.
C. Lot coverage.
(1) The area of the principal and accessory building on any lot shall not
exceed 30% of the area of such lot measured horizontally.
(2) The maximum impervious area ratio shall not exceed 80% of the
total area of any lot measured horizontally.
A. Off-street parking spaces and loading facilities shall be provided for all
uses specified in this article, in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIV of this chapter and the following additional requirements:
(1) All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
water's edge and any street line and a minimum of 15 feet from any
property line to provide for proper landscaping and buffering.
(2) Off-street parking in the River Harbor (RH) District shall be
provided in accord with the following minimum standards:
(a) Marinas/boat-launching ramps. Single spaces shall be nine feet
by 18 feet. Dimensions for double spaces shall be nine feet by
36 feet. All parking spaces shall be located within 1,000 feet of
berths or ramps. Overflow parking should be placed at the
ends of the parking areas in any unusually shaped parcels. The
required minimum number of spaces shall be as indicated on
the following table:
§ 235-154 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-155
230:876
Use Number of Spaces
Boat slips 0.6 per slip
Boat slips including
charter fishing
2
Boat ramp 30 car trailer spaces, plus 10
single spaces per ramp
Retail 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Nonretail business and
office uses
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Medical/dental offices 6 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
(b) Residential uses.
[1] Detached residential units: two spaces per dwelling unit.
[2] Attached residential units, including townhouses and row
houses: two spaces per dwelling unit.
[3] Multifamily and apartment units: 1.5 spaces per unit.
(c) Hotels, motels and boatels: one space per room or suite; plus
one space per three employees on maximum shift; plus one
space per three persons to maximum capacity of public
meeting rooms; plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for
restaurants and accessory uses.
(d) Yacht clubs: one space per three persons to maximum capacity
of meeting rooms, plus 1.5 spaces per boat berth.
(e) Restaurants.
[1] Sit-down: one space per three patron seats or one space
per 100 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater, plus one space per employee on the maximum
shift.
[2] Fast-food/takeout: one space per 50 square feet of floor
area, plus one space per employee on the maximum shift.
(f) Boat rentals: one space per boat under 16 feet and 1.5 spaces
per boat over 16 feet.
B. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of parking spaces
required for a given project may be permitted by the Town Planning
Board during the site plan review and approval process where it can be
demonstrated that such a reduction will not create overflow parking
problems or traffic congestion and that the additional spaces will be
§ 235-155 LITTERING § 235-155
230:877
§ 235-156. Landscaping; buffering; trails and paths.
§ 235-157. Site plan approval required; standards.
No permits shall be issued pursuant to the foregoing regulations of this
article until and unless a site development plan for such proposed use
has been presented to and approved by the Planning Board, which shall
consider and determine that all requirements of this chapter have been met;
and, further, they shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove
the site development plan in accordance with the following standards:
used for landscaping or open space within the site. Such a reduction
shall be permitted by the Town Planning Board on a case-by-case basis.
A. Parking areas shall be landscaped and buffered as much as possible.
B. Outdoor storage of boats and equipment shall be adequately buffered
using trees and/or berms to screen the items being stored from
adjacent properties. The adequacy of the buffering shall be determined
by the Town Planning Board as part of the special use permit and site
plan review and approval process.
C. Where practical, trees with a diameter or caliper of six inches or
greater shall be retained on the site.
D. As part of the site plan and/or special permit use review and approval
process, the Planning Board shall require public access in the form of
walkways, pedestrian trails or paths or bikeways to the riverfront for
those development projects or proposed uses adjacent to the riverfront
where such access is appropriate and desirable and would not conflict
with existing natural features or be hazardous to the public health,
safety or general welfare. In requiring such public access, the Planning
Board shall consider the nature of the access to and from surrounding
properties and uses, as well as the relationship of the access and
proposed use of the water.
A. The conditions necessary to restrict, safeguard and protect property
values in the vicinity of the proposed site and to protect the health,
safety, morals, peace and general welfare of the Town.
B. The effect of the proposed use on the development and characteristics
of the area and upon the development and conduct of other lawful uses
in the vicinity.
C. Whether the proposal and its use will be in harmony with the character
of the area.
D. Whether the proposed use will be consistent with the purpose and goals
of the River Harbor (RH) District.
§ 235-155 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-157
230:878
§ 235-158. Design guidelines.
§ 235-159. Sign requirements.
E. Whether the proposed use will create hazards and dangers to the
general public or to persons in the vicinity from the point of view of
traffic congestion, crowds, fire protection and parking of automobiles.
A. Projects constructed within the River Harbor (RH) District shall reflect
a maritime theme utilizing site design elements common to maritime
waterfront areas such as:
(1) Landscaped pedestrian walkways that provide access to and along
the riverfront.
(2) Parking areas separated from the riverfront by buildings and
pedestrian walkways and landscaping.
(3) Distinct carved wood signs and wrought-iron accents along
pedestrian walkways.
(4) Private and public docks for pleasure boats.
(5) Docks for commercial boats with bollards for tie-up.
(6) Building orientation and placement to maximize water views.
(7) Distinctive outdoor lighting consistent with the area's theme.
B. Buildings and structures constructed within the (RH) River Harbor
District should reflect a maritime theme utilizing such architectural
design elements, materials, details, and colors common to maritime
waterfront areas as:
(1) Gable-style pitched roofs.
(2) Projected eaves.
(3) Sheltered entries.
(4) Small individual buildings with clapboard or wood-shingle siding.
(5) Shutters beside windows.
(6) Divided-light windows.
(7) Flower boxes.
(8) Paint color schemes with trim accents.
(9) Cupolas, weathervanes, etc.
A. All signage, with the exception of real estate signs, temporary political
signs and accessory traffic signs, shall be subject to special use permit
and site plan review and approval process by the Town Planning Board
§ 235-157 LITTERING § 235-159
230:879
in accordance with the provisions of Articles XV and XVI. All signs shall
be subject to the applicable provisions of Article XXI of this chapter.
B. Signs may be illuminated with a constant source, but flashing, neon,
revolving, animated or similar-type signs are prohibited.
C. Signs oriented towards the water shall be permitted for identification
purposes only, shall be building-mounted, and shall not exceed 25
square feet.
D. Dimensional and setback requirements for signs oriented towards
streets or highways shall be determined by the Planning Board.
§ 235-159 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-159
230:880
ARTICLE XXV
Small Wind Energy Systems
[Added 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
§ 235-160. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 235-161. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — The tower, base plate,
anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators),
wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, anemometers and vanes,
data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to
monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period
of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the
wind resource at a given location.
ROTOR DIAMETER — The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by
the rotating blades of a small wind energy system.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that:
TOTAL HEIGHT — For purposes of a small wind energy system, the vertical
distance from ground level to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip
is at its highest point.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — Equipment that converts and then stores or
transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy. This equipment
includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower,
transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, guy wire or other component
used in the system.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM OWNER — The individual who owns, or intends
to own, the property upon which the small wind energy system will be
operated.
WIND GENERATOR — Blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the wind tower.
A. Facilitate the approval of small wind energy systems; and
B. Preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly
increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a small wind energy
system.
A. Is used to generate electricity;
B. Has a rated nameplate capacity of 60 kilowatts or less; and
C. Has a total height of 150 feet or less.
§ 235-160 LITTERING § 235-161
230:881
WIND TOWER — The monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that
supports a wind generator.
§ 235-162. Application.
§ 235-163. Standards.
A small wind energy system shall be an accessory use in all zoning districts
subject to the following requirements:
A. This article applies to small wind energy systems no greater than 60
kilowatts of rated nameplate capacity.
B. This article covers only stand-alone tower-mounted systems. It is not
intended to cover roof-mounted, building-integrated, building-mounted,
or architectural wind energy systems.
A. Setbacks. A wind tower for a small wind energy system shall be set back
a distance equal to its total height plus an additional 20 feet from:
(1) Any public right-of-way;
(2) Any right of ingress or egress by another on the owner's property;
(3) Any overhead utility lines;
(4) All property lines; and
(5) Any existing guy wire, anchor, or small wind energy tower on the
property.
B. Access.
(1) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(2) The wind tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum
height of eight feet above the ground.
C. Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a small wind
energy system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind
generator to the wind tower wiring, the wind tower wiring to the
disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires, shall be located
underground.
D. Lighting. A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted
unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). Lighting of other parts of the small wind energy systems, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety
purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
E. Appearance, color, and finish. The wind generator and wind tower shall
remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally applied
§ 235-161 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-163
230:882
§ 235-164. System conditions.
The owner of the property on which the small wind energy system is
located shall maintain the small wind energy system in good condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
repairs, and safety/security measures.
§ 235-165. Abandonment.
§ 235-166. Noise.
All small wind energy systems shall comply with the limitations contained in
Chapter 160 of the Town Code, unless the Planning Board agrees that those
provisions shall not be applicable.
by the manufacturer, unless a different color is approved by the
Planning Board.
F. Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a
wind generator, wind tower, building, or other structure associated with
a small wind energy system, visible from any public road are prohibited.
G. Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy systems that
connect to the electric utility shall comply with the requirements for
interconnection and operation as set forth in the electric utility's
service regulations applicable to wind power generation facilities.
H. Met towers. A met tower shall be permitted under the same standards,
requirements, and procedures as a small wind energy system.
A. A small wind energy system that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned. The
Director of Zoning may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of a
small wind energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The
owner shall have the right to respond in writing to the notice of
abandonment, setting forth the reasons for operational difficulty and
providing a reasonable timetable for corrective action, within 30 days
from the date of the notice. The Director of Zoning shall withdraw the
notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been
withdrawn if the owner provides information that demonstrates the
wind energy system has not been abandoned.
B. If the small wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the
owner of a small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator
from the wind tower at the owner's sole expense within three months
following the date of notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to
remove the wind generator from the wind tower, the Town may pursue a
legal action to have the wind generator removed at the owner's
expense.
§ 235-163 LITTERING § 235-167
230:883
§ 235-167. Variances.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Town Code, including this
chapter, to the contrary, variances to the distance requirements and other
requirements and standards contained in this article are not permitted.
§ 235-168. Site plan approval.
A. Applications for site plan approval shall be by written application on
forms provided by the Department of Planning and Zoning. The
application shall include a site plan setting forth specific site data on a
map, which shall be prepared to scale and in sufficient detail and
accuracy and which shall show the following:
(1) The location of property lines, utilities, and permanent easements;
(2) The location of all structures on the subject property and all
structures on any adjacent property within 200 feet of the subject
property, together with the distance on these structures to the
proposed small wind energy system;
(3) The names of all adjoining landowners as appear on the Town
Assessor's records;
(4) The location, nature, and extent of any proposed fencing,
landscaping, and/or screening;
(5) The location and nature of proposed utility easements and access
road, if applicable;
(6) Standard drawings of the small wind energy system structure,
including the tower, base, and footings; drawings of access road(s);
and including an engineering analysis and certification of the
tower; and
(7) Data pertaining to the tower's safety and stability.
B. Such site plan applications required under this section shall also
include:
(1) A completed environmental assessment form;
(2) A project visibility map, based on a digital elevation model, showing
the impact of topography upon visibility of the project from other
locations, to a radius of one-half mile from the center of the project.
The base map used shall be a published topographic map showing
man-made features, such as roads and buildings; and
(3) At least three color photos, taken from locations within a one-halfmile
radius from the site and to be selected by the Planning Board
and computer-enhanced to simulate the appearance of the as-built
small wind energy system as it would appear from these locations.
§ 235-167 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-169
230:884
§ 235-169. Violations.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind
energy system that is not in compliance with this article or with any
condition contained in a building permit issued pursuant to this article.
§ 235-170. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 235-171. Inconsistency.
All other local laws and ordinances of the Town inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such
repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all other
respects this article shall be in addition to such other local laws or
ordinances regulating and governing the subject matter covered by this
article.
A. Penalties for violations of this article shall be as provided in § 235-102
of the Code for the Town of Irondequoit.
B. In addition to the penalties provided under this section, the Town Board
may also maintain an action or proceeding to prevent, correct or
restrain any violation of this article.
§ 235-169 LITTERING § 235-171
230:885

ARTICLE XXVI
Ridge Road Planned Development District
[Added 2-17-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009; amended 3-20-2018 by L.L.
No. 1-2018]
§ 235-172. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 235-173. Designation of RRPD District on Official Zoning Map.
The official Town of Irondequoit Zoning Map shall be revised to reflect the
change in district name to the "Ridge Road Planning Development District."
§ 235-174. District uses.
A. The Ridge Road Planned Development District (hereinafter the
"Planned Development District" or "RRPD District") is intended to
foster economic investment and redevelopment opportunities by
accommodating a mix of uses, allowing for the reconstruction/
renovation of existing buildings and promoting new development in this
highly visible development area along the Town of Irondequoit's
primary commercial corridor.
B. The Comprehensive Plan aims to promote higher development
standards for new redevelopment projects to encourage private
reinvestment in the upgrading, improvement and expansion of existing
developments. This goal is specifically important for the East Ridge
Road corridor, which, as stated in the Comprehensive Plan, makes a
major contribution to the Town's economic base and is an important and
viable area that serves not only the Town residents but also
metropolitan area. The purpose of this district is to permit, encourage
and enable flexible design and development that is consistent with
Town's overall economic development goals and the vision set forth in
the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan and compatible with the higher
intensity of development that this area of East Ridge Road can readily
accommodate.
A. Permitted uses. In the RRPD District, the following uses shall be
permitted:
(1) Residential, multiple-dwelling;
(2) Retail;
(3) Professional and medical offices;
(4) Banks and other financial institutions;
(5) Restaurants;
(6) Cinemas, theaters and other places of public assemblage (but not
including adult motion-picture theaters, adult theaters, or adult
uses);
§ 235-172 LITTERING § 235-174
230:887
§ 235-175. Development review process.
Given the existing and potential range of building types and sizes and the
possibility of adaptive reuse of existing structures in the RRPD District,
the proposed change in occupancy and/or scope of work for development
and redevelopment projects may vary significantly. The type of review
required prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy or building permits
will depend on the location and scope of work proposed.
(7) Personal services (including, but not limited to, dry-cleaning,
laundries or laundromats, barbershops, hair or nail salons, and car
washes);
(8) Hotels;
(9) Educational facilities, learning and training centers and similar
uses;
(10) Daycare facilities (private or nonprofit);
(11) Medical facilities;
(12) Laboratories;
(13) Light manufacturing and warehousing facilities that comply with
§ 235-39A;
(14) Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas;
(15) Municipal facilities; and
(16) Parking facilities and structures operated as accessory use and/or
parking structures operated for monetary gain.
B. Special use permit. The following uses shall require a special use
permit, pursuant to Article XVI of this chapter:
(1) Funeral homes;
(2) Animal hospitals and kennels; and
(3) Mini-storage facilities.
A. Prior to the issuance of a change of occupancy permit or building
permits related to building renovation or new construction within this
district, the Department of Community Development will determine the
applicable development review process in accordance with the
requirements contained herein.
B. Application. The owner or owner's agent shall submit an application on
form(s) provided by the Community Development Department to
provide detailed information about the proposed change in occupancy
and/or scope of work.
§ 235-174 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-175
230:888
C. Criteria for review. The applicable development review process will be
determined in accordance with the criteria provided below.
(1) Administrative review. The Community Development Department
shall conduct an administrative review of proposed projects that
are consistent with the design guidelines set forth in § 235-176 of
this chapter and meet one or more of the following criteria:
(a) Interior renovation or repairs;
(b) Minor modifications to existing building exterior, including, but
not limited to, painting, material refacing, door and window
replacement, additional windows and doors; modifications to
roof (included roof-mounted equipment);
(c) Building additions less than 5% of existing building, up to
3,999 square feet;
(d) Lighting as follows:
[1] Upgrades and/or replacement of existing lighting fixtures
that are dark sky compliant; and
[2] Addition of new lighting fixtures that are dark sky
compliant and produce zero lumens along parcel
boundaries bordering adjacent properties.
(e) Changes in use or occupancy that will not cause significant
adverse changes to existing site operation (e.g., parking, traffic
generation; visual character, etc.); and
(f) Signage as follows:
[1] Signage replacement that is similar and/or smaller than
previously installed signage;
[2] New exterior wall mounted signage up to 50 square feet
per use/occupant;
[3] New freestanding monument signs less than 50 square
feet, not including frame or base structure, and no more
than 15 feet in height; and
[4] Incidental signage, including, but not limited to, signage
for on-site traffic and parking controls.
(2) Site plan review. Projects that exceed the criteria set forth in
Subsection C(1) above will require site plan review, pursuant to
Article XV of this chapter. Additionally, the Community
Development Director may require site plan review for any project
that does not clearly demonstrate eligibility for administrative
review.
§ 235-175 LITTERING § 235-175
230:889
§ 235-176. RRPD District design guidelines.
D. Review completion required. The applicable development review
process must be completed before any building permit or change of
occupancy permit can be issued by the Department of Community
Development.
A. The following design guidelines have been created to provide a
framework for development and redevelopment within the RRPD
District and provide information that will help inform the development
review process.
B. Bulk requirements.
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Public right-of-way (ROW) setback. Minimum setback shall be
30 feet from any parcel line bordering a public ROW.
(b) Private road setback. Minimum setback shall be 15 feet from
any parcel line bordering a private roadway or internal
driveway.
(c) Municipal easements. No building shall be located within 10
feet of municipal easements, regardless of setbacks.
(2) Building height.
(a) Minimum building height shall be 18 feet.
(b) Maximum building height shall be 200 feet.
[1] Building height shall be measured as the vertical distance
from the average elevation of the proposed finish grade at
the front of the building (ROW side) to a point midway
between the highest and lowest points of the roof.
[2] Chimneys, tanks, elevator penthouses, landscaping and
similar projections shall not be included in calculating
height. Multilevel parking structures and/or facilities
located below-grade shall not be included in height
calculation.
C. Architectural requirements. The following design requirements shall
apply to the RRPD District:
(1) Facade. The architectural features, materials and the articulation
of a facade of a building shall be continued on all sides visible from
a public and provide roads or courtyards.
(a) For new construction commercial buildings, a minimum of 50%
of the front facade on the ground floor shall be transparent,
consisting of window or door openings allowing views into and
out of the interior.
§ 235-175 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-176
230:890
(2) Building composition. Buildings shall have a clearly defined base,
midsection, and crown. This can be accomplished using a
combination of architectural details, materials and colors.
(3) Architectural details or features such as cupolas, clock towers,
masonry features, and other similar elements are encouraged.
(4) Primary buildings shall be constructed or clad with materials that
are durable and economically maintained in a manner that will
retain their appearance over time, including, but not limited to,
painted wood; natural or synthetic stone; brick; stucco; integrally
colored, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units; high-quality
prestressed concrete systems; or glass.
D. Site design requirements.
(1) Intent. To create a collection of attractive buildings and sites that
will sustain high-quality development standards and contribute
positively to the Town's built environment.
(2) Building placement and orientation. To the extent practicable,
buildings shall be oriented to the roads they front along and frame
corners at the intersection of two roads.
(3) Outdoor patios and seating are permitted. Design of such seating
should complement architecture of adjacent building(s) and must
incorporate architectural walls, fencing and other features to safely
separate outdoor spaces from nearby vehicular movement.
(4) Pedestrian-oriented design. To the extent practicable,
redevelopment and new development should incorporate site
design features that enhance pedestrian access and safety to and
through parcels located in this district.
(5) Bicycle storage. Proposed development within the district must
provide on-site bicycle storage, outdoors and/or inside the building.
Outdoor bike racks must be covered, through fixture design or by
proximity to the building's architectural elements.
(6) Landscaping. To the extent practicable, landscaping and decorative
features should be utilized to enhance the overall aesthetic quality
of the area, especially in high-visibility areas along major corridors.
Installation of new, and/or replacement of existing, lawns, grasses,
trees, shrubs, flowers, shall be consistent with the Town's
landscaping guidelines. Other hardscaping and decorative features
(e.g., water features, decorative lighting, benches, decorative
walls, etc.) are encouraged.
(7) Parking and loading area design.
(a) Existing parking lots. Existing parking lots shall be maintained
in good repair. When new or substantially reconstructed
§ 235-176 LITTERING § 235-176
230:891
parking lots are installed on a site, requirements for new
parking areas must be met.
(b) New parking lot design. New parking areas shall be designed
to enhance aesthetic appeal and reduce stormwater runoff.
[1] Screening shall be provided between parking areas and
adjacent roads and sidewalks and property boundaries.
[a] Screening, whether natural or man-made, must be at
least three feet in height and at least 50% opaque.
[b] One canopy tree (minimum of three-inch caliper) for
each 20 linear feet of parking lot frontage shall be
provided.
[2] Unpaved edges and corners of parking lots, islands, and all
other areas not expressly designated for parking, loading
or vehicular/pedestrian/bicycle circulation shall be
landscaped. Vegetation can include turf grass, native
grasses or other native flowering plants, vines, shrubs or
trees. Such spaces may include architectural features such
as benches, kiosks or bicycle parking.
[3] On any parcel with a parking area containing 200 spaces
or more, three-hundred-square-foot landscaped areas shall
be provided for every 25 spaces. Tree and landscaping
selections shall be consistent with the Town's landscaping
guidelines and/or demonstrate compliance with other
accepted state or federal landscape design standards for
parking lot applications.
[4] Parking spaces and drive aisles. Minimum sizes shall be as
follows:
Minimum Dimension
Standard parking space 9 feet by 20 feet
ADA-compliant parking
space
Refer to New York State
Department of
Transportation's Accessible
Parking for Persons With
Disabilities specifications
Two-way drive aisle 24 feet wide
One-way drive aisle 18 feet wide
[5] Shared parking incentive. Parking requirements provided
herein may be reduced by up to 25% during site plan
review if shared parking between parcels and/or colocated
uses is proposed and an agreement evidencing the
shared parking arrangement is recorded with the Monroe
§ 235-176 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-176
230:892
County Clerk's Office prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
(c) New loading area design. New loading areas should be located
in low-visibility areas of the building exterior to minimize views
and site access conflicts. A visual buffer, man-made or natural,
shall be provided.
(d) Existing loading area design. Redevelopment of properties
with existing loading areas that face public streets or
sidewalks and loading areas that abut residential districts or
uses shall be retrofitted at the time of renovation to include
landscaped and/or screened area(s) along the public street,
sidewalk and/or abutting residential areas.
E. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street motor vehicle parking
spaces shall be provided on site utilizing surface parking lots or parking
garage structures at-grade, above-grade or below-grade.
(1) The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided in the
RRPD District shall be the lesser of a) the total number of spaces
required pursuant to the parking requirements set forth below or
b) 6,000 spaces.
(2) Off-street parking ratios for the RRPD District shall be as follows:
Use Minimum Parking Space
Residential 1.5 spaces per unit
Senior residential (55+) 0.75 space per unit
Hotel 1 space per hotel room
Retail/office/medical 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of occupied space
Restaurants 1 space per 4 seats (including
stools)
Cinemas, theaters, auditoriums 1 space per 5 seats
Warehouse 1 space per 2,000 square feet
Light industrial 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Other No less than any minimum set
forth herein to be determined
during site plan or
administrative review
(3) Bicycle parking minimum. At least one bicycle space shall be
provided for every 25 parking spaces.
F. Signage.
(1) Design considerations. Although the scale of development within
this district may vary, the Town of Irondequoit desires attractive,
§ 235-176 LITTERING § 235-176
230:893
high quality signage. To the extent practicable, a cohesive design
theme should be established to enhance the aesthetic appeal and
promote the identity of the area.
(a) The overall design should reflect the aesthetic theme of the
building and/or use.
(b) Font and color selection should maximize readability.
(c) Lit signs are appropriate for the area, but should be highefficiency
and dark sky compliant.
(d) Wall-mounted signage for multitenant buildings should
minimize visual clutter through consolidated signage or
individual signs that are sized and spaced consistently along
the building face.
(2) Maximum dimensions. The following size limitations are
established within this district:
Type
Maximum
Size
(Sign Face
Only) Height Count Setback
Freestanding,
monument
100 square
feet
20 feet 1 per ROW
lot line
10 feet
Wallmounted
10% of
building
face, not to
exceed 350
square feet
total per
building
N/A N/A N/A
Incidental 12 square
feet per
sign
N/A N/A
G. Refuse storage and mechanicals.
(1) Outdoor storage of refuse shall comply with regulations set forth in
§ 192-20 and be located in areas that minimize visual impacts and
conflicts with site circulation and neighboring uses.
(2) Building- and ground-mounted building mechanicals shall be
located out of view and/or screened to the greatest extent
practicable.
H. Lighting.
(1) Exterior lighting, including fixtures located on sites and mounted
on structures, shall be designed to provide safe pedestrian and
§ 235-176 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 235-176
230:894
vehicular navigation, enhance safety, and complement the design
of the proposed development. Dark sky compliant fixtures should
be used, unless the need for alternative is demonstrated during
application.
(2) Interior lighting within buildings shall be designed, positioned and/
or controlled in such a way that avoids light spill on adjacent public
rights-of-way.
§ 235-176 LITTERING § 235-176
230:895
Chapter 236
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204. Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 236-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Historic Preservation Law of the Town
of Irondequoit."
§ 236-2. Purpose.
Recognizing that the Town of Irondequoit's rich and varied history and
vibrant present are evident in its commercial and residential buildings
and surrounds, it is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that
the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic
districts is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and
general welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is
founded on its past, and inasmuch as Irondequoit has many significant
historic, architectural, and cultural resources which constitute its heritage,
this chapter is intended to:
§ 236-3. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the "Irondequoit
Historic Preservation Commission."
A. Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which
represent distinctive elements of Irondequoit's historic, architectural,
and cultural heritage;
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
C. Protect and enhance Irondequoit's attractiveness to visitors and the
support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; and
D. Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development
of the Town.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the
Town Board who shall serve without compensation for terms of seven
years. The original members selected shall serve at staggered terms of
seven years, six years, five years, four years, three years, two years and
one year. The Commission members shall be composed of the Town
historian, who shall serve during the tenure of that position and at least
one of the following to the extent available: an architect experienced in
working with historic buildings; an historian; a resident of an historic
§ 235-176 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 236-3
236:896
district; a person who has demonstrated significant interest in and
commitment to the field of historic preservation evidenced either by
involvement in a local historic preservation group, employment, or
volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or other serious
interest in the field. All members shall have a known interest in historic
preservation and architectural development within the Town of
Irondequoit.
B. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by
and from among the members of the Commission.
C. The powers of the Commission shall include:
(1) Employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission as approved by the Town
Board;
(2) Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct
of its business;
(3) Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic,
architectural, and cultural landmarks and for the delineation of
historic districts;
(4) Conduction of surveys of significant historic, architectural, and
cultural landmarks and historic districts within the Town;
(5) Designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and
historic districts;
(6) Acceptance on behalf of the Town government of the donation of
facade easements and development rights, and the making of
recommendations to the Town government concerning the
acquisition of facade easements or other interests in real property
as necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
(7) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
public education programs;
(8) Making recommendations to Town government concerning the
utilization of state, federal, or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the Town.
(9) Recommending acquisition of a landmark structure by the Town
government where its preservation is essential to the purpose of
this chapter and where private preservation is not feasible; and
(10) Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of
appropriateness pursuant to this chapter.
§ 236-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 236-3
236:897
§ 236-4. Designation of landmarks or historic districts.
D. The Commission shall meet at least monthly, but meetings may be held
at any time on the written request of any two of the Commission
members or on the call of the Chairman or the Supervisor.
E. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission's members, but not less than a majority of the full
authorized membership may grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
A. The Commission may designate an individual property as a landmark if
it:
(1) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic, or social history of
the locality, region, state, or nation; or
(2) Is identified with historic personages; or
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style; or
(4) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced
an age; or
(5) Because of unique location or singular physical characteristics,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood; or
(6) Receives an approval from a property owner to request historic
landmark designation.
B. The Commission may designate a group of properties as an historic
district if it:
(1) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation as a landmark; and
(2) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct
section of the Town.
C. The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be
specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the Town Clerk's
office for public inspection.
D. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by registered mail to the
owner of the property proposed for designation, describing the
property and announcing a public hearing by the Commission to
consider the designation. Where the proposed designation involves so
many owners that individual notice is infeasible, notice may instead be
published at least once in the official newspaper of the Town at least 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing. Once the Commission has
§ 236-3 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 236-4
236:898
§ 236-5. Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition or
new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or moving of a landmark
or property within an historic district, nor shall any person make any
material change in the appearance of such property, its light fixtures,
signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or other exterior elements which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the landmark or historic district,
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Commission.
§ 236-6. Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness.
issued notice of a proposed designation, no building permits shall be
issued by the Building Inspector until the Commission has made its
decision.
E. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any
landmark or historic district. The Commission, owners, and any
interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at
the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or
district. The record may also contain staff reports, public comments, or
other evidence offered outside of the hearing.
F. The Commission shall forward notice of each property designation as a
landmark and the boundaries of each designated historic district to the
offices of the Monroe County Clerk for recordation.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to interior
spaces, unless they are open to the public. The Commission's decision
shall be based on the following principles:
(1) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district
shall be retained, with their historic features altered as little as
possible;
(2) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with its
historic character, as well as with the surrounding district; and
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is
located.
B. In applying the principles of compatibility, the Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character, and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration or new construction;
§ 236-4 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 236-6
236:899
§ 236-7. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;
(3) Texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar features
of other properties in the neighborhood;
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback; and
(5) The importance of historic, architectural, or other features to the
significance of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owners shall file an application for such a
certificate with the Historic Preservation Commission. The application
shall contain:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;
(2) Location and photographs of property;
(3) Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available;
(4) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent
properties, if available;
(5) Samples of color or materials to be used;
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors,
a description of materials to be used, method of illumination, and a
plan showing the sign's location on the property; and
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission. The certificate of appropriateness required
by this chapter shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building
permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the Town of
Irondequoit.
C. The Commission shall approve, deny or approve the permit with
modifications within 60 days from receipt of the completed application.
The Commission may hold a public hearing on the application at which
an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the
application to present their views.
§ 236-6 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 236-7
236:900
§ 236-8. Demolition hardship criteria.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition
has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to
prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
§ 236-9. Alteration hardship criteria.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration
has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order
to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that the
property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether
that return represents the most profitable return possible.
§ 236-10. Hardship application procedure.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the Town
Clerk's office for public inspection. The Commission's decision shall
state the reasons for denying or modifying any application.
E. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for 12 months, after which
time the owner must reapply if he still wishes to undertake work on the
property.
A. The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of
whether that return represents the most profitable return possible;
B. The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable
return; and
C. Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
A. After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be
issued unless the Commission makes a finding that a hardship exists.
B. The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship application
at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents
of the application to present their views.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups, and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek
an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the Town
Clerk's office for public inspection. The Commission's decision shall
state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application. If
§ 236-7 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 236-10
236:901
§ 236-11. Enforcement.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein.
It shall be the duty of the Building Code Enforcement Officer to inspect
periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is
found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the Historic
Preservation Commission, the Building Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a stop-work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further
work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop-work order is in
effect.
§ 236-12. Maintenance and repair required.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark
or property within an historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, color, or outward appearance. No owner or person with
an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within
an historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of
disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural
feature which would, in the judgment of the Historic Preservation
Commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic
district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples
of such deterioration include:
§ 236-13. Penalties for offenses.
the application is granted, the Commission shall approve only such
work as is necessary to alleviate the hardship.
A. Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
B. Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
C. Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
D. Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
E. Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations,
including broken windows or doors; and
F. Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which
could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a violation and the violator shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $300 per day nor more than $1,000 per day for each day, the
violation continues.
§ 236-10 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § 236-13
236:902
§ 236-14. Authority to serve notice.
The Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector may from time to time require notice to be served
upon owners, as hereinafter provided, to remedy any of the foregoing
conditions described in § 236-12 which may exist upon the land, in addition
to other Town Code violations which may exist. Compliance is required
within seven days of receipt of notice.
§ 236-15. Form of notice.
Whenever the Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector requires the owners of land to correct Town Code
violations, the notice shall specify the place, manner and time (not less
than seven days from the receipt of said notice) within which such work
shall be completed. The notice shall be served upon such owner or owners
by registered or certified mail addressed to his or her or their last known
address. The Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector may require personal service in the case of a resident
if so desired.
§ 236-16. Failure to comply; work done by Town; costs.
Whenever a notice or notices has been or have been served upon such
owner or owners of the respective lots or parcels of land to correct Town
Code violations, and such owner or owners shall neglect or fail to comply
with the requirements of such notice or notices within the time provided
therein, the Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector may authorize the work to be done. The cost thereof
shall be paid out of the general Town funds to be appropriated by the
Town Board for such purposes. The Commissioner of Public Works, Building
Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code Compliance Inspector may issue an
appearance ticket subscribed by him or her directing the owner or owners
to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time
in connection with this alleged Commission of a designated offense of this
chapter.
B. Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a designated
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this
chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to its
appearance prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection
shall be brought by the Town Attorney. This civil remedy shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 236-13 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 236-17
236:903
§ 236-17. Reimbursement for costs; costs to constitute lien.
Should the Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector authorize the work to be done, then the department
authorizing the work shall be reimbursed for the cost, including out-ofpocket
administrative expense of the work performed or services rendered
by direction of the Commission, Town Board, Commissioner of Public Works/
Superintendent of Highways, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or Code
Compliance Inspector, as hereinabove provided, by assessment and levy
upon the lots or parcels of land wherein such work was performed or such
services rendered, and the expenses so assessed shall constitute a lien and
charge on the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise
satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the
same time as other Town charges.
§ 236-18. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission
relating to hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may, within 30 days
of the decision, file a written application with the Zoning Board of Appeals
for review of decision. Reviews shall be conducted based on the same
record that was before the Commission and using the same criteria.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-1996 10-15-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
222
8-1996 10-15-1996 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 136
9-1996 11-19-1996 Firearms Ch. 132
10-1996 11-19-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
222
11-1996 12-17-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
222
12-1996 12-17-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
§ 236-17 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:904
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-1997 3-4-1997 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2-1997 4-1-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
3-1997 5-20-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
4-1997 6-17-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
5-1997 7-15-1997 Telecommunications
facilities moratorium
Ch. 157
6-1997 8-19-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
--- 8-19-1997 Auxiliary police Ch. 48, Art. II
7-1997 11-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
8-1997 12-16-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
--- 7-14-1998 Architectural Review
Committee
Ch. 3
1-1998 8-18-1998 Building construction and
fire prevention
amendment; unsafe
buildings amendment;
solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 98; 104; 192,
Art. II; 235
2-1998 10-6-1998 Taxation: exemption for
persons with disabilities
and limited income
Ch. 210, Art. III
3-1998
4-1998
10-6-1998
10-6-1998
Zoning amendment
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235 Ch. 222
5-1998 10-6-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
6-1998 10-6-1998 Junked vehicles
amendment
Ch. 225
7-1998 11-17-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:905
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-1998 12-15-1998 Department of
Development Services
amendment; ethics
amendment; Department
of Planning and Zoning;
environmental quality
review amendment; flood
damage protection
amendment; solid waste:
collection and disposal
amendment; stormwater
management amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 18; 20; 45; 123;
136; 192, Art. II;
196; 235
1-1999 1-5-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
2-1999 2-2-1999 Taxation: veterans
exemption
Ch. 210, Art. IV
3-1999 2-2-1999 Taxation: alternative
veterans exemption
Ch. 210, Art. V
4-1999 5-18-1999 Storage of vehicles Ch. 225
5-1999 7-20-1999 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
6-1999 8-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
7-1999 8-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
8-1999 8-17-1999 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 204
9-1999 11-30-1999 Procurement policy
amendment
Ch. 51
10-1999 11-30-1999 Investment policy
amendment
Ch. 28
11-1999 11-30-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
1-2000 3-21-2000 Taxation: exemption for
persons with disabilities
and limited incomes
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. III
2-2000 4-25-2000 Animals amendment Ch. 79
3-2000 4-25-2000 Town Attorney Ch. 5
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:906
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2000 7-18-2000 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
5-2000 7-18-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
6-2000 7-18-2000 Taxation: home
improvement exemption
Ch. 210, Art. VI
7-2000 8-10-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
8-2000 9-26-2000 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 192
9-2000 9-26-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
10-2000 9-26-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
11-2000 12-19-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2000 12-19-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
1-2001 2-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2001 3-20-2001 Taxation: parcel
combination
Ch. 210, Art. VII
3-2001 4-24-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
4-2001 4-24-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
5-2001 5-15-2001 Noise amendment Ch. 160
6-2001 6-19-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
7-2001 6-19-2001 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
8-2001 8-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
9-2001 8-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
10-2001 8-21-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
11-2001 9-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2001 9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
13-2001 9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:907
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-2001 9-25-2001 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 94
15-2001 9-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
16-2001 9-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
17-2001 9-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
18-2001 9-25-2001 Noise amendment Ch. 160
19-2001 11-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
20-2001 11-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
21-2001 11-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
22-2001 11-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
23-2001 12-18-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
1-2002 1-22-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2002 1-22-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
3-2002 2-26-2002 Sewers amendment Ch. 180
4-2002 2-26-2002 Right-of-way Ch. 199
5-2002 2-26-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
6-2002 2-26-2002 Historic preservation Ch. 236
7-2002 3-19-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
8-2002 4-23-2002 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 167
9-2002 4-23-2002 Storage of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 225
10-2002 6-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
11-2002 7-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2002 10-15-2002 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 196
13-2002 10-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:908
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-2002 10-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
15-2002 10-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
16-2002 10-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
1-2003 2-25-2003 Town Attorney repealer Ch. 5
2-2003 3-18-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
3-2003 3-18-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
4-2003 3-18-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
5-2003 3-18-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
6-2003 4-22-2003 Three-month interim
application process for
telecommunications
facilities
NCM
7-2003 6-17-2003 Littering Ch. 230
8-2003 9-23-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
9-2003 10-21-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
10-2003 10-21-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
11-2003 10-21-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2003 10-21-2003 Notification of defects
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
13-2003 11-25-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
1-2004 1-20-2004 Littering amendment Ch. 230
2-2004 3-23-2004 Residency requirements
for Commissioner of
Public Works, Deputy
Commissioner of Public
Works, Superintendent of
Highways and Deputy
Superintendent of
Highways
Ch. 40, Art. IV
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:909
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2004 3-23-2004 Special events
amendment
Ch. 194
4-2004 6-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
5-2004 6-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
6-2004 6-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
7-2004 6-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
8-2004 8-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
9-2004 8-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
10-2004 8-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
11-2004 11-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2004 11-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
13-2004 11-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 235, Art. VIIIA
14-2004 12-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
1-2005 2-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
2-2005 2-15-2005 Town property Ch. 164
3-2005 4-26-2005 Amusement centers and
devices
Ch. 76
4-2005 5-24-2005 Community residence
facilities and group
homes
Ch. 117
5-2005 7-19-2005 Deputy Court Clerk Ch. 40, Art. V
6-2005 8-23-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
7-2005 9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
8-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
9-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
10-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
11-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
12-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:910
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
1-2006 2-28-2006 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 210, Art. V
2-2006 4-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Res. No.
2006-160
9-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Ord. 1-23-2007 Building construction and
fire prevention
Ch. 98
1-2007 6-19-2007 General provisions:
terminology, general
penalty and fees
amendments; Department
of Community
Development amendment;
Department of Planning
and Zoning repealed;
building construction and
fire prevention
amendment; unsafe
buildings amendment
Chs. 1, Arts. II, III
and IV; 18; 45,
reference only; 98;
104
2-2007 7-17-2007 Air pollution amendment Ch. 69
3-2007 7-17-2007 Public nuisances Ch. 173
4-2007 7-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
5-2007 11-20-2007 Rental properties Ch. 177
6-2007 11-20-2007 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
7-2007 12-18-2007 Stormwater management:
design and management
of postconstruction
pollution prevention
measures
Ch. 196, Art. II
8-2007 12-18-2007 Stormwater management:
illicit discharges and
connections
Ch. 196, Art. III
9-2007 12-18-2007 Stormwater management:
pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment
control during
construction
Ch. 196, Art. I
Res. No.
2008-24
1-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:911
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2008-88
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Res. No.
2008-89
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Res. No.
2008-90
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Res. No.
2008-91
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
Res. No.
2008-92
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
1-2008 5-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2008 7-15-2008 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 136
3-2008 8-19-2008 Officers and employees:
removal or disciplining of
members of certain
boards, committees or
commissions appointed or
confirmed by Town Board
Ch. 40, Art. VI
4-2008 9-16-2008 Irondequoit Bay harbor
management
Ch. 149
1-2009 2-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2009 2-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
3-2009 2-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
1-2010 7-27-2010 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
2-2010 10-19-2010 Pawnbrokers Repealed by L.L. No.
2-2014
3-2010 11-16-2010 Dog control amendment Ch. 79, Art. I
Ord. No.
2012-1
5-21-2012 Boats and boating
amendment
Annulled by State
Supreme Court
1-2014 5-15-2014 Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals:
alternate members
Ch. 46, Art. I
2-2014 10-16-2014 Pawnbrokers, secondhand
dealers and jewelry and
coin exchange dealers
Ch. 165
3-2014 12-18-2014 Recreation and
Community Services,
Bureau of
Ch. 44
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:912
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2014 12-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
5-2014 12-18-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2015 3-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2015 3-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
3-2015 3-19-2015 Taxation: business
investment exemption
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
4-2015 5-21-2015 Rental properties
amendment
Ch. 177
5-2015 5-21-2015 Vacant and unsafe
buildings and properties
Ch. 104
6-2015 12-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2016 4-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
2-2016 10-20-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2017 2-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
2-2017 5-16-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
3-2017 6-20-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
4-2017 7-18-2017 Taxation: home
improvement exemption
Ch. 210, Art. VI
5-2017 7-18-2017 Bow hunt program Ch. 93
6-2017 8-15-2017 Taxation: Lake Ontario
and connected waterways
assessment relief
Ch. 210, Art. VIII
7-2017 11-21-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222
8-2017 11-21-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1-2018 3-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 235
2-2018 4-17-2018 Bow Hunt Program
Amendment
Ch. 93
3-2018 4-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222
4-2018 5-15-2018 Procurement Policy Ch. 51
5-2018 6-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222
6-2018 7-17-2018 Town Property
Amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:913
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2018 8-21-2018 Bow Hunt Program
Amendment
Ch. 93
8-2018 8-21-2018 Community Choice
Aggregation Program
Ch. 115
9-2018 9-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222
10-2018 12-18-2018 Trees Amendment Ch. 214
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2019 3-19-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222 54
2-2019 4-16-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 235 54
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:914
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3-2019 6-18-2019 Officers and
Employees:
Residency
Requirements
for
Comptroller
Amendment;
Residency
Requirements
for Budget
Officer
Amendment;
Residency
Requirements
for
Commissioner
of Public
Works,
Deputy
Commissioner
of Public
Works,
Superintendent
of Highways
and Deputy
Superintendent
of Highways
Amendment;
Residency
Requirements
for Director
of
Department
of Community
Development;
Residency
Requirements
for Director
of
Department
of Recreation
Ch. 40, Art.
II; Ch. 40,
Art. III; Ch.
40, Art. IV;
Ch. 40, Art.
VII; Ch. 40,
Art. VIII
54
§ DL-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § DL-1
236:915
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 6-18-2019 General
Provisions:
Terminology
Amendment;
Fees
Amendment;
Recreation
Department
of
Ch. 1, Art. II;
Ch. 1, Art. IV;
Ch. 44
54
§ DL-1 IRONDEQUOIT CODE § DL-1
236:916