Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-21-1993 as L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Johnson City, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp.,1 and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 300, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the Village of Johnson City," hereafter termed
the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Johnson City" to
any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such
reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number,
article number or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City, and it is
the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Johnson City in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
1. Editor's Note: Now General Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Johnson City prior to the effective
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Johnson City or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Johnson
City.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Johnson City.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Johnson City providing for
the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Johnson City or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Johnson City appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Johnson City or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to December 1, 1992.
M. All legislation relating to vehicles and traffic.
§ 1-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 1-5
1:4
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Johnson City and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the
Village Clerk of the Village of Johnson City by impressing thereon the Seal
of the Village of Johnson City, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Johnson City" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Johnson City required to
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village of
Johnson City upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Johnson City or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Johnson
City to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of
this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) or
imprisonment for a term of not more than fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Johnson City, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one (1) or more of said pieces of legislation. It is
the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)2
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B, the following chapters, Articles and sections were
added or amended: definitions of "Board of Health," "Director of Services," "Property
Maintenance Appeals Board," "Property Maintenance Board," "Superintendent of Public
Works," "Village Clerk" and "Village Treasurer" in § 1-14, §§ 1-15, 5-2, 15-3A, 15-5B, 35-1,
39-1, Ch. 43, Ch. 51, §§ 59-1, 59-2, 75-4, 88-8, 96-2C, 96-3B, 96-6, 96-12C, 132-4A, 136-7,
136-8, 140-6C, 140-9, 140-16G, 140-19A(1), (2) and (3), C(1) and (2) and D, 140-27A,
144-1, 144-56A(2), 144-57D(1), 166-2, 166-11B, 166-12, 166-13, 166-14B, 166-17D,
166-22, 166-25, Ch. 176, §§ 188-1, 192-3A and C, 200-2, 200-3, 200-4, 200-6, 200-8,
200-12, 200-15, 200-16, 200-17, 200-22, 200-23, 200-24A, 200-26, 200-28, 200-30, 200-32,
200-33, 200-35, 200-36B and C, 200-43C, 200-44B, 200-45, 200-46D, E and F, 200-76B,
204-1, 204-3, 208-4B, C and D, 222-3B, 222-15H, 222-87B(8), 226-3C, 236-2C, 240-24C,
240-33B, C and D, 240-42, Ch. 244, §§ 250-1, 250-6, 254-6, 254-29, 254-35C, 270-24,
definitions of "bed-and-breakfast establishment," "dwelling unit," "enforcement officer,"
"landfill," "nonconforming structure or use" and "swimming pool" in § 274-4, §§ 274-9A,
274-15, 274-16C(1)(a) and D, 274-29I(2), 274-36B(9)(f), 274-47A(8), 274-80C and D,
274-94E, 274-99, 274-109B, 274-119A(3) and 274-136C(2) and E. The following original
sections were deleted: the definition of "gender" in Sec. 1-2 and Secs. 1-1 and 1-3 through
1-7 of Ch. 1 of the 1973 Code; Sec. 2 of Subpart D of Part I of the 1973 Code; Sec. 6-2 of
Ch. 6 of the 1973 Code; Arts. II and III (L.L. No. 12-1981) of Ch. 8 of the 1973 Code; Secs.
9 1/2-33 and 9 1/2-34 of L.L. No. 12-1980; Sec. 10-12 of Ch. 10, Art. I, of the 1973 Code;
and definitions of "dump," "flood," "flood hazard district," "flood fringe," "floodway,"
§ 1-9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Village of Johnson City, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
"100-year flood" and "tourist home" in Sec. 21-4 of Ch. 21 of the 1973 Code. A complete
description of the changes is on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Ch. 1 of the 1973 Code]
§ 1-14. Definitions.3
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Village Board of Trustees:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Broome County Health Department. 4
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson
City.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had
shall not be counted.
CORPORATE LIMITS; CORPORATION LIMITS — Whenever the words
"corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "village limits" are used, they
shall mean the legal boundary of the Village of Johnson City.
COUNTY — The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County
of Broome in the State of New York.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department of the village to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act
or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section
designate otherwise. 5
DIRECTOR OF SERVICES — The Director of Public Services of the Village
of Johnson City. 6
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the County of Broome.
INTERPRETATION — In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon
the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to
be controlling.
3. Editor's Note: Former Section 1-1, How Code designated and cited, was superseded at
time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
5. Editor's Note: The original definition of "Gender," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted and gender-specific language throughout the Code was made
gender-neutral at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
6. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
KEEPER; PROPRIETOR — The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean
and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and
partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or
employee.
MAYOR — Whenever the word "Mayor" is used, it shall mean the Mayor of
the Village of Johnson City, and where an ordinance or section shall direct
that an act be performed or decision be made by the Mayor, such expression
shall be deemed to include not only the Mayor but the Deputy Mayor, in the
absence of the Mayor, or the Acting Mayor, in the absence of both the Mayor
and the Deputy Mayor, or any member of the Board of Trustees designated
by the Board or the Mayor to perform the act or to exercise the discretion
referred to; but this provision shall not be construed to authorize the Mayor
or the Board to delegate any power or duty on the part of the Mayor to any
other person except a member of the Board of Trustees of the village or
except as otherwise provided by law.
MONTH — The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
NAME OF OFFICER — Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be
construed as though the words "of the Village of Johnson City" were added.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
OATH — The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
OR; AND — "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well
as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — The term "personal property" includes every
species of property except real property, as herein described.
§ 1-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 1-14
1:10
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following" shall
mean next before and next after, respectively.
PREMISES — Whenever the word "premises," is used it shall mean place or
places.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE APPEALS BOARD — The Zoning Board of
Appeals of the Village of Johnson City. 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BOARD — The Village Court of the Village of
Johnson City. 8
PUBLIC PLACE — The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery,
school yard or open space adjacent thereto, all streets and parking fields or
any area within the confines of the village used by the public at large.
REAL PROPERTY — The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
RESIDENCE — The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place
adopted by a person as his or her place of habitation, and to which,
whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the intention of returning. When
a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such
person sleeps shall be deemed his or her "residence."
SEAL — Whenever the word "seal" is used, it shall mean the Village or
Corporate Seal.
SIDEWALK — The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians, excluding parkways.
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION — The "signature" or "subscription" of a
person shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE — The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of New
York.
STREET — The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public
highways in the village.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Services
of the Village of Johnson City. 9
TENANT; OCCUPANT — The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or
with others.
7. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:11
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
TRUSTEE — The word "trustee" shall mean any person elected or appointed
to that office.
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES — Whenever the term "Village Board of
Trustees" is used, it shall be construed to mean the Mayor and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Johnson City.
VILLAGE CLERK — The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Johnson City. 10
VILLAGE; CORPORATION — Whenever the words "the village," "this
village," "the corporation" or "this corporation" are used, they shall be
construed as if the words "of Johnson City, New York" followed them.
VILLAGE TREASURER — The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Johnson City.
11
WEEK — The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING — The words "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 12
§ 1-15. Penalties for offenses; continuing violations.13
Except as otherwise provided herein, any violation of any provision of the
entire Code of the Village of Johnson City shall be subject, upon conviction,
to a penalty or fine up to and not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or to a term of imprisonment of not more than fifteen (15) days, or
both. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-16. Prosecution where different penalties exist for same offense.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the village, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than
one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
§ 1-17. Penalties not exclusive.
Obedience to the provisions hereinafter set forth may be enforced either
by criminal information for the penalties herein prescribed as well as by
prosecution of the offender as provided in § 1-15 or by civil action for a
penalty or by civil remedy at law or in equity by way of injunction or
10.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
12.Editor's Note: Former original Sections 1-3 through 1-7, which immediately followed this
section, were superseded at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 1-17
1:12
otherwise to abate or prevent a violation of the provisions of this Code
of Ordinances. Neither a judgment in, nor the pendency of a criminal
prosecution for an alleged violation of the provisions of this Code, nor a
judgment in or the pendency of a civil action at law or in equity shall be
a bar to the other form of proceeding; provided, however, that election to
proceed in a criminal proceeding will bar a proceeding similarly for the
same offense. The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this Code shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the remedies herein
provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin or abate a violation shall be
cumulative.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:13

ARTICLE III
Legislation Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain new pieces of legislation
were approved by the Village Board of Trustees for inclusion in
the Code of the Village of Johnson City. Such new enactments are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "...adopted during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III." The listing
below sets forth each chapter affected by any such legislation
adopted during codification.]
Chapter Adoption Date Legislation
Chapter 264, Vehicles and Traffic
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:15
Chapter 5
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants, employees and
agents of the Village of Johnson City to issue and serve appearance tickets
in connection with violations of state statutes, local laws, code violations,
ordinances and/or rules and regulations of the Village of Johnson City which
the public servants, agents or employees are authorized or required to
enforce.
§ 5-2. Authorization to issue appearance tickets.
The following public servants, agents or employees of the Village of Johnson
City are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with
respect to violations of state statutes, local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Village of Johnson City that such public servants are
respectively required or authorized to enforce:
A. Code Enforcement Officer: violation of any provision of Part II of the
Code (except for violations of Chapter 264, Vehicles and Traffic,
Chapter 192, Peace and Good Order and Chapter 92, Alcoholic
Beverages), including but not limited to the following:
(1) Building, including but not limited to the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2) Zoning.
(3) Planning.
(4) Fire prevention and safety.
(5) Licensing of occupations or businesses as may be regulated by the
Village of Johnson City.
B. Police officers:
(1) Violations relating to public health, safety and welfare, including
but not limited to violations of Code Chapter 92, Alcoholic
Beverages; violations of Code Chapter 96, Animals; violations of
Code Chapter 192, Peace and Good Order; and violations of Code
Chapter 240, Streets and Sidewalks.
(2) Violations of Code Chapter 264, Vehicle and Traffic.
(3) Violations of Code Chapter 196, Peddling and Soliciting.
C. Director of Public Services, or any designate thereof:
§ 1-17 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 5-2
1:16
§ 5-3. Manner of service.
An appearance ticket shall be served in accordance with §§ 150.20 and
150.40 of the New York Criminal Procedure Law.
Chapter 7
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 250.
(1) Sewage and health violations, including but not limited to the New
York State Sanitary Code.
§ 5-2 ASSESSMENTS § 5-3
7:17

ARTICLE I
Termination of Village's Status as an Assessing Unit
[Adopted 9-4-1984 as L.L. No. 13-1984 (Div. 4 of Subpart N of Part I
of the 1973 Code)]
§ 7-1. Termination; assessment of future taxes.
The Village of Johnson City, pursuant to § 1402, Subdivision 3(a), of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, shall cease to be an assessing
unit, as that term is defined in the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York, and village taxes shall hereafter be levied on a copy of the portion
of the Town of Union assessment roll pertaining to real property located
within the geographic confines of the Village of Johnson City.
§ 7-2. Certain statutes inapplicable.
The provisions of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York
and the Village Law of the State of New York relative to the makings and
reviewing of assessments of real property shall hereafter not apply to the
village, and the office of Village Assessor is hereby abolished.
§ 7-3. Construal of terms.
Whenever the term "Village Assessor" is used in Subpart N of the Code
of Ordinances of the Village of Johnson City (Partial Exemption from Real
Property Taxation) or in any other local law or ordinance of the village, such
term shall be deemed to mean the Town of Union Assessor.
§ 7-4. Permissive referendum.
This Article is subject to a permissive referendum, and the Board of
Trustees, pursuant to § 9-908 of the Village Law of the State of New York,
hereby directs that this Article shall be submitted to the qualified electors
of the village for approval at the next general election of the village to be
held on November 6, 1984.14
14.Editor's Note: This Article passed at referendum November 6, 1984.
§ 7-1 ASSESSMENTS § 7-4
7:19
Chapter 8
CONSTABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 5. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 8-1. Office created.
It is hereby created, in the Village of Johnson City, New York, the office of
Village Constable.
§ 8-2. Appointment; term.
The Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint a
Constable, who shall serve a term of one year.
§ 8-3. Powers and duties.
A Constable appointed hereunder shall be a peace officer as defined in the
Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York and will be authorized,
in addition to all other powers, rights, duties and responsibilities incumbent
upon such office, to issue appearance tickets relating to enforcement of
any statute of local law, ordinance or rule or regulation affecting the public
health, safety and welfare. Further, such Constable shall be responsible for
collecting fines for parking tickets issued by the Village police force.
§ 8-4. Rules and regulations; insurance; payment; equipment.
The Mayor is authorized to make rules and regulations as may be required,
and shall also provide, within the limits of any appropriation, and subject to
the approval of the Board of Trustees:
A. Liability insurance for such Constable, which shall protect the
Constable and village from acts of liability that may arise during the
performance of duties of said Constable.
B. Workers' compensation insurance.
C. For the payment of the Constable for services rendered upon either an
hourly basis or upon a percentage of parking ticket fines collected
dependent upon the agreement between the village and the Constable.
D. Uniforms and equipment for the Constable if determined to be
necessary or desirable to carry out the duties of the office.
E. An annual physical examination, the passage of which shall be
successful prior to any appointment or reappointment.
§ 7-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 8-4
8:20
Chapter 9
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 15. Personnel policies — See Ch. 55.
§ 9-1. Statutory authority; title.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of § 18 of the Public
Officers Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the "Defense
and Indemnification Law of the Village of Johnson City."
§ 9-2. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the legal defense and indemnification of
judgments against employees of the Village pursuant to § 18 of the Public
Officers Law.
§ 9-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
given herein:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is an officer or employee of the Village of
Johnson City, or any member of any Village board, council or commission
or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a Village-sponsored
volunteer program, or any other person holding a position by election,
appointment or employment in the service of the Village, whether or not
compensated. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his
or her estate or judicially approved personal representative, but shall not
include an independent contractor.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Johnson City, County of Broome,
State of New York.
§ 9-4. Benefits of statute conferred on employees.
By the adoption of this chapter, the Village hereby agrees to confer upon its
employees the benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New
York and to be held liable for the costs incurred under its provisions.
§ 9-5. Responsibility of Village.
Subject to the terms, provisions and conditions contained in said Public
Officers Law, the Village shall provide for the legal defense and
indemnification of its employees for acts or omissions which occurred while
they were acting or, in good faith, purporting to act within the scope of their
public employment or duties.
§ 8-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 9-6
9:21
§ 9-6. Resolution of disputes.
Any dispute as to whether an employee was acting or, in good faith,
purporting to act within the scope of his or her employment or duties shall
be resolved by the Board of Trustees, which shall review and consider
the facts and circumstances out of which the complaint arose. The Board
of Trustees need not limit its review to the allegations contained in the
legal proceedings and may reassess any determination based on additional
evidence or subsequent developments in the action or proceeding.
Chapter 10
EMPIRE ZONE
§ 9-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 9-6
10:22
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 10-1. Empire Zone Administrative Board.
The Empire Zone Administrative Board shall consist of one representative of
a local financial institution, one representative of an organized labor union,
one representative of an educational institution and one officer or employee
from one of the municipalities sponsoring the application; and from the
City of Binghamton, Village of Johnson City and the Village of Endicott
there shall be appointed one business owner, one zone resident and one
representative of a community organization, for a total of 13 members.
§ 10-2. Application authorized. [Amended 12-6-2005 by L.L. No.
8-2005]
The Village of Johnson City hereby authorizes the County of Broome, on
behalf of the Village of Johnson City, to submit to the Commissioner of
Economic Development for the State of New York an application for the
creation of an Empire Zone within a certain area of the aforementioned
municipalities, and amendment of the boundary of said zone, now known as
the “Triple Cities Empire Zone.”
§ 10-3. Incentives to be provided by village.
The Village of Johnson City hereby agrees, upon the approval of the
aforementioned Empire Zone, to provide local tax and other incentives,
pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-e, to properties within the Empire
Zone, as delineated on the attached map,15 which are also situate within the
Village of Johnson City.
§ 10-4. Zone certifier.
The zone certifier required by the Empire Zones Program shall be an
employee of the Broome County Industrial Development Agency until such
time as an Economic Development Alliance is established.
§ 10-5. Copies. [Amended 12-6-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
Copies of this article shall be forwarded to the County of Broome, Town
of Union, Village of Endicott, City of Binghamton and the New York State
Department of Economic Development.
§ 10-6. Expansion of subzone. [Added 10-4-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994]
A. Expansion of the Johnson City subzone of the Empire Zone will be
provided by deducting the Conrail right-of-way from the calculation of
the amount of property within the zone. The Johnson City subzone will
15.Editor's Note: The Empire Zone Map is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 10-1 EMPIRE ZONE § 10-6
10:23
§ 10-7. Amended map. [Added 10-4-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994;
amended 12-6-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
The area of the Empire Zone within the Village of Johnson City is set
forth on the map entitled "Appendix A,"16 as amended by the map dated
November 5, 2005.
be expanded to the northwest part of Field Street, part of Corliss
Avenue, to the south to include 338 Grand Avenue and to the northeast
to include part of Pratt Avenue, North Broad and Diment Streets and
101 and 99 Lester Avenue. Property removed from the zone is the
Picciano Building on Arch Street.
B. The Johnson City subzone is amended to include 100 Albert Street and
305 Main Street. The following will be deleted from the subzone: 107
Main Street, 115 Main Street, 131 Main Street, 308 Main Street, 24
Avenue D, 28 Avenue C and State of New York Highway right-of-way
along interchange 70 and Oakdale Road. [Added 5-1-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
C. The Johnson City subzone is amended to include 107 Main Street, 115
Main Street, and 131 Main Street. The following will be deleted from
the subzone: part of Corliss Avenue, 235 Harry L. Drive, 100 Albert
Street, and part of North Broad and Diment Streets north of Pratt
Avenue. Additional areas of inclusion and deletion are indicated in the
map dated November 5, 2005, and filed in the Village Clerk's office.
[Added 12-6-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
16.Editor's Note: The Empire Zone Map is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 10-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 10-7
10:24
ARTICLE II
Tax Benefits for Relocating Businesses
[Adopted 6-20-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
§ 10-8. Procedures.
The procedures and criteria listed below are adopted to make Empire Zone
tax benefits available to businesses relocating to the zone from within the
Village.
§ 10-9. Application for certification.
The applicant business must submit to the Triple Cities Empire Zone
Coordinator an application for zone certification with a brief narrative and
evidence it has moved or is moving into the zone and meets one of the
following criteria:
§ 10-10. Approval of certificates.
The Triple Cities Empire Zone Coordinator is hereby authorized to approve
certification eligibility for such businesses when they meet any one of those
criteria.
A. A business is at a location which:
(1) Has been or is being acquired or is under threat of acquisition by
eminent domain; or
(2) Is in an area undergoing changes in development or urban planning
goals and that business is no longer a suitable or appropriate use in
that area.
B. An existing business is expanding and has insufficient or inappropriate
space at its present location.
C. An existing business is leasing or otherwise occupying space which it
does not own and has acquired a facility within the zone.
D. An existing business is operating out of a person's home and is seeking
to relocate outside the home.
E. The proposed location better meets the goals of the applicant's business
plan.
§ 10-8 EMPIRE ZONE § 10-10
10:25
Chapter 11
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 67.
§ 10-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 10-10
11:26
ARTICLE I
Time of Village Primary Election
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Subpart A of Part I of the 1973 Code]
§ 11-1. Election Law applicable.
Primary elections for the nominations of all elective village offices of the
Village of Johnson City, Broome County, New York, shall be held and
conducted in the fall of each year coincident with the general and fall
primaries held in accordance with and as provided by the Election Law of
the State of New York or any amendments to said Election Law changing or
varying the date or dates of general fall primaries.
§ 11-2. Submission at special election.
This Article shall be submitted at a special election for the purposes
aforesaid to be held on the first day of August 1944 between the hours of
12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. in the evening of said day.
§ 11-1 ELECTIONS § 11-2
11:27

ARTICLE II
Time of Annual Village Election
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Subpart B of Part I of the 1973 Code]
§ 11-3. Applicability of state and federal election laws.
The annual election in the Village of Johnson City for the election of all
elective village offices shall be held and conducted in the fall of each year
hereafter coincident with the general fall elections held in accordance with
and as provided by the federal election laws and the Election Law of the
State of New York or any amendments to said election laws changing or
varying the date of general fall elections.
§ 11-4. Submission at special election.
This Article shall be submitted at a special election for the purposes
aforesaid to be held on the first day of August 1944 between the hours of
12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. in the evening of said day.
§ 11-3 ELECTIONS § 11-4
11:29
Chapter 15
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 55. Purchasing procedures — See Ch. 63.
§ 11-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 11-4
15:30
ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. II of Ch. 2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 15-1. Purpose; applicability.
This Code of Ethics consists of rules of ethical conduct for the officers and
employees of the Village of Johnson City and shall serve as a guide for their
official conduct. In addition to the provisions of this Code of Ethics, the
officers and employees of the Village of Johnson City shall be subject to
any prohibition contained in Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or of
any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in
contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 15-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer
or employee unless the context otherwise requires.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Johnson City, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a "municipal officer or employee" solely by reason of being
a civil defense volunteer.
§ 15-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Johnson City shall be subject to
and abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He or she shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift. He or she
shall not accept or receive any gift in the form of money under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him or her or could reasonably be expected to
influence him or her in the performance of his or her official duties or
was intended as a reward for any official action on his or her part. He or
she shall not accept or receive any gift having a value of seventy-five
dollars ($75.) or more, whether in the form of services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him or her or could reasonably be expected to
influence him or her in the performance of his or her official duties or
was intended as a reward for any official action on his or her part.17
B. Confidential information. He or she shall not disclose confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official
duties or use such information to further his or her personal interest.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 15-1 ETHICS § 15-3
15:31
§ 15-4. Filing injury, damage claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Johnson City or any agency thereof on
behalf of himself or herself or any member of his or her family arising out of
C. Representation before one's agency. He or she shall not receive
compensation, nor enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any municipal agency of which he or she is an officer, member or
employee or of any municipal agency over which he or she has
jurisdiction or to which he or she has the power to appoint any member,
officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He or she shall
not receive compensation, nor enter into any agreement, express or
implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any
matter before any agency of his or her municipality, whereby his or her
compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such
agency with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall
not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable
value of the services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he or she knows
thereof, any officer or employee of the Village of Johnson City, whether
paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives official
opinion to the Board of Trustees or to any other board, commission or
agency of the Village of Johnson City, including the Binghamton-
Johnson City Joint Sewage Board, on any matter pending before any
such board, commission or agency shall publicly disclose on the official
record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other
private interest he or she has in such matter.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He or she shall not invest or
hold any investment directly in any financial, business, commercial or
other private transaction which creates a conflict with his or her official
duties.
G. Private employment. He or she shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for
or promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his or her official duties.
H. Future employment. He or she shall not, after the termination of service
or employment with such municipality, appear before the Board of
Trustees or any board, commission or agency of the Village of Johnson
City, including the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Board, in
relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he or she
personally participated during the period of his or her service or
employment or which was under his or her active consideration.
§ 15-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 15-4
15:32
any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized
or permitted by law.
§ 15-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
§ 15-6. Penalties.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
A. The mayor of the Village of Johnson City shall cause a copy of this Code
of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of
Johnson City within thirty (30) days after its adoption. Each officer and
employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon the duties of his or her office or employment.
B. Failure to distribute any copy of the Code of Ethics or failure of any
officer or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty
of compliance with such code, nor the enforcement of the provisions
thereof, pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 806 of the General Municipal
Law.18
18.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 15-4 ETHICS § 15-6
15:33

ARTICLE II
Board of Ethics
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. III of Ch. 2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 15-7. Created; membership.
A Board of Ethics is hereby established for the Village of Johnson City. The
Board of Ethics shall consist of at least three (3) members, a majority of
whom are not otherwise officers or employees of the Village of Johnson City,
and shall include at least one (1) member who is an elected or appointed
officer or employee of the Village of Johnson City. The members shall be
appointed by the Mayor to serve at his or her pleasure.
§ 15-8. Duties; amendments to Code of Ethics.
The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to officers and employees
of the Village of Johnson City with respect to Article 18 of the New York
General Municipal Law and with respect to the Code of Ethics of the Village
of Johnson City. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to the
written request of any officer or employee of the Village of Johnson City
under such rules and regulations as the Board of Ethics may prescribe
and shall have the advice of counsel employed by the Board of Ethics or,
if none, the Village Attorney. In addition, the Board of Ethics may make
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of amendments
to the Code of Ethics of the Village of Johnson City upon the request of the
Board of Trustees. At its option, the Board of Ethics may refer matters to
the Broome County Board of Ethics.
§ 15-7 ETHICS § 15-8
15:35
Chapter 23
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 23-1. Authorization.
The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City hereby consents and
authorizes, pursuant to Public Housing Law § 31, the Town of Union
Housing Authority to act as the Public Housing Authority in and for said
Village of Johnson City, the same as if the Town of Union Housing Authority
had been created especially for said Village of Johnson City.
Chapter 35
MEETINGS
§ 35-1. Time.19
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City shall meet at 7:30 p.m.
in the evening on the first Monday in January of each year hereafter, except
that if said day shall fall upon the first day of January in any year, then said
Board of Trustees shall meet at 7:30 p.m. in the evening on the following
day and such meeting shall be known as the "annual meeting" of the Board
of Trustees.20
Chapter 39
NEWSLETTER, PUBLICATION OF
§ 39-1. Establishment; guidelines.21
A local law is hereby established permitting the Village of Johnson City
to publish and distribute a village newsletter at village expense. Said
newsletter shall be published no more than four (4) times a year at a cost
not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.) per issue. No more than seven
thousand (7,000) copies of said newsletter shall be published per issue with
a maximum of four (4) pages each.
§ 39-2. Contents.
The newsletter shall contain information relating to the official acts and
meetings of village officials, employees, boards, commissions, departments
and other agencies of the village.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
20.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, Effect of local law on Village Law, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 15-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 39-2
23:36
Chapter 43
NEWSPAPERS, OFFICIAL
§ 43-1. Newspapers designated.
The following are hereby designated official newspapers of the Village of
Johnson City: the Evening Press and Sun Bulletin, or such other newspaper
of general circulation within the Town of Union and Village of Johnson City
as the Board may determine.
§ 43-2. Authority to choose one newspaper.
The Board of Trustees shall by resolution at the annual meeting designate a
newspaper of general circulation within the village and the Town of Union
as the official newspaper.
Chapter 51
PARKS AND RECREATION, ADMINISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 188.
§ 51-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to amend § 243, Subdivisions 1 and 2, and
§ 244 of the General Municipal Law as they apply to the Village of Johnson
City.
§ 51-2. Establishment.
In the Village of Johnson City there is hereby established a Recreation
Commission which shall establish and direct athletic and recreational
programs in parks, playgrounds and neighborhood recreation centers.
§ 51-3. Membership; terms. [Amended 6-20-1995 by L.L. No.
5-1995]
The Recreation Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who are
residents of the village or of such other municipality or school districts as
shall, pursuant to agreement with the village, contribute to the expense of
operating and maintaining any such playgrounds and recreation centers, to
be appointed by the Board of Trustees for terms of five (5) years each or
until their successors are appointed. The members of the Commission shall
be appointed for terms of office as follows: one (1) member for a term of one
(1) year; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; one (1) member for a
§ 39-2 NEWSPAPERS, OFFICIAL § 51-3
43:37
term of three (3) years; one (1) member for a term of four (4) years; one (1)
member for a term of five (5) years.
§ 51-4. Organization.
The members of the Recreation Commission established pursuant to this
chapter shall elect from their own number a Chairman and Secretary and
other necessary officers to serve for one (1) year and may employ such
persons as may be needed, as authorized by this chapter and pursuant
to law, provided that in the Village of Johnson City the prior approval of
the Board of Trustees is granted for such employment. Such a Recreation
Commission shall have power to adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of
all business within its jurisdiction.
Chapter 55
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 15.
Meetings — See Ch. 35.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 67.
Terms of office — See Ch. 75.
§ 51-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 51-4
55:38
ARTICLE I
Sick Leave
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Secs. 2-2 through 2-6 of Art. I of Ch. 2 of the
1973 Code]
§ 55-1. Beginning of accumulation.
Sick leave for new employees shall start accumulating at the date of
employment. Sick leave shall be deducted at the rate of one day for a
regular workday.
§ 55-2. Computation for non-duty-connected injury or illness;
maximum accumulation. [Amended 9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 18-1985]
Employees shall accumulate sick leave at the rate of one day per month of
full-time employment. Sick leave may be accumulated up to 300 days.
§ 55-3. Option to receive pay in lieu of additional leave. [Amended
10-9-1978 by L.L. No. 9-1978; 9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985]
§ 55-4. Records.
An accurate record of all sick time shall be kept by the Village Clerk, and
all department heads shall submit monthly to said Clerk such information
as may be necessary in the keeping of such records.
§ 55-5. Bonus payment of unused leave upon retirement. [Amended
10-9-1978 by L.L. No. 9-1978; 9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 16-1985]
A. Any full-time employee, regardless of date of hire, may, after he or she
accumulates 150 days of sick leave, elect to receive pay for additional
days of sick leave in lieu of accumulating them. However, no more than
12 days of sick leave may be paid to an employee in any one fiscal year.
B. The Village Treasurer shall promulgate rules to implement this section.
A. Employees, regardless of date of hire, who retire (or die) prior to July 1,
1986, shall receive, as a retirement bonus (or their spouse or estate in
the event of death), pay for all unused sick leave up to the maximum of
300 days computed at the rate of pay at the time of retirement or death.
B. Employees, regardless of date of hire, who retire (or die) after June 30,
1986, shall have no unused sick leave paid to them (or their spouse or
estate in case of their death) upon retirement or death.
§ 55-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 55-5
55:39

ARTICLE II
Longevity Pay
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Sec. 2-7 of Art. I of Ch. 2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 55-6. Longevity pay; loss upon employment termination;
exception.
A. Full-time employees, whether regular or provisional, who have been
employed steadily shall be entitled to additional pay, to be known as
"longevity pay," in the amount of $100 per year, beginning on the fifth
anniversary date of their employment; in the amount of an additional
$100 per year beginning on the tenth anniversary date of their
employment; in the amount of an additional $100 per year, beginning on
the fifteenth anniversary date of their employment; in the amount of an
additional $100 per year beginning on the twentieth anniversary date of
their employment; and in the amount of an additional $100 per year
beginning on the twenty-fifth anniversary date of their employment,
making a total longevity pay of $500 per year for employees who have
been steadily employed for 25 years or more.
B. Any employee who is voluntarily separated from village employment
will lose all time that may have been accumulated toward longevity. Any
employee who is granted a leave of absence from employment to
complete his or her education shall retain the time he or she has
accumulated prior to the leave of absence and shall commence
accumulating additional time upon his or her return to employment. If
discharged or if employment is terminated for cause, there will be no
accumulation of longevity pay.
§ 55-6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 55-6
55:41

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)22
§ 55-7. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Health Insurance, adopted 9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 15-1985
(Sec. 2-10 of the 1973 Code), was repealed 5-29-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001.
§ 55-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 55-7
55:43

ARTICLE IV
Drug Screening
[Adopted 12-1-1992]
§ 55-8. Testing required; psychological profiles.
Effective January 1, 1993, all persons thereafter hired by the village as fulltime
employees shall be hired, consistent with all applicable federal and
state statutes, conditioned on their satisfactory completion of a screening
test to detect the presence of illegal drugs and, for those persons to be hired
as members of the Fire or Police Departments, conditioned further on their
completion of a satisfactory psychological evaluation.
§ 55-9. Administering of tests and profiles.
The Mayor is authorized to enter into negotiations with health care
providers for the administering of the drug tests and psychological profiles,
subject to ratification by the Board of Trustees.
§ 55-8 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 55-9
55:45
Chapter 59
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of parks and recreation — See
Ch. 51.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 188.
Sewers — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 236.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 240.
§ 59-1. Creation.23
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall be the head of the Department. All
employees assigned thereto shall perform their duties subject to the
supervision of the Superintendent.
§ 59-2. Powers and duties.24
The Department of Public Works shall have charge of the supervision over
the care, maintenance and construction of all streets, sidewalks, alleys and
public ways; the construction, operation and maintenance of all stormwater
and sanitary sewers; and all street curbs, gutters and drains and the
appurtenances thereto. The Department shall also be responsible for
garbage and refuse collection, all parks and all other duties assigned to it by
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City and shall equip, operate
and maintain all parks and playgrounds.
§ 59-3. Assignment of properties.
All physical properties of the village not assigned to some other department
or officer shall be and are hereby assigned to the Department of Public
Works.
§ 59-4. Custodian of tools.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be custodian of all tools,
equipment and other personal property belonging to the village and not
assigned to the care of the village or any other public officer.
§ 59-5. Superintendent of Public Works.
In the Village of Johnson City, there is hereby created the office of
Superintendent of Public Works. Such office shall be in the unclassified
service of the civil service.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 55-9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 59-5
59:46
Chapter 63
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 63-1. Compliance required.
All purchases by the Village of Johnson City or its boards, commissions,
departments, officers or employees shall be governed by the following
regulations.
§ 63-2. Governing statute.
Purchases for which competitive bids are required, according to the
provisions of Article 5-A of the General Municipal Law, shall be governed
by the provisions of that statute. A purchase order shall be issued by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer upon the acceptance of a competitive bid.
§ 63-3. Purchase orders.
A purchase order shall be prepared concurrently with or shortly after any
purchase. One (1) copy of the purchase order shall go to the vendor, one
(1) to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and one (1) to remain in the department's
file.
§ 63-4. Exemptions.
The following purchases shall be exempt from the purchase order
requirements:
§ 63-5. Contents of purchase orders.
All purchase orders submitted to the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall contain
the following:
A. Utility and other services regularly billed.
B. Newspaper publications as required by the General Municipal Law.
C. Inconsequential items or services purchased on a demand basis. These
will be totaled at the end of the month, and the total for each line item
will be put on a purchase order and submitted to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
A. Quantity.
B. Item description.
C. Budget code.
D. Estimated cost.
E. Estimated total amounts.
§ 59-5 PURCHASING PROCEDURES § 63-6
63:47
§ 63-6. Encumbrance.
Purchase orders received by the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office shall be
encumbered by the end of the month in which they are received.
§ 63-7. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is control the budget, to record village liabilities
and to provide cogent and timely information to the Village Board of
Trustees. It is also the intent of this chapter to lay the groundwork for the
institution of a central purchasing department when such a department is
deemed feasible.
Chapter 67
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 55.
§ 67-1. Residence requirement for Village Treasurer.
The Village Treasurer of the Village of Johnson City need not be a resident
of the Village of Johnson City, but must be a resident of Broome County.
Chapter 75
TERMS OF OFFICE
§ 75-1. Official year designated.
The official year of and for the Village of Johnson City shall hereafter begin
at 12:00 noon on the first day of January and end at 12:00 noon on the first
day of each January thereafter.
§ 75-2. Terms of office of Mayor and Trustees. [Amended 7-19-1971;
9-4-1984 by L.L. No. 12-1984]
The term of office of the Mayor elected for a full term shall be four (4)
official years and of each Trustee elected for a full term shall be two (2)
official years.
§ 75-3. Applicability to Village Law.
This chapter shall vary and supersede § 3-302 of the Village Law of the State
of New York only to the extent provided herein.
§ 63-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 75-4
67:48
§ 75-4. Term of Village Justice.25
The term of office of each Village Justice elected thereafter (after November
1948) shall commence at 12:00 noon on the first day of January in each
subsequent fourth year.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 84
ADOPT-A-ROAD-AND-LOT PROGRAM
§ 84-1. Petition to participate.
Any not-for-profit corporation or any other organization or association may
petition the Board of Trustees to participate in the Adopt-A-Road-And-Lot
Program.
§ 84-2. Application requirements.
Such applicant shall complete a form setting forth the names and addresses
of all participants, either on an individual or group basis. Such application
may be obtained from the Village Clerk.
§ 84-3. Application review.
The application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, who may forward
the application to the appropriate departments or divisions of the Village of
Johnson City for review and comment as to the feasibility and compatibility
of the organization or group participating in the cleanup and care program.
§ 84-4. Authorization by Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees, after receipt and review of the recommendations of
the Director of Public Services and the reports of the proper departments
and divisions of the government of the Village of Johnson City, will adopt
a resolution authorizing the organization or group to begin a program of
care and maintenance of said road or lot. Thereafter, and before any work is
undertaken by the organization or group, a duly authorized representative
of the organization or group shall sign an Adopt-A-Road Agreement on
a form furnished by the Village Clerk and shall furnish all other
documentation called for in that agreement. Only after such agreement has
been signed by the Mayor shall any work begin.
§ 84-5. Additional application requirements.
The application for participation in this program shall set forth what steps
and what actions the particular organization or group is going to take to
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 75-4 ADOPT-A-ROAD-AND-LOT PROGRAM § 84-5
84:49
provide the continuous care and maintenance of the road from debris, trash
and refuse. At a minimum, the applicant shall agree to pick up litter and
plant flowers, shrubs or ground cover, if applicable, and maintain the same.
§ 84-6. Request for review; recommendation by Board of Trustees.
After a period of not less than six (6) months, the organization or group
which has petitioned the Board of Trustees shall request the appropriate
departments and divisions of this municipal government to review its action
over a six-month period, and the departments and divisions of the Village of
Johnson City shall then report their findings to the Board of Trustees. After
the governing body has received the reports of departments which have
reviewed and inspected the work efforts and after a committee, consisting
of members of said Board appointed by the Mayor, shall review the area,
the adoption of a resolution to post said road or lot as an adopted road
or adopted lot shall then be recommended to the Board of Trustess, and
the Board of Trustees shall then commend the organization or group for its
efforts.
§ 84-7. Erection of signs.
If a road or lot is adopted after the procedures have been followed as set
forth herein, an appropriate sign or signs shall be erected in a prominent
place displaying the fact that this road or lot has been adopted under
this program and is qualified as a road or lot appropriately cared for and
maintained by the adoptive group.
§ 84-8. Participants not deemed municipal employees; village held
harmless.
The organization or group which performs any work or services under this
program shall not be deemed to be an employee of the Village of Johnson
City but merely volunteers, and the Village of Johnson City shall be held
harmless from any negligent or careless acts of the organization or group
and performance of any functions under the program, and in this connection
the organization shall furnish to the Village Clerk satisfactory evidence of
liability insurance coverage, covering the group's proposed activities and
naming the Village of Johnson City thereon as an additional insured. The
applicant further agrees not to permit anyone under the age of twelve (12)
years to participate in the program.
§ 84-9. Equipment.
The Village of Johnson City shall not supply any tools, equipment or supplies
for this program. Any and all tools, equipment or supplies shall be furnished
by the volunteers.
Chapter 88
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 84-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 88-1
88:50
§ 88-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited by the following short title: "A Local
Law Regulating Burglar, Fire and Other Emergency Alarms and Fees in the
Village of Johnson City."
§ 88-2. Purpose.
Response on the part of police patrol units or firemen on any alarm not
only endangers the lives of the persons who are proceeding to the scene
but also civilians along the way. All caution possible is used in making
these responses, but there is always the element of danger. It is hereby
determined to benefit the health and general welfare of the citizens of
the Village of Johnson City to discourage and minimize false alarms when
they are caused by human error or malfunctions of the equipment at the
subscriber's terminals.
§ 88-3. Definitions. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM REVIEW BOARD — The Alarm Review Board shall consist of the
Police Chief or his designee, Fire Chief or his designee, Director of Planning
and up to two additional persons appointed by the Mayor.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which emits
an audible response which is intended to alert persons outside a premises
to the existence of a hazard or emergency, or which is intended to alert
emergency agencies by automatically dialing an emergency agency, or
which is connected to a private answer point for the purpose of reporting
such alarms to emergency agencies, or which is directly connected to
the emergency communications center or other emergency agency. Alarm
system does not include any such device on a motor vehicle.
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH — An alarm dispatch request to the Police
Department or Fire Department and the responding agency finds no
evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense, fire or medical
emergency or weather related cause after having completed a timely
investigation of the alarm site. Alarm dispatch requests caused by actual
criminal offense, or with evidence of a criminal attempt, actual fire, actual
medical emergency or weather related causes shall not be considered a
false alarm dispatch.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible signaling device to be activated outside the premises
within which the system is installed.
§ 88-4. Automatic discontinuance device required.
All at-scene audible alarm systems must be installed with a time-out timer
which will discontinue the signal after a predetermined length of time
§ 88-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 88-4
88:51
in order to prevent unnecessary harassment of area residents when it is
impossible to locate someone to turn off the alarm.
§ 88-5. Local alarms.
All local alarm systems shall become deactivated and silenced automatically
after a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. Police and/or fire officials
may disable an audible alarm signal that has not been silenced prior to
the expiration of the fifteen-minute period and shall not be liable for any
damage that may result.
§ 88-6. Maintenance.
Any and all emergency alarms in the Village must be adequately
maintained. The owner of an alarm system shall maintain the premises
and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false
alarm dispatches, make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a
representative to respond to the alarm system's location within one hour
when notified by the Village to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises; and
not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of
an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
§ 88-7. False alarms fines.
An alarm user shall be subject to warnings and fines depending on the
number of false alarm dispatches emitted from an alarm system within a
calendar year based upon the following schedule:
Number of False
Alarm Dispatches Action Taken Fines
1 Written notice and warning letter #1 $0
2 Written notice and warning letter #2 $0
3 Written notice and fine $50
4 Written notice and fine $75
Additional Written notice with fine increasing
$25 per violation
§ 88-8. Notification to user; failure to pay charges. [Amended
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. The Police Department and/or the Fire Department shall notify the
alarm user within five days, by first class mail, of said false alarm
dispatch, and within 30 days of such notice, the alarm user may appeal
to the Alarm Review Board by showing written proof demonstrating
that the alarm was not a false alarm, and the Alarm Review Board shall
have 30 business days from receipt of said appeal to determine the
appeal and provide written findings. The Alarm Review Board may
§ 88-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 88-8
88:52
Chapter 92
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 132.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 188.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
§ 92-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Village of Johnson City as an exercise of its police
power to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the village by adopting this chapter. The Village Board has found and
determined that the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages
by persons under circumstances evincing an intent to consume the contents
of such open containers on certain public lands and the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on certain public lands, except under controlled
conditions, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the village. Such possession and consumption contributes to the
development of unsanitary conditions, disorderly gatherings and the
creation of nuisances.
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the findings of the
Police Department and/or Fire Department that said dispatch
constituted a false alarm dispatch.
B. Should the alarm user fail to pay any and all alarm fines within 30 days
of receipt of notice or receipt of appeal denial, whichever is later, the
Police and/or Fire Department shall certify to the Village Clerk the
amount of the penalties.
(1) If the alarm user is the owner of the real property which contains
the residence or business, all alarm fines and penalties shall
become a lien upon the real property and shall be included in the
next tax bill rendered to the owner, unless paid before, and shall be
collected in the same manner as other taxes against the real
property.
(2) If the owner of the real property is not the same person or business
as the alarm user and the alarm user fails to pay any penalty
assessed, the Village Attorney may institute a suit in the Village's
name in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover penalties,
costs and disbursements, including attorney's fees, incurred in the
collection of penalties.
§ 88-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 92-2
92:53
§ 92-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any public highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground,
parking area or school property.
§ 92-3. Prohibitions.
§ 92-4. Exceptions.
The above prohibitions shall not apply when a permit or license has been
issued by the Village of Johnson City or other appropriate agency for the
public use of any public highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground or
parking area for any authorized function, including but not limited to fairs,
parades, block parties and carnivals.
§ 92-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the aforesaid provision shall be punishable by a minimum
fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.).
Chapter 96
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 188.
A. No person shall have in his or her possession any open container
containing any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the village
under circumstances evincing an intent to consume the contents of said
container upon any such public land.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land
within the village.
§ 92-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 92-5
92:54
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. I of Ch. 4 of the 1973 Code]
§ 96-1. Prohibited at large.
No person owning or having charge thereof shall permit any animal or fowl
to run at large in any public street or in any public place or to stray upon
the premises of another person in the Village.
§ 96-2. through § 96-3. (Reserved)26
26.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 96-2, Keeping livestock generally, as amended, and 96-3, Keeping
livestock for sale; permit fee, as amended, were repealed 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 10-2017.
§ 96-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 96-2
92:55

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)27
§ 96-4. through § 96-12. (Reserved)
27.Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Fowl and Poultry, adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. II of Ch. 4 of the
1973 Code, as amended, was repealed 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 10-2017.
§ 96-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 96-4
92:57

ARTICLE III
Exotic Animals
[Adopted 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 96-13. Scope.
§ 96-14. Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, corporation
or other entity to do any of the following:
A. Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
EXOTIC ANIMALS — Reptiles, ferrets, snakes, tropical birds, turtles,
and any species of animal whose natural or usual habitat within the
State of New York is either in the wild or in a zoo but which is being
housed or sustained by a person.
B. Exception. This article shall not apply to licensed veterinarians or to
hospitals operated by licensed veterinarians.
A. Permit or allow any exotic animal in their possession or control to run at
large or to cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a
nuisance upon the premises of a person other than the owner or person
harboring the animal.
B. Permit or allow any exotic animal in their possession or control to
engage in habitual howling or other noises so as to create a nuisance.
C. Permit or allow any exotic animal in their possession or control to
chase, bite, snap at, jump upon, or otherwise harass or bother any
person in such a manner as to reasonably cause intimidation or
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
D. Maintain or house exotic animals is such a manner or quantity as to be
unsanitary or odor-bearing or unhealthy for the exotic animals involved.
E. Cause, permit or allow any exotic animal in their possession or control
to be in any public area of the Village.
§ 96-13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 96-14
92:59
Chapter 100
ANTENNAS
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TELEVISION AERIAL OR ANTENNA — Includes an antenna and its
supports constructed outside of a building but excludes aerials or antennas
used for broadcasting purposes by a duly licensed broadcasting company.
§ 100-2. Permit required.
No person shall install or cause to be installed any television aerial or
antenna in excess of ten (10) feet in height without first having obtained a
permit from the Building Inspector of the village.
§ 100-3. Regulation and inspection.
The Building Inspector or anyone designated by him or her is hereby
empowered to regulate, inspect and reinspect all television aerials and
antennas which are installed or which may hereafter be installed in the
village.
§ 100-4. Unsafe installations; penalties for offenses.
§ 100-5. Height.
No television aerial or antenna shall be more than the height prescribed
by the Building Inspector and which such Inspector shall find reasonable in
each individual case.
A. Notice to correct. When an installation inspected pursuant to § 100-3 is
found to be unsafe to life or property or to conflict with the regulations
herein provided or any ordinance or regulation of the village, the
Building Inspector shall notify the person owning or using such
television aerial or television antenna to place the same in a safe and
secure condition within a reasonable time, such reasonable time not to
exceed ten (10) days.
B. Failure to correct. Any person failing or refusing to repair, change or
remove the same within the time stipulated, after notification to repair,
change or remove the same, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed
in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, of this Code, and
the Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to remove
or cause to be removed any such equipment or part thereof constructed
and maintained in violation of the rules herein provided.
§ 96-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 100-6
100:60
§ 100-6. Construction; installation; location generally.
Television aerials and antennas shall be constructed and installed in a
strong and durable manner. Such aerials and antennas shall be constructed
of metal or other fire-resistant materials equivalent in strength and shall be
so located that a suitable clearance is had to prevent any accidental contact
by sagging, swinging or otherwise with any electric or power lines or signal
wires.
§ 100-7. Conductors.
No television aerial or antenna or counterpoise conductors shall be
attached to or suspended from any electric light or power, telephone,
telegraph, fire or police alarm or installed over or above any public street,
alley, highway or other public place. Television antenna or counterpoise
conductors, when passing over roofs of buildings, must clear the highest
point by at least six (6) feet and must be so installed as to prevent accidental
contact with flagpoles, chimneys or metal parts of the buildings. Antenna or
counterpoise conductors shall not be attached to chimneys.
§ 100-8. Lead-in wires.
Lead-in wires from television aerials and antennas shall be of copper or
other approved metal and shall continuously be separated from any electric
light or power wires within the structure.
§ 100-9. Grounding.
All television antennas or aerials shall be either permanently grounded by
means of a copper conductor not smaller than No. 6 American Wire Gauge
or provided with a lightning arrester which shall be properly grounded and
approved by the Building Inspector or his or her designee.
Chapter 104
AUCTIONS
§ 104-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean and include the
following:
PERSONAL PROPERTY — All goods, wares, merchandise, commodities,
compounds, things, chattels, jewelry and all other tangible personal
property of whatsoever form or nature, but does not include real property.
PUBLIC AUCTION — Any public officer to sell personal property to the
highest bidder or to the person offering to pay the highest price therefor,
and shall be without qualifications or reservations, unless at the time of
the offer of each article or parcel and before any bids are asked thereon a
minimum price therefor be publicly stated.
§ 100-6 AUCTIONS § 104-1
104:61
SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION — Shall not include judicial sales, sales by
public officers in the manner prescribed by law, sales pursuant to statute
to satisfy liens on the property sold ands resales pursuant to statute of
property retaken under a conditional sales contract.
§ 104-2. Applicability to judicial sales.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit judicial sales by auctioneers
without a license.
§ 104-3. Applicability to regular retail business.
No license shall be necessary under the provisions of this chapter for the
operation of a regular retail business.
§ 104-4. Applicability to auctions for charitable purposes.
§ 104-5. Licensed auctioneer to conduct auctions.
No sale at public auction of any personal property, as defined in this chapter,
shall be held within the village unless such sale be directly conducted by an
auctioneer licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 104-6. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license as auctioneer shall present to the Village
Clerk a written application signed and duly verified by him or her, which
application shall contain the following information:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit auction sales for charitable
purposes by civic, religious or fraternal organizations, provided that the
following requirements are fulfilled:
(1) A written application setting forth compliance with this section is
filed with the Village Clerk, who is hereby authorized to issue a
permit to conduct such auction to such applicant without payment
of a fee.
(2) A permit as authorized by Subsection A(1) is issued prior to the
holding of the auction.
(3) All proceeds are used for charitable purposes, except that an
auctioneer duly licensed under this chapter may be paid.
(4) All items sold at the auction are donated.
B. All the provisions of § 104-20 except those pertaining to a filed
inventory shall apply to auctions held under this section.
A. The applicant's full name, age, residence by street, number and place
and present occupation.
§ 104-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 104-6
104:62
§ 104-7. Bond required; amount; approval.
The applicant for an auctioneer's license shall also present to the Village
Clerk with his or her application for such license a bond to the village
executed by a duly authorized surety company in the penalty of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.), conditioned that he or she will faithfully observe
the laws of the state and the ordinances of the village then in effect or
thereafter enacted and that he or she will faithfully perform his or her
duties as such auctioneer and render such accounts and pay such debts as
may be required of him or her by law. Such bond shall be approved by the
Village Attorney.
§ 104-8. License fee; term of license.
The fee for a general auctioneer's license for one (1) year is hereby fixed
at and shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.), and except where a
general auctioneer's license is issued, the fee for an auctioneer's license is
hereby fixed at and shall be the sum of three dollars ($3.) for the first day
and three dollars ($3.) for each successive day during which such auction
shall be conducted. Said fee shall be payable to the Village Clerk before the
granting of the permit provided for in § 104-11.
§ 104-9. Issuance of license.
If the Village Clerk is satisfied as to the good character, competency and
integrity of the applicant and upon payment of the license fee and approval
of the bond as required herein, such Clerk shall issue to the applicant an
auctioneer's license, authorizing him or her to conduct auction sales in the
village as provided by law and by this chapter.
§ 104-10. License not to authorize certain sales.
No license issued as herein provided shall have or permit any person to
whom such license is issued the right of privilege of conducting a transient
sale of bankruptcy or damaged stocks.
B. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States and a resident of
the State of New York.
C. The applicant's qualifications, including education and business
engaged in during the past five (5) years.
D. Where and when the applicant has been previously licensed as an
auctioneer.
E. Whether any previous license as auctioneer was canceled or revoked.
F. Such further facts as may be required by the Village Clerk to show the
good character, competency and integrity of the applicant.
§ 104-6 AUCTIONS § 104-11
104:63
§ 104-11. Permit required to conduct auction.
No person shall sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction or cause
to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction within the village
any livestock or any personal property except used household furniture and
effects purchased from or sold on account of a householder who has actually
used such furniture and effects in his or her household in the village without
a permit by the Board of Trustees to hold such sale, which permit shall fix
the time of commencement and the duration of such sale.
§ 104-12. Application for permit.
§ 104-13. Statement of inventory to be attached to permit
application.
There shall be attached to the permit application provided for herein a
written sworn inventory of the personal property to be offered for sale,
specifying as to each item the quantity, quality, kind and grade and the
material of which it is composed, with a distinctive number for each item,
and that each and every article contained in said inventory is a part of the
stock of goods of said person and has been a part of the stock of goods
A. Required. Any person intending to sell at public auction any personal
property, as defined in this chapter, within the village except used
household furniture and effects purchased from or sold on account of a
householder who has actually used such furniture and effects in his or
her household in the village shall make application to the Board of
Trustees for a permit to hold such sale at public auction, and if such
permit is granted, the sale may be conducted as provided in this
chapter.
B. Form, contents, time of filing. Such permit application shall be in
writing and shall be verified and must be filed with the Village Clerk not
less than fifteen (15) days before the time for the commencement of any
such sale. The permit application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the public auctioneer.
(3) The street and length of time for which it is desired to conduct such
sale.
(4) The place or places within the village at which for the two (2) years
last preceding the filing of said application the applicant has
continuously conducted his or her business.
C. Verification. Such application shall be verified by the applicant if he or
she is an individual or, if the applicant is a partnership, by one (1) of the
partners or, if such applicant is a corporation, by an officer of such
corporation.
§ 104-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 104-13
104:64
of said person for a period of at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of
the filing of said application, and that no property purchased, procured or
placed in stock specifically for such public auction is included therein, and
is the property of the seller and not subject to conditional bills of sale or
chattel mortgages or pledge and that all property listed in the inventory
is free and clear of all conditional bills of sale, chattel mortgages, liens or
encumbrances except as specifically listed in the inventory.
§ 104-14. Examination of property specified in inventory.
The Board of Trustees before issuing a permit to conduct an auction shall
have the right, either personally or by such person duly authorized by them,
to examine the personal property specified in the inventory to be offered for
sale to determine whether said inventory correctly sets forth the items to be
sold.
§ 104-15. Restrictions upon issuance of permit.
No permit shall be issued to any person to conduct a sale at public auction
unless each and every article contained in the inventory of the property to
be sold has been a part of the stock of goods of said person for a period of at
least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the filing of the permit application
with the Village Clerk and unless the person applying for such permit shall
have been for a period of at least two (2) years preceding the date of the
filing of such application continuously engaged in business in the village,
dealing in the same kind of personal property as is to be offered for sale at
such public auction.
§ 104-16. Term of permit.
No permit shall be issued to conduct a sale at public auction for a longer
period than fifteen (15) consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, at any one (1) place in the village, and a period of at least twelve
(12) months must have elapsed after the conclusion of any auction sale
conducted before another permit shall be issued to the same applicant
or to any person for a sale to be conducted at the same place, except
that the Board of Trustees, in its discretion, may extend such period of
fifteen (15) days for an additional period of fifteen (15) days which shall run
consecutively from the date of the expiration of the first fifteen-day period,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
§ 104-17. Revocation of license and/or permit.
A. Generally. The Mayor may revoke any license granted to a public
auctioneer or any permit for the conduct of any sale at public auction
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if he or she shall have
cause to believe that the holder of such auctioneer's license and/or
permit to conduct such sale is violating any statute of the state relative
to auctions and auctioneers or any provision of this chapter. A
conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of such offense or
§ 104-13 AUCTIONS § 104-17
104:65
§ 104-18. Hours during which sale may be conducted.
Sales at public auction shall be held only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.,
and 6:00 p.m., unless a special permit is issued by the Board of Trustees
authorizing sales during other times. Application for a special permit shall
state the reasons why a special permit is requested and shall be directed
to the Board of Trustees and filed with the Village Clerk. The application
shall be separate and distinct from any other application required under this
chapter or any other section of the Code of Ordinances.
§ 104-19. Tagging, identification of articles offered for sale.
There shall be attached securely to each article to be offered for sale a
tag or label, upon which shall be plainly written or printed in the English
language a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the
material or substance of which such article is made or composed and the
distinctive number of such article on the itemized inventory filed with the
Village Clerk; if said article is one of those commonly classed as jewelry or
articles commonly carried by persons engaged in the jewelry business, the
tag shall state the percentage or carat of purity of such material; in case
the article is plated or overlaid, a true statement of the kind of plate and
the percentage of purity thereof and the kind of material or metal under
the plating; if the article is one commonly known as precious, semiprecious,
synthetic or imitation stones, the true names, weight, quality and color of
said stones; if watches or clocks, the true name of the manufacturers, the
number of jewels and adjustments and the country of manufacture; and if
any of such articles or part thereof is used or is secondhand, the length of
time the same has been in use and in a conspicuous place on said tag the
recovery upon a bond pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be conclusive evidence of such violation.
B. Notice and hearing. The Mayor may, upon the complaint of any person,
cause notice to be served upon the holder of an auctioneers' license
and/or holder of a permit to conduct a sale, specifying the grounds of
complaint or reason assigned for the revocation of such auctioneer's
license and/or permit to conduct a sale, which notice shall fix a time and
place at which the Mayor shall hear the evidence of the person making
such complaint and such other evidence as may be presented to him or
her or be in his or her possession, and the holder of such auctioneer's
license and/or the holder of such permit to conduct a sale shall have an
opportunity to be heard in his or her own defense. If the Mayor shall
believe that sufficient grounds therefor exist, he or she shall revoke
such auctioneer's license and/or such permit to conduct a sale.
C. Fee not to be refunded. Whenever any auctioneer's license and/or
permit to conduct a sale at public auction has been revoked, no refund
of any unearned portion of the fee for such license and/or permit shall
be made to the holder thereof.
§ 104-17 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 104-19
104:66
words "secondhand" or "used." Said tag in each and every case shall remain
upon the article and be delivered with the article to the purchaser.
§ 104-20. Acts prohibited during sale at public auction generally.
In addition to acts prohibited elsewhere in this chapter, no auctioneer or any
other person shall commit any of the following acts during sales at public
auction:
§ 104-21. Sale of property not included in inventory.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or any other person, through such
auctioneer, to sell, dispose of or offer to sell or dispose of any personal
property as defined in this chapter at a sale at public auction which has
not been included and described in the inventory with the application for a
permit to hold such sale.
§ 104-22. Private sales prohibited.
A. False representations. Make any false representations as to the
character, quality or condition, value or ownership of any property
offered for sale or falsely represent that such property is in whole or in
part bankrupt or insolvent stock or damaged goods or goods saved from
fire.
B. Substitution. Substitute any other article for the article sold to a bidder.
C. Withdrawal of article from sale after receipt of bid; bids by unqualified
persons. Bid in or withdraw from sale any article after receiving a
second bid therefor or receive any bid from a person not a bona fide
bidder at such sale or any person acting as a "capper," "booster" or
"shiller."
D. Employment of means to attract attention. Employ or permit to be
employed any bellman, crier, instrument of music or means of
attracting the attention of passersby other than a sign or flag.
E. Providing entertainment. Conduct a sale where entertainment for the
prospective bidders is provided on the premises where the sale is
conducted.
F. Compliance with chapter. Open or conduct any public auction sale until
all the provisions of this chapter have been complied with and a permit
for such sale obtained from the Board of Trustees.
A. During the time when and while an auction sale is being conducted, no
sales of any property, whether or not it is a part of the inventoried
property, shall be permitted within the same room or in any room
opening therefrom by private sale or otherwise than by public auction
sale.
§ 104-19 AUCTIONS § 104-22
104:67
§ 104-23. Sale to be to highest bidder.
When any article or combination of articles is offered for sale at public
auction, unless the auctioneer states a minimum price therefor before any
bid or offer is asked, the article or combination of articles shall be sold to
the person whose bid or offer is the highest offered if there is more than one
(1) bid or offer therefor.
§ 104-24. Report of articles sold.
At or before 10:00 a.m. of each morning during the continuation of an
auction sale, the person conducting the same shall file or cause to be filed
with the Village Clerk a complete list of the articles sold at such sale on
the previous day, showing the names and addresses of the purchasers and
the true price received for each article sold, attaching to such record an
affidavit that the same is a true and correct statement of all sales made on
such previous day and that no other articles were sold on said day. Such
daily reports shall be kept on file by the Village Clerk and open for public
inspection.
Chapter 108
BICYCLES, ROLLERBLADES, AND SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 108-1. Applicability of traffic regulations. [Amended 10-3-2017 by
L.L. No. 11-201728]
Every person riding a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard upon a street
or roadway of the Village shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
264, Vehicles and Traffic, of this Code which are applicable to the driver
of a vehicle, except as to specific regulations contained in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of said chapter which by their nature can have
no application.
B. No property not included in the inventory filed as hereinbefore required
shall be sold or offered for sale at public auction or private sale during
the time that such auction sale is being conducted in the same room or
in a room opening therefrom.
28.Editor's Note: This local law also changed the title of this chapter from "Bicycles" to its
current title.
§ 104-22 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 108-2
104:68
§ 108-2. Obedience to police officers, traffic-control devices.
[Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
Any person operating a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard upon the
public ways of the Village shall obey the instructions of police officers,
traffic signals, signs and other controlled devices applicable to a vehicle
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 108-3. Operation generally. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
11-2017]
No person riding a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard shall drive the
same or coast upon any street or sidewalk or proceed with the feet off the
pedals or without at least one hand on the handlebars or steering apparatus
or perform any trick or fancy riding upon any street or place in the Village.
§ 108-4. Speed. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
No person shall operate a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions existing at the
time and place.
§ 108-5. Riding on bicycles generally.
§ 108-6. Riding on right; care to be used in passing. [Amended
10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
Every person operating a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard on a
roadway shall ride as near the right-hand side of the roadway as practical
and exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in
the same direction.
§ 108-7. Emerging from alley or driveway; duty to yield right-of-way.
[Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
The operator of a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard emerging from an
alley, driveway or building, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk
area extending across any alley or driveway, shall stop and yield the right-ofway
to all pedestrians on said sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering
the roadway, shall stop and yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on said roadway.
A. Manner. A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride the permanent or regular seat attached thereto.
B. Passengers. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry another person
upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon.
§ 108-2 AUCTIONS § 108-8
104:69
§ 108-8. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street excepting upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle;
neither shall a bicycle be parked against a building in such a manner as to
obstruct pedestrian traffic.
§ 108-9. Clinging to vehicles. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
11-2017]
No person riding upon any bicycle, rollerblades, or skateboard shall attach
the same or himself or herself or hang onto any other moving vehicle.
§ 108-10. Riding in groups. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
11-2017]
Any person riding a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard in company with
others on bicycles, rollerblades, or skateboards must ride in single file.
§ 108-11. Carrying packages, etc. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
11-2017]
No person operating a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard shall carry any
package, bundle or article which obstructs the view of the operator or which
prohibits him or her from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars.
§ 108-12. Riding on sidewalks. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
11-2017]
§ 108-13. Riding in public parks, playgrounds. [Amended 10-3-2017
by L.L. No. 11-2017]
All persons are prohibited from riding a bicycle, rollerblades, or a
skateboard in any public park or playground.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard on a
sidewalk within any of the business sections of the Village.
B. No person 12 years or more of age, other than newspaper carriers on
delivery routes, shall ride a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard upon
any sidewalk in the Village.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, rollerblades, or a skateboard
upon any sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
§ 108-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 108-13
104:70
Chapter 110
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 162.
§ 110-1. State law applicable.
All of the provisions of §§ 475 to 499, inclusive, of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York and amendments thereto are hereby made a
part of this chapter.
§ 110-2. Conduct of game authorized; license required. [Amended
8-11-1992 by L.L. No. 9-1992]
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required
license to conduct the game of bingo on any day of the week, including
Sunday, within the territorial limits of the village, subject to the provisions
of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and Article 19-B
of the Executive Law.
§ 110-3. Scope of license requirements.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
shall conduct a bingo game or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect.
§ 110-4. Payment of rental for premises.
No bingo game shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the
operation of such game.
§ 110-5. Purchase of supplies and equipment.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 14-H
of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or
equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo
games from other than a supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law29
or from another authorized organization.
29.Editor's Note: See § 430 et seq. of the Executive Law.
§ 108-13 BINGO § 110-6
110:71
§ 110-6. Participation in management or operation of game.
No person except a bona fide member of an organization authorized to
conduct the game of bingo under the provisions of this chapter shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
§ 110-7. Remuneration for management or operation of game.
No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
§ 110-8. Maximum value of single prize.
No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.)
in any single game of bingo.
§ 110-9. Aggregate value of series of prizes.
No series of prizes on any one (1) bingo occasion shall aggregate more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
§ 110-10. Disposition of proceeds.
The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct the same.
§ 110-11. Sunday games. [Amended 8-11-1992 by L.L. No. 9-1992]
Pursuant to § 485 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York,
it shall be lawful for authorized organizations upon obtaining a license
pursuant to § 110-2 of the Code of the Village of Johnson City to conduct
games of bingo on the first day of the week commonly known and
designated as "Sunday," provided that no Sunday games commence earlier
than 12:00 noon.
§ 110-12. Unauthorized conduct of game, willful violation of
chapter to constitute misdemeanor.
The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
§ 110-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 110-12
110:72
Chapter 114
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 148.
Flammable gases — See Ch. 154.
Outdoor woodburning furnaces — See Ch.
184.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 114-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other sections of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 114-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof intended for
residential, business, industrial or other purposes.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 114-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY or CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 114-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 114-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 114-15A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 114-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 114-10 of this
chapter. The term “operating permit” shall also include an operating permit
§ 110-12 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-2
114:73
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Includes an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 114-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 114-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City.
§ 114-3. Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy or certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy or certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy or certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy or certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 114-15A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
§ 114-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-3
114:74
§ 114-4. Building permits.
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Board of Trustees of this Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience related
to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time
prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City to
serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Mayor with approval
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City to act under the
supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to assist
the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the powers and
fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer
by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the time prescribed by law,
obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service
training and other training as the State of New York shall require for
code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees of this Village.
§ 114-3 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-4
114:75
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 144 square feet (13.88 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one-or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of retractable window awnings supported by an
exterior wall of a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses);
(8) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(9) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances; or
(10) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
§ 114-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-4
114:76
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
§ 114-4 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-4
114:77
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in § 114-4D(5). Construction documents which
are accepted as part of the application for a building permit shall be
marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in writing or by
stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents shall be
retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the accepted
construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at
the work site so as to be available for use by the code enforcement
personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted construction
documents to the applicant shall not be construed as authorization to
commence work nor as an indication that a building permit will be
issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a building permit
is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this section may be renewed upon application by the permit
§ 114-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-4
114:78
§ 114-5. Construction inspections.
holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the application
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 114-16 Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
§ 114-4 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-5
114:79
§ 114-6. Stop-work orders.
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 114-16 Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. Where served by certified
mail, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not
required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be posted
upon the affected property. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy
§ 114-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-6
114:80
§ 114-7. Certificates of occupancy; certificates of compliance.
thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work
order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy
of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work orders. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 114-15, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be required
for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all
structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance. In addition, where applicable, the following documents,
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the
applicant for the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance,
shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance:
§ 114-6 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-7
114:81
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
(a) Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the
temporary occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion
thereof, prior to completion of the work which is the subject of
a building permit. However, in no event shall the Code
Enforcement Officer issue a temporary certificate unless the
Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building or
structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary
certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been
installed is operational, and that all required means of egress
from the building or structure have been provided. The Code
Enforcement Officer may include in a temporary certificate
such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or
appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and
intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which
§ 114-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-7
114:82
§ 114-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire fighting services for a
property within this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 114-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 118
of the Code of the Village of Johnson City, as now in effect or as hereafter
amended from time to time.
§ 114-10. Operating permits.
shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and
specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified
period of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit
holder shall undertake to bring the building or structure into
full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Code and the Energy Code.
D. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
E. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 114-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR section 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
§ 114-7 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-10
114:83
(c) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(d) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of this Village.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permit. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 114-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
§ 114-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-10
114:84
§ 114-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section, and
all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC Inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
§ 114-10 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-11
114:85
§ 114-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be required to,
perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
building or structure which contains an area of public assembly if
OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of
such building or structure at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be required to,
perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
building or structure occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such building or
structure at least once every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be required to,
perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
multiple dwelling not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this
section if OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of such multiple dwelling at intervals not exceeding the
interval specified in Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be required to,
perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
nonresidential building, structure, use or occupancy not included
in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such nonresidential
building, structure, use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the
interval specified in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 114-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 114-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
§ 114-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-12
114:86
§ 114-13. Recordkeeping.
§ 114-14. Program review and reporting.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy or certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 114-4 through 114-12, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Board of
Trustees of this Village a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors,
including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 114-13, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
§ 114-12 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-14
114:87
§ 114-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property personally or by certified mail. Where served by
certified mail, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not
required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be posted
upon the affected property. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at the
affected property personally or by posting and certified mail; provided,
however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence
shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Penalties. In accordance with § 382 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York, any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any
building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance,
temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice
or order issued by the Code Enforcement Personnel pursuant to any
provision of this chapter and any owner, builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents
or any other person taking part or assisting in the construction or use of
any building who shall knowingly violate any of the applicable
§ 114-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 114-15
114:88
provisions of law or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit or
certificate of the Code Enforcement Personnel made thereunder, shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of violation or
imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by § 382 of the
Executive Law of the State of New York, any person who violates any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, or any
term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Personnel pursuant to any provision of this chapter, shall
be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part
thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties
provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted
in the name of this Village.
E. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate
of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating
permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this Village, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Code Enforcement Officer of this
Village.
F. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 114-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 114-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
§ 114-15 BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION § 114-15
114:89
§ 114-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees
of this Village. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to
time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance
with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and
collected for the submission of applications, the issuance of building
permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits, certificates
of occupancy or certificates of compliance, temporary certificates,
operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and
other actions of the Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated
by this chapter.
§ 114-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees of this Village may, by resolution, authorize this
Village to enter into an agreement, in the name of this Village, with other
governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 117
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 208.
Solid waste — See Ch. 236.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 117-1. Legislative intent.
The Village of Johnson City has implemented an emergency telephone
system whereby an individual can dial a 911 telephone number in the event
of an emergency. A village-wide uniform numbering system of all buildings
will assist emergency personnel in responding efficiently and quickly to an
emergency. It is, therefore, in the best interest of the public health, safety
and welfare of the village to enact this chapter.
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
§ 114-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 117-2
117:90
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — The principal building or buildings on each lot and shall not
include any accessory building.
§ 117-3. Determination of buildings to be numbered.
The Building inspector shall be authorized to decide which building or
buildings on any particular lot shall be numbered.
§ 117-4. Designation of numbers; review of determination.
§ 117-5. Duty of building owners.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a building in the Village of Johnson
City to cause to be displayed thereon the street number of said building
on a post, mailbox or other structure at or within 30 feet of the curbline
where the driveway or entranceway to the building is located. At all times,
the owner of a building shall maintain such number in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 117-6. Size and display.
A. The Building Inspector shall designate separate numbers for buildings
which have no designated street number, and he shall also have the
authority to redesignate numbers for buildings when deemed
necessary.
B. Any property owner aggrieved by the determination of the Building
Inspector may seek review of that determination by the Broome County
Director of Emergency Services upon a written submission to the
Director setting forth the reasons for seeking such review. The Director
shall be authorized to confirm or modify or change the determination of
the Building Inspector in the exercise of his reasonable discretion, and
such determination shall be final and binding.
A. The figure or figures comprising the number are to be at least three
inches in height and shall be placed on the front of said building or on a
post or other structure in a prominent and conspicuous place and in
such manner as to be plainly legible and visible from the center of the
street when facing the building at all times between sunrise and sunset.
The color of said figures shall be in sharp contrast to the color of their
background. So far as the purpose or intent of this chapter is
concerned, the front of a building shall be construed as that side of the
building which faces the street, and the number or numbers shall be
displayed on such side of such building or premises.
B. The numbers shall be so placed that they will not be obstructed by
trees, shrubbery, porches or other extension of the building.
§ 117-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 117-6
117:91
§ 117-7. Display of other numbers prohibited.
The display of any house number other than the number authorized or
assigned by the Building Inspector is expressly prohibited.
§ 117-8. Noncompliance; notice; remedy; costs.
§ 117-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided
in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 118
C. Wherever practicable, said number shall be placed near some light or
source of illumination so that it may be readily seen at night.
D. Where the front of the building upon which the number is to be
displayed is more than 75 feet from the edge of the right-of-way
(whether improved or not) of the street or road serving the building, the
number shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, be
displayed on a post, mailbox or other structure visible from the road or
street and in no event farther back than 30 feet from said road or street
right-of-way.
E. In the event that more than one house has access from a single
driveway, a street number of the house must be displayed at each
location at which the driveway access diverges from the common
access.
A. Noncompliance deemed a violation. Any person, corporation,
partnership or other entity owning a building within the Village of
Johnson City refusing or neglecting for 30 days after notice from the
Building Inspector to place the proper designated number on said
building shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
B. Service of notice. The notice provided for in § 117-8A may be given by
personal service or by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address
of the owner as shown on the last assessment roll on file in the
Assessor's office.
C. Numbering of building by village. In the event of the neglect or refusal
of any owner, after notice to cause said building to be properly
numbered, the Building Inspector of the Village of Johnson City may
cause said building to be properly numbered.
D. Report; assessment of costs. The Building Inspector shall report the
cost of numbering said building to the Village Clerk, and said cost shall
be assessed as a lien against the property of the owner and collected in
the same manner as other village taxes.
§ 117-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 117-9
118:92
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 140.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Plumbing — See Ch. 200.
§ 118-1. Purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Village of Johnson
City. Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage
by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration. Vacant buildings not
properly secured at doorways and windows also serve as an attractive
nuisance for young children who may be injured therein, as well as a
point of congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building
may also serve as a place of rodent infestation, thereby creating a health
menace to the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
safety, health protection, and general welfare of persons and property in the
Village by requiring that such unsafe buildings be repaired or demolished
and removed.
§ 118-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is located in
any zone within the Village.
§ 118-3. Investigation and report.
When, in his/her own opinion or upon receipt of information that a building
is or may become unsafe to the general public; or is open at the doorways
and windows making it accessible to and an object of attraction to minors,
as well as to vagrants and other trespassers; or is or may become a place
of rodent infestation; or presents any other danger to the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the public; or is unfit for the purposes for
which it may lawfully be used, the Building Inspector shall cause or make
an inspection thereof and report in writing to the Board of Trustees his/
her findings and recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and
removal.
§ 118-4. Consideration of report; order to repair or demolish.
Upon receipt of a report prepared as stated in § 118-3, the Board of
Trustees shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution determine,
if in its opinion the report so warrants, that such building is unsafe and
dangerous and order its repair, if the same can be safely repaired, or its
§ 117-9 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 118-4
118:93
demolition and removal, and further order that a notice be served upon the
persons in the manner provided herein.
§ 118-5. Contents of notice.
Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following:
§ 118-6. Service of notice.
The said notice shall be served by personal service of a copy thereof upon
the owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee, or any person having
a vested or contingent interest in such unsafe building as shown by the
records of the Village Treasurer or of the county clerk, or if no such
person can be reasonably found, by mailing such owner by registered mail
a copy of such notice directed to his last known address as shown by the
above records; and by personal service of a copy of such notice upon any
adult person residing in or occupying said premises if such person can be
reasonably found; and by securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the
unsafe building. A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall also be
filed in the office of the County Clerk of the County of Broome.
§ 118-7. Failure to comply.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said order of the Board of Trustees, after the hearing, the Board of
Trustees shall provide for the demolition and removal of such building or
structure either by Village employees or by contract. Except in emergency
A. A description of the premises;
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or
dangerous;
C. An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe
and secure, or demolished and removed;
D. A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall
commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter, unless, for good cause shown,
such time shall be extended;
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Board of Trustees in
relation to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be
scheduled not fewer than five business days from the date of service of
the notice; and
F. A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the
order to secure or demolish and remove the building, the Board of
Trustees is authorized to provide for its demolition and removal, to
assess all expenses thereof against the premises on which it is located
and to institute a special proceeding to collect the costs of demolition,
including legal expenses.
§ 118-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 118-7
118:94
as provided in § 118-9 hereof, any contract for demolition and removal of a
building in excess of $20,000 shall be awarded through competitive bidding.
§ 118-8. Assessment of expenses.
All expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the proceedings to
repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including the
cost of actually removing such building, and all reasonable and necessary
legal expenses incidental thereto, shall, at the option of the Village, either:
§ 118-9. Emergency cases.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent
danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property, unless an
unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished, the
Board of Trustees may, by resolution, authorize the Building Inspector
to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building.
The expense of such repair or demolition shall be a charge against the
premises on which it is located and shall be assessed, levied, and collected
as provided in § 118-8 hereof.
§ 118-10. Severability.
Each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all
other provisions herein, and if any provisions shall be deemed invalid, all
other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Chapter 124
CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENTS
§ 124-1. Applicability of chapter to certain amusements.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
baseball or football games, field sports, amateur concerts, performances or
exhibitions or to performances, concerts or exhibitions given for benevolent
purposes.
§ 124-2. Sunday baseball games and moving picture shows.
It shall be unlawful to conduct baseball games and moving picture shows,
either free or for paid admission, before 1:00 p.m. on the first day of the
week, within the village.
A. Be considered a lien upon said premises upon which such building is
located and shall be assessed against the same premises; or
B. Be collected by commencement of a special proceeding against the
owner of said unsafe dangerous building or structure pursuant to
General Municipal Law § 78-b.
§ 118-7 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENTS § 124-3
124:95
§ 124-3. Circuses, theaters and exhibitions.
§ 124-4. Carnivals, road shows and similar amusements.
No person shall exhibit or conduct or cause or procure to be exhibited
or conducted out of doors, in tents or in any other temporary structure
any carnival, road show or similar exhibition or performance or any show,
exhibition, performance, concession or refreshment stand in conjunction
therewith unless the unanimous consent of the Board of Trustees is first
obtained; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a circus or
wild west show or to amateur performances or exhibitions.
§ 124-5. Billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys and shooting
galleries; license fees.
A. License required. No person shall conduct in the village any circus,
menagerie, tent show or outdoor entertainment or any theatrical,
musical entertainment or moving picture performance or exhibition or
any public entertainment, concert or exhibition of natural or artificial
curiosities for which admission money is demanded or which is
conducted for gain or profit without first having obtained a license from
the Village Clerk.
B. License fees. Any person applying for a license under this section shall,
at the time of making application therefor, pay a fee as follows:
Type of License Fee
For each license for a circus, for each day's performance $50.00
For each license for a menagerie, for each day's
performance
$5.00
For each license for tent shows and outdoor theatrical
performances, for each day
$5.00
For all other outdoor exhibitions and performances
mentioned in this section, for each day's performance
$5.00
For each license for keeping or conducting a theater or
moving picture theater, per year
$20.00
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or conduct
any billiard room, poolroom, bowling alley, shooting gallery or similar
place of amusement for money or hire without first obtaining a license
from the Village Clerk.
B. License fees.
(1) For each license for keeping or conducting a billiard room or
poolroom for money or hire, the license fee shall be five dollars
($5.), plus one dollar ($1.) per table each year.
(2) For each license for keeping or conducting a shooting gallery,
bowling alley or similar place of amusement for money or hire, the
§ 124-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 124-5
124:96
§ 124-6. Hours of operation of bowling alleys; Sunday games.
§ 124-7. Minors frequenting billiard and pool rooms.
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license to operate a billiard
room to suffer or permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to
enter or remain in such billiard room or place unless accompanied by his
or her parent or legally appointed guardian or by a supervisor of children's
recreational activities.
Chapter 132
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
PRIVATE DANCE — Any dance where the attendance is restricted to the
members of a society, club or corporation or the guests of the society, club
or corporation are admitted by invitation only, and from which guests any
fee or payment is or will be received.
PUBLIC DANCES or PUBLIC DANCE HALLS — Any dance or hall to which
admission may be had by payment of a fee or by purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket obtained for money or value or in which a charge
is made for the care of clothing or other property or for which a charge
is made in lieu of an admission charge or any other dance or party where
dancing is held before or after any program of any nature other than
dancing, to which the public generally may gain admission with or without
payment of a fee or to which admission can be had by the purchase of liquid
refreshments, beverages or food to be consumed on or off the premises or
at any public place, business or other establishment where patrons thereof
or persons therein are permitted to dance. The term "public dance hall,"
as further defined and as used in this chapter, shall mean and include any
room, place or space in which a public dance may be held or any hall or
other place in which classes in dancing are held or instruction in dancing is
given for hire.
license fee shall be five dollars ($5.), plus one dollar ($1.) per alley
each year.
A. No person shall conduct a public bowling alley in the village between
1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. in the morning on any weekday except that
such public bowling alley shall close at 12:00 midnight on Saturdays
and Sundays.
B. It shall be unlawful to conduct or participate in games of bowling on
Sunday before 1:00 p.m. and to participate in or witness games for
which an admission or other fee may or may not be charged.
§ 124-5 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS § 132-2
132:97
§ 132-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful to hold any public dance or class in dancing or to give
instruction in dancing for hire in any public dance hall within the limits of
the Village until the public dance hall in which the same may be given or
held shall first have been duly licensed for such purpose. It shall be unlawful
for any person to permit any room or building owned or controlled by him or
her to be used for the purpose of a public dance hall unless the same shall
be licensed as herein provided.
§ 132-3. Classification of licenses.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be classified as
follows:
§ 132-4. License fees.
A. Class A. A Class A license shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct
or permit dancing upon only the date specified therein (except during
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Sundays), but not later than
1:00 a.m. on the following day, except by special authorization of the
Mayor.
B. Class B. A Class B license shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct
or permit dancing upon any day of that year (except during the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Sundays), during which it is effective, who
shall then and there be engaged in conducting a bona fide restaurant or
grill or soda spa or be the owner and holder of the license issued
pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the
State of New York for consumption of beverages on the premises.
A. Amount. The fee for licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be as follows: [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 3-5-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
Type of License Fee
Class A $75.00 for each date specified
Class B $100.00 for initial term $25.00 for each
renewal term
B. Refunds. No license fee shall be refunded in the event of voluntary
surrender or revocation of any license, except as otherwise herein
provided.
C. Disposition. All license fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk and
credited to the general fund of the Village.
D. Proration. No license fee shall be prorated under a period of six (6)
months.
§ 132-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 132-5
132:98
§ 132-5. Application for license; contents.
Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file with
the Village Clerk a written application which shall contain the following
information:
§ 132-6. Evidence of good character; conviction of crime.
In addition to the information required by § 132-5, if the application for
a license as herein provided is made by a person or persons, evidence of
good character shall be provided. The applicant must further state whether
or not he or she has ever been convicted of violating any law regulating
the conduct of public dance halls or public dances or whether or not he or
she has been convicted of any other crime, and if so, such crime must be
designated.
§ 132-7. Referral of application to Chief of Police; investigation;
recommendation of Chief.
The Village Clerk shall refer all applications made under the provisions
of this chapter to the Chief of Police, who shall inspect each application
to determine whether the premises sought to be licensed comply with all
regulations, ordinances and all laws applicable to dance halls or other
public places of assembly and shall furnish to said Clerk, in writing, the
results of said investigation, accompanied by his or her recommendation as
to whether a license shall be granted or refused.
A. The names, residences and ages of the applicants, if individuals, and if a
corporation, firm or partnership, the names of the principal officers or
partners, their residences and ages; the name or names of persons who
shall be designated as manager or persons in charge, with the
addresses of the same.
B. The premises where such public dance hall is to be located or
conducted and the street and number of all entrances.
C. The location of the floor space to be used for dancing purposes.
D. Whether the applicant or manager has previously engaged as owner or
employee in conducting a public dance hall and, if so, when and where
and the length of time.
E. The names and addresses of the persons owning the premises for which
a license is sought, whether a hotel, restaurant, cafe, club room,
nightclub or place or places where patrons are invited to purchase
liquid refreshments, beverages or food to be consumed on or off the
premises.
F. Such other information as may be from time to time required.
§ 132-5 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS § 132-8
132:99
§ 132-8. Age of applicant.
No license to operate a public dance hall shall be granted to any applicant
who is under twenty-one (21) years of age.
§ 132-9. Denial of application; refusal to issue license.
A license shall not be refused under the provisions of this chapter except
for a specific reason or for the protection of the public safety, health, morals
or general welfare, and in the event that the application for such license
is denied, no further application shall be made unless the reason for such
denial or rejection no longer exists.
§ 132-10. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the license application as provided in this chapter and
upon the approval thereof and payment to the Village Clerk of the license
fee as herein provided, a license to conduct and maintain a public dance hall
shall be issued.
§ 132-11. Numbering and contents of license.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be numbered in the order in which they
were issued and shall set forth the location of the public dance hall, the date
of issuance, the expiration date, the fee paid and the name of the licensee.
§ 132-12. Issuance of duplicate license; fee.
In the event of the loss or destruction without fault on the part of the holder
of a license issued under this chapter, a duplicate thereof may be issued
by the Village Clerk or issuing officer at his or her discretion and upon the
payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.).
§ 132-13. License to be posted.
A license issued hereunder shall be immediately posted upon the premises
for which it was issued.
§ 132-14. Transfer of license.
No transfer of a license issued under the provisions of this chapter, either
as to the person to whom the license is issued or as to the location thereof,
shall be granted.
§ 132-15. Expiration of license.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be effective
and shall apply to and cover only the calendar year in which such license
was issued, and such license shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which it was issued.
§ 132-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 132-16
132:100
§ 132-16. Suspension of license.
The Mayor may suspend any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees, and thereupon, said
license may be revoked or continued by said Board.
§ 132-17. Revocation of license.
The Mayor or the Board of Trustees may at any time, upon notice to the
licensee to be heard, revoke any license granted under this chapter for
disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises or in the event that the same
is frequented by disorderly or immoral persons or indecent act or acts are
therein committed or whenever any disorderly conduct of a gross, violent or
vulgar character shall take place therein or whenever any provision of any
law or article has been or is being violated.
§ 132-18. Village's right of entry.
Any place licensed under this chapter may be entered at any reasonable
time by any member of the Police Department, the Fire Chief, Building
Inspector, Health Officer, Village Clerk or any person designated by the
Board of Trustees for the purpose of inspection or to ascertain whether a
violation of this chapter is therein being committed.
§ 132-19. Persons of ill repute prohibited at dances.
No person to whom a license has been issued shall permit any person of bad
character, prostitute, gambler, intoxicated person or procurer to dance or
to frequent or attend any dance held pursuant to the license obtained under
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 132-20. Minors attending dances.
No person licensed hereunder shall permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to frequent or attend any dance unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian, excepting, however, that persons under the age of
eighteen (18) but not less than sixteen (16) years of age may be permitted
to attend such dance until 12:00 midnight but not thereafter.
§ 132-21. Special permit required for certain dances; fee. [Added
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
It shall be unlawful for any private dance or public dance held on any one
calendar day to continue past 1:00 a.m. the following calendar day unless
a special permit has been received from the Village Board of Trustees. The
cost of such permit shall be $10.
§ 132-16 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS § 132-21
132:101
Chapter 134
FILLING AND GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration — See Ch. 114.
Drainage and watercourses — See Ch. 136.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 156.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 238.
Street excavations — See Ch. 240, Art. II.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
§ 134-1. Purpose.
These regulations are intended to provide for the control of filling and
grading activities so as to prevent serious damage to public health, welfare
and safety; public and/or private lands and drainage or watercourses within
the Village of Johnson City.
§ 134-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILLING AND GRADING — The alteration of land by any means which
results in a modification of the land contours through the addition or
deletion of soil or other nonrefuse inert material. This definition shall not
include tilling of lands, landscaping of residences, commercial or industrial
buildings which are authorized by a duly issued building permit pursuant
to Chapter 114 of the Village Code or any activities which are specifically
reserved to the Department of Environmental Conservation.
FILL MATERIAL — Acceptable fill material shall be limited to loam, rock,
stone, gravel, sand, cinders, soil and concrete pieces less than 12 inches in
diameter.
§ 134-3. Permit required.
A. On all sites in the Village of Johnson City in which fill is delivered or
removed, the owner of said site shall obtain a permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works or designee which will require
compliance with 6 NYCRR 360 and which provides for the following:
(1) Engineering drawings showing the section, block and lot numbers
upon which the activity will be conducted.
(2) The names and addresses and the section, block and lot numbers of
all contiguous property owners.
(3) A plan showing all existing and proposed contour lines, amount of
fill to be delivered, amount of soil to be removed, location of trees
§ 132-21 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 134-3
132:102
over four inches in diameter measured four feet from the ground
and road access to the site. The plan should also indicate any
floodways, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, or watercourses on
the parcel(s) to be filled.
(4) An erosion control plan or SWPPP as required by Chapter 238.
(5) Documentation regarding permit status with the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to the issuance of
a permit. Any New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation permit required must be in effect prior to the issuing
of a permit.
(6) Proof of insurance adequate to cover the intended work pursuant to
the terms of the permit. The Village of Johnson City shall be named
as an additional insured on the owner's policy. The owner shall by a
separate instrument agree to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village of Johnson City from any claims arising out of the intended
activity.
(7) A description of the source of soil to be utilized in the filling and
grading, including but not limited to anticipated amount location of
the source and, if the source is not the applicant, a verified
statement by the owner of the source as relates to availability of the
soil for filling and grading.
(8) The anticipated commencement and completion dates.
(9) The names of all authorized contractors, entities or businesses
which will participate in the filling and grading, document
preparation or supervision of the project.
B. If in the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works or designee
testing or monitoring is required, the owner of said site is required to
hire a consultant or to pay such sums to the Village of Johnson City to
cover such costs.
C. The owner of said site shall be required to post a surety bond with the
Village Clerk, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, in an amount
to be fixed by the Superintendent of Public Works or designee, prior to
issuance of said permit in the following cases:
(1) When the estimated cost of the work, including all lots, as shown in
the application, or as reasonably calculated by the Superintendent
of Public Works or designee, exceeds $20,000; or
(2) When the estimated time of completion as set forth in the
application, or as reasonably calculated by the Superintendent of
Public Works or designee, exceeds 60 days from the issuance of the
permit.
§ 134-3 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS § 134-3
132:103
§ 134-4. Penalties for offenses; remedies.
§ 134-5. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the homeowner who has delivered on his
property three yards or less of fill, in an aggregate, on an annual basis.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works or designee shall charge a permit
fee to the owner of said site in the amount of $25, or other such amount
as may be established by a resolution of the Village Board.
A. Any person who violates this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 per day and not more than
$2,500 per day or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days.
Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
B. Convictions for a violation of this chapter shall constitute and effect an
immediate revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works or designee may suspend the
performance of any delivery of fill and also may revoke any permit
issued hereunder or under any other provision of law purporting to
authorize such delivery of fill for a like period, at any time, in the event
of an actual or threatened violation of this chapter. The Superintendent
of Public Works or designee shall have the further authority to suspend
and revoke all other permits at the site when the instant permit is
violated or there is a threatened violation.
(1) The Superintendent of Public Works or designee shall accomplish
such suspension and revocation by delivering, personally or by
certified mail, a written notice thereof, stating the particular
grounds therefor, to the applicant. Thereafter, during the period of
such suspension and revocation, no delivery of fill shall be
permitted or performed.
(2) Any person aggrieved by such suspension and/or revocation may
appeal therefrom to the Village Board, who may affirm, modify or
reverse the Superintendent of Public Works or designee's action or
make such other disposition of the appeal which may be consistent
with the purposes of this chapter.
D. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment and such
other remedies as may now or hereafter be provided by law, the
Superintendent of Public Works or designee may maintain an action or
proceeding in the name of the Village in any court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by an injunction
the violation of such chapter and to recover, by appropriate civil
remedies, any cost, expense or damage sustained by the Village in
consequence of such violation, including an action to enforce the surety
bond provided for in this chapter.
§ 134-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 134-5
132:104
Chapter 136
DRAINAGE AND WATERCOURSES
§ 136-1. Legislative intent.
§ 136-2. Definitions.
Definitions contained in the Environmental Conservation Law of the State
of New York shall be used when not inconsistent with definitions herein
contained.
§ 136-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill up, confine, pave, allow
obstructions to accumulate or otherwise interfere with or change the course
of any drain, ditch, stream or watercourse in the Village of Johnson City
without first obtaining from the Superintendent of Public Works or other
authorized village official a permit authorizing such work to be performed;
and no drain, ditch, stream or watercourse shall be stopped, filled up,
confined, paved or otherwise interfered with or the course thereof changed
except in strict accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit
and the plans and specifications submitted therewith.
§ 136-4. Application.
The application for a permit shall be in form prescribed by the Village of
Johnson City and accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
duly licensed engineer or surveyor. The plans and specifications shall show
the exact nature of the work to be performed, the course, structure and
capacity of all drains, streams and watercourses, the method of drainage
of the adjacent or contiguous territory and any other necessary information
and explanatory details required by the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The adoption by the State of New York of the Environmental
Conservation Law recognizes that the quality of our environment is
fundamental to our concern for the quality of life. Consistent with that
philosophy, the Village of Johnson City hereby joins with the State of
New York in adopting the following provisions to conserve, improve and
protect its natural resources and environment and to control water and
land pollution in order to enhance the health, safety and welfare of the
people of said village and state and their overall economic and social
well-being.
B. Accordingly, a local law regulating the stopping, filling up, confining,
paving or other interference with or changing the course of drains,
ditches, streams and watercourses in the Village of Johnson City and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted.
§ 134-5 DRAINAGE AND WATERCOURSES § 136-5
136:105
§ 136-5. Procedure.
The application and plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate with
the Superintendent of Public Works, who may specify alterations, changes
or modifications in the plans and specifications which he or she deems
necessary and may refuse a permit until such alterations, changes and
modifications have been made. If the Superintendent of Public Works shall
disapprove the plans and specifications submitted and refuse a permit, the
reasons therefor will be set forth, in writing, and given to the applicant
within thirty (30) days after filing, who may within thirty (30) days
thereafter appeal to the Village Board, in writing. The Village Board may
call a public hearing and decide such appeal at its next regular meeting.
§ 136-6. Commencement of work.
The Village Engineer shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of the commencement of the work in order that provision may
be made for proper inspection thereof. Samples of material and every
reasonable facility for ascertaining whether the work is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter shall be furnished to the Village Engineer as
he or she may require.
§ 136-7. Fees and costs.30
A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) shall be paid to the village when the
application is filed, and the owner shall also pay the actual cost of any
material tests and reimburse the village for necessary inspection at the rate
of five dollars ($5.) for each hour or portion thereof that a Village Inspector
is engaged on the work.
§ 136-8. Penalties for offenses.31
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II. Further or alternative action may be taken under § 1-17 of said Code.
Chapter 138
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 92. Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 136-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 138-1
138:106
§ 138-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to support our schools, both public and
private, in their work of protecting and educating our children against the
ravages of drug abuse.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG-FREE ZONE — Any area within 1,000 feet of any school ground
within the Village of Johnson City.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Buildings, playing fields and land contained within
the real property boundary line of a public or private elementary, junior high
or high school.
§ 138-3. Posting of signs.
The Police Chief of the Village of Johnson City, or his designee, may procure
and place signs in drug-free zones, giving notice that the area is a drug-free
zone and stating that violators will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the
law.
Chapter 140
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
§ 138-1 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-3
138:107

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 140-1. Short title. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
This chapter shall be known as the “Electrical Code of the Village of Johnson
City” and shall comply with the standards of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code as it pertains to electrical systems
and the National Electrical Code and the generally accepted standards
prescribed in said codes.
§ 140-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context requires otherwise:
APPRENTICE — A person engaged in electrical work under the direct
supervision of a master or journeyman electrician and also registered in a
New York State certified electrician apprenticeship training program.
BOARD — The Board of Electrical Examiners of the Village of Johnson City
established by this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL — A certificate issued by the designated
Board.
INSPECTOR — The person or persons authorized and required by this
chapter to make electrical inspections within the Village of Johnson City.
JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN — A person having a valid journeyman's
license issued by the Village, doing any work in connection with the
installation, erection, alteration, extension or repair of electrical wiring,
apparatus, fixtures, devices, or appliances, excluding portable appliances,
as hereinafter defined, and equipment for light, heat or power purposes or
for signaling systems operating at 50 volts or more.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — Any person who has a valid master electrician's
license issued by the Village and carries on the business of installing,
erecting, altering or repairing electrical wiring, apparatus, fixtures,
devices, or appliances, excluding portable appliances, as hereinafter
defined, and equipment utilized or designed for the utilization of electricity
for light, heat or power purposes or for signaling systems operating at 50
volts or more. Any master electrician performing the above described shall
also hold a journeyman's license.
PORTABLE APPLIANCE — An appliance capable of being readily moved,
where established practice or the conditions of use make it necessary or
convenient for it to be detachable from its source of electric current by
means of flexible cord and attachment plug.
§ 140-3. Enforcement.
§ 140-1 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-3
138:109
§ 140-4. Installation standards.
All installations of electrical work, all extension thereto and all alterations
thereof within the Village of Johnson City shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and of any law or of any ordinance, local law
or building code of the Village of Johnson City pertaining thereto and
shall also be in conformity with approved standards for safety to life and
property. In every case where no specific type of class of material or no
specific standards are prescribed by law, conformity with the regulations
and requirements contained in the National Electrical Code as approved
by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence of
conformity with approved standards for safety to life and property.
§ 140-5. Applicability. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
12-18-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. The Electrical Inspector or his or her duly authorized representatives
shall enforce the regulations of this chapter with the aid and assistance,
where necessary, of the Police, Fire, Building and Code Enforcement
Departments of the Village of Johnson City.
B. The Village Attorney of the Village of Johnson City shall act as counsel
and legal adviser to the Board of Electrical Examiners created by this
chapter, and it shall be his or her duty to prosecute violations of this
chapter upon complaint of the Inspector or the Board.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons engaged solely
in selling, servicing or repairing portable appliances or solely in
repairing or replacing heating elements, brushes, motors or parts
thereof, fans, worn or burnt-out parts and switches and flexible cords
attached to or part of portable appliances or solely in the attachment of
portable appliances to existing circuits when no joining or splicing of
electrical conductors is required; nor to the installation, maintenance
or repair of elevators; nor to any work involved in the manufacture,
assembly, test or repair of electrical machinery, portable or fixed
appliances, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing and repairing as their
principal business; nor to the work in connection with the erection,
construction, maintenance or repair of lines and facilities for the
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity from the source
of supply to the service connection on the premises where used by
public service companies, as defined by the Transportation
Corporations Law of this state, or municipal plants authorized to
generate or sell electricity; nor to the work of such companies' plants in
installing, maintaining and repairing on the consumer's premises of
service connections and meters remaining the property of such
companies or plants after installation; nor to emergency repairs or
wiring and appliances on consumer's premises necessary for the
protection of life or property; nor to the work of companies
incorporated for the transmission of intelligence by electricity in
§ 140-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-5
138:110
§ 140-6. Permits. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
installing, maintaining or repairing wires, apparatus or fixtures or other
appliances.
B. An individual who owns and resides in a single-family dwelling may
personally perform the maintenance, installation or repair of electrical
wiring or equipment in the dwelling and normal accessory buildings
upon receipt of the necessary permit. "In the dwelling" shall mean load
side of main breaker of the residence. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
this Subsection B shall not permit an individual who owns and resides
in a single-family dwelling to personally perform the maintenance,
installation or repair of electrical wiring or equipment to: [Amended
12-18-2012 by L.L. No. 12-2012]
(1) Swimming pools, either aboveground or in-ground;
(2) Hot tubs;
(3) Solar panels; or
(4) Wind power.
A. Required; display. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
install, alter or repair or cause to be installed, altered or repaired any
electrical wiring in the Village of Johnson City until such time as proper
application has been filed with the Building Inspector and/or Director of
Code Enforcement of the Village and a permit has been obtained from
the said Superintendent, which said permit shall be approved by the
designated board. Such permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon
the exterior of the premises whereon such installation, alteration or
repair is to be performed. The Electrical Board shall retain the power to
approve or disapprove said permit.
B. Issuance. No such permit shall be issued to any person unless he or she
is the holder of a license as a master electrician under this chapter or is
exempted from the requirement of a license under the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Permit fee. The cost of electrical permits and inspections shall be set by
the Board of Electrical Examiners.
D. Insurance.
(1) Workers Compensation. Proof of coverage, required under § 57 of
the New York Workers Compensation Law, must be provided by
filing Form C-105-2.
(2) Disability benefits coverage. Proof of coverage, required under
§ 220(8) of the New York Workers Compensation Law, must be
provided by filing Form DB120.1. Licensees who are not required
to provide Workers Compensation and/or disability benefits
§ 140-5 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-6
138:111
§ 140-7. Inspections. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
12-18-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
coverage must submit Form C-105.21, properly completed by the
Workers Compensation Board.
(3) The following insurance is required for all new and renewal
licenses: Comprehensive General Liability, issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of New York,
including products and completed operations liability with a limit of
$500,000 per occurrence, bodily and property damage and
$500,000 annual aggregate. The Village of Johnson City shall be
included as a named insured or additional insured for liability
arising at work performed under this license. A certificate of
insurance showing the required coverage will be provided to the
Village, with 30 days' notice of cancellation or nonrenewal.
A. Authority of inspectors. The Chief Inspector, duly appointed as the
representative of the designated Board and authorized and required as
such representative to make electrical inspections within the Village or
within an area which includes the Village and each of his or her duly
appointed deputy and assistant inspectors are hereby authorized and
deputized as agents of the Village to make inspections and
reinspections of all electrical installations within the Village and all
extensions thereto and alterations thereof and to approve or disapprove
the same.
B. Prohibited interests of inspectors. No inspector shall engage in the
business of master electrician, either directly or indirectly, nor have
financial interest in or connection with any person conducting such
business.
C. Inspector's right of entry; authority to disconnect service. The Inspector
shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or
dwelling in the discharge of his or her official duties or for the purpose
of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the installation of
electric wiring, devices, permanently set appliances and equipment
contained therein and shall have the authority to order any wire to be
cut or disconnected in cases of emergency where necessary for the
safety of life or property or where such wire may interfere with the
work of the Fire Department. He or she is also authorized to order the
discontinuance of electrical service to any electrical wiring, device,
permanently set appliance or equipment found to be dangerous to life
or property because it is defective or defectively installed until it has
been made safe and been approved by him or her.
D. Inspection after fire or explosion. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to
make an inspection of any premises wherein a fire or explosion
occurred, and for such purposes, it shall be the duty of the Chief of the
Fire Department of the Village, within 24 hours after such occurrence,
to report or cause to be reported to the office of the designated board
§ 140-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-7
138:112
§ 140-8. Connection to installations.
§ 140-9. Liability for damage. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No.
4-1990; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from nor lessen responsibility
of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to person
or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village, the Board
of Electrical Examiners or the Electrical Inspector be deemed to have
from which such Inspector operates the address or location of such
premises and to furnish such other information and assistance with
respect thereto as such Inspector may require.
E. Periodic reinspection. The Inspector shall make periodically a thorough
reinspection of the installation of all electric wiring, devices,
permanently set appliances and equipment now or hereafter installed
within the Village and within the scope of this chapter, and when any
such installation is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the
person owning, using or operating the same shall be notified, in writing,
and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place the
same in safe condition and to have such work completed within 15 days
or such longer time as may be specified by the Inspector in such notice.
Upon receipt of a formal complaint or at the request of the Fire
Marshal, Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector, the Electrical
Inspector shall make an inspection of a premises suspected to be in
violation of this code.
F. Inspection will not be necessary if the electrical work done is of a direct
replacement nature or new installation, that is, fuse, breaker,
receptacle or switch, if such replacement or installation does not
exceed two such devices one-hundred-twenty-volt twenty-amp circuits
in a single-family detached dwelling.
A. Approval required. It shall be unlawful for any person to make
connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring,
devices, permanently set appliances or equipment for the installation,
extension or alteration of which a permit is required by law until a
certificate of approval or a permit has been issued authorizing such
connection and the use of such wiring, devices, appliances or
equipment.
B. Application to make reconnection. It shall be unlawful for any person to
make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical
wiring, devices, permanently set appliances or equipment which has
been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Inspector or
the use of which has been ordered by the Inspector to be discontinued
until a certificate of approval has been issued by him or her authorizing
the reconnection and use of such wiring, devices, appliances or
equipment.
§ 140-7 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-9
138:113
assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made or license
issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 140-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No.
4-1990; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 140-11. Disposition of moneys derived from operation of chapter.
All fees, fines and penalties derived by the Board of Electrical Examiners
from the operation of this chapter shall be turned over by the Board to
the Treasurer or other fiscal officer of the Village exercising corresponding
functions within ten (10) days after they are received, and such moneys
shall be paid by such Treasurer into the general fund of the Village and shall
be available for use for any lawful Village purpose.
A. Any person who shall directly or indirectly engage in or work at the
business of master electrician or journeyman electrician in the Village
without a master electrician's license or journeyman electrician's
license or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of
any rule or regulation made pursuant thereto or who, having had his or
her license suspended or revoked, shall continue to engage in or work
at the business of master or journeyman electrician, as the case may be,
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, of this Code.
B. The ratio of apprentices to electricians shall be two apprentices to one
journeyman electrician for up to four journeyman; thereafter the ratio
shall be one apprentice to one journeyman.
C. The ratio shall apply to each individual job within the Village in order to
ensure the safety and proper installation of electrical systems.
§ 140-9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-11
138:114
ARTICLE II
Board of Electrical Examiners
§ 140-12. Board established; composition; appointment and
qualifications of members. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990;
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 140-13. Terms of office. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990]
Members shall be appointed to the Board for terms of five (5) years and at
the pleasure of the Mayor. Any member who misses three (3) consecutive
meetings without just cause shall automatically be replaced by the Mayor.
§ 140-14. Filling of vacancies.
A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board from any cause shall
be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of the member whose office
has become vacant.
§ 140-15. Quorum established.
A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
§ 140-16. Power and duties of the Board.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those
elsewhere prescribed in this chapter:
A. There is hereby established in and for the Village of Johnson City a
board to be known as the "Board of Electrical Examiners of the Village
of Johnson City." This Board shall consist of five persons, at least two of
whom shall be residents of the Village of Johnson City, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor.
B. One shall be a master electrician who has had at least five years'
experience in electrical contracting and construction work and who
employs one or more journeyman electricians; two shall be journeyman
electricians who have had at least five years' practical experience in
electrical construction work; and two shall be persons not engaged in
any of the above-mentioned occupations of the other members of the
Board.
C. The Building Inspector and Electrical Inspector shall be ex officio
members of the Board. The Electrical Inspector or his or her designee
shall be present at all meetings of the Board.
A. Meetings. To hold at least one (1) meeting in each month and as many
other meetings at such other time as, in the opinion of the Chairman or
a majority of the Board, are necessary or desirable for the efficient
discharge of the business of the Board.
§ 140-12 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-16
138:115
B. Examination and certification of license applicants. To examine the
qualifications and fitness of applicants for licenses under this chapter or
of the representatives of such applicants designated for such purposes
and certify the same to the Village Clerk.
C. Recommendations for granting and issuance of licenses. To recommend
to the Village Clerk the granting and issuance of licenses as master
electricians to applicants possessing or whose representatives possess
the requisite qualifications; to recommend the granting and issuance of
licenses as journeyman electricians to applicants possessing the
requisite qualifications.
D. Suspension or revocation of licenses. To suspend or revoke licenses for
cause as prescribed in § 140-27 and to notify the Village Clerk of such
suspensions and revocations. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L. No.
4-1990]
E. Imposition and collection of fines. To impose and collect fines for
violations as prescribed in § 140-27. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L.
No. 4-1990]
F. Records. To keep records of all its meetings and proceedings and of all
licenses issued, suspended or revoked by it and to make such records
available for public inspection.
G. Manual of rules and regulations. To prepare a manual of its rules and
regulations for the conduct of examinations and to furnish copies
thereof to persons desiring the same upon payment of a fee which shall
be set by the Board of Electrical Examiners. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
H. Adoption of rules and regulations. To adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, with respect to the form and content of applications for
licenses, the reception thereof, the investigation and examination of
applicants and their qualifications, the conduct of the meetings and the
business of the Board and the other matters incidental or appropriate to
the powers and duties of the Board as prescribed by this chapter and
for the proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and to amend or repeal any of such rules and regulations by a
majority vote at any special or regular meeting upon notice of at least
thirty (30) days to each member thereof.
I. Filing of rules and regulations. To file a copy of all its rules and
regulations and of all changes therein, which is duly certified by the
Secretary, with the Village Clerk immediately upon the adoption
thereof, which copy shall be available for public inspection during the
regular business hours of the day.
§ 140-16 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-17
138:116
§ 140-17. Review action of Board.
Any action of the Board may be reviewed by any person aggrieved thereby
in any court of competent jurisdiction by a proceeding instituted under the
provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 140-17 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-17
138:117

ARTICLE III
Examination and Licensing of Electricians
§ 140-18. License required. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
§ 140-19. License term; renewal; fees. [Amended 7-17-1990 by L.L.
No. 4-1990; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
The Board of Electrical Examiners may issue licenses under this article as
follows:
A. Master electrician. No person shall hereafter engage in, carry on or
conduct the business of master electrician or do or perform or offer or
undertake or contract to do or perform the work of a master electrician
within the Village or hold himself or herself out to the public, directly or
indirectly, as being able to do so unless licensed pursuant to this article.
B. Journeyman electrician. No person shall hereafter engage in, undertake
or perform the work of a journeyman electrician or agree to do or
perform such work within the Village or hold himself or herself out to
the public, directly or indirectly, as being able to do so unless licensed
pursuant to this article or unless working under the direction of a
person so licensed, and no person shall directly or indirectly hire,
employ, engage or suffer or permit any person to do the work of a
journeyman electrician unless such person is licensed as a journeyman
electrician pursuant to this article.
C. Verification of licenses. It shall be within the authority of the Electrical
Inspector or any Village official to verify that any person or persons
performing electrical work within the Village (other than property
owners authorized pursuant to § 140-5 of this chapter) are duly licensed
to perform such work according to the provisions of this chapter. If
proof of proper licensing is not shown to the Inspector or Village
official, the work on the project shall be stopped until such time as
properly licensed electricians are available to complete the project, and
the person performing the work without a valid license shall be subject
to a minimum fine of $500 and a maximum fine of $1,500. In addition,
the owner of the premises where the work was being performed, the
Electrical Inspector and the Code Enforcement Officer shall be notified,
in writing, that the person or persons performing the electrical work on
said premises were unable to show proof of proper licensing and the
work on said premises is to be discontinued until a properly licensed
electrician is retained to perform the work.
A. Master electrician's license, Class A.
(1) Master electrician's license, Class A, shall authorize the licensee to
engage in the business of master electrician within the Village for a
§ 140-18 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-19
138:119
§ 140-20. Applications for licenses. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
period ending the 31st day of December next following the date of
its issuance.
(2) The fee for such license shall be set by the Board of Electrical
Examiners.
(3) Such a license may be renewed annually on or before the expiration
thereof for periods of one year upon payment of an annual renewal
fee which shall be set by the Board of Electrical Examiners.
B. Master electrician's license, Class B.
(1) A master electrician's license, Class B, shall authorize the licensee
to engage in the business of master electrician in the Village, but
only for the purpose of undertaking, performing and completing a
single continuous job or installation at one location of property.
Only one Class B license can be issued within a twelve-month
period.
(2) The fee for such a license shall be determined by the Electrical
Board.
C. Journeyman electrician's license.
(1) A journeyman electrician's license shall authorize the licensee to
perform only the work of a journeyman electrician within the
Village for a period ending the 31st day of December next following
the date of its issuance.
(2) The fee for such license shall be set by the Board of Electrical
Examiners.
D. Failure to renew license generally. Every licensee shall pay an
additional fee as set by the Board of Electrical Examiners, together with
the license fee prescribed in this section, upon the renewal of the
license.
E. Effect of failure to renew any license. Every licensee who fails to renew
his license after a period of five years will be required to retake the
examination.
A. Master electricians. Every person desiring a license as a master
electrician under this article shall make application therefor to the
Board of Electrical Examiners in such form and detail as the Board may
prescribe. Such application shall state, among other things, the name
and place of business of the applicant, the class of license applied for
and the name of the representative of the applicant who will take the
examination for the license and who will act as the supervisor of the
work to be done under the license, if granted. A corporation or
partnership that performs electrical work as defined in this section
§ 140-19 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-20
138:120
§ 140-21. Examinations.
§ 140-22. Qualifications of applicant for master electrician's
license. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
must have a licensed master electrician that is a stockholder of such
corporation in a minimum amount of 25%.
B. Journeyman electricians. Every person desiring a license as journeyman
electrician under this article shall make application therefor to the
Board of Electrical Examiners in such form and detail as the Board may
prescribe. Such application shall state, among other things, the name
and residence address of the applicant, the name and business address
of the employer of the applicant and the nature and extent of the
experience of the applicant in work as a journeyman electrician.
A. Generally. Examinations shall be in writing. A complete record of every
examination given shall be kept on file until three (3) years after the
date of the examination. Examinations shall be offered at least two (2)
times per year. The Board of Electrical Examiners may, in its discretion,
authorize no more than two (2) additional examinations per year if the
Board determines that a sufficient number of eligible candidates
warrant the additional offering of said examination. In no event shall
the examination be offered twice during any three-month period. The
results of each such examination shall be announced by the Board not
later than thirty (30) days from the date of such examination.
B. Presentation for examination. The applicant or, in the case of those
applying for licenses as master electricians, the designated
representative of the applicant shall present himself or herself for
examination at the time and place specified in a notice to be given by
the Board of Electrical Examiners.
C. Waiver of examination. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section where an applicant for a master electrician's license, Class B,
establishes to the Board's satisfaction that he or she holds a current
license from another state or political subdivision thereof or from the
State of New York or any political subdivision thereof, which license
was issued on the basis of a qualifying examination, the Board shall
have the power to waive the written examination, at its discretion.
D. Reexamination. An applicant or the representative of an applicant who
has failed in his or her first examination shall not be eligible for
reexamination until three (3) months from the date of such failure; one
who fails twice or more shall not be eligible for further reexamination
until at least six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such second
or subsequent failure. The reexamination fee shall be the same as the
initial examination fee.
A. No license as a master electrician shall be granted to any person unless
the person shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Electrical
§ 140-20 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-22
138:121
§ 140-23. Qualifications of applicant for journeyman electrician's
license. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Examiners that he or she has or will establish a place for the regular
transaction of business; is a competent electrician and qualified to do
electrical contracting, construction and installation work and electrical
wiring; has a working knowledge of electricity and the natural laws,
properties and functions of electricity and of appliances, apparatus,
materials and devices for electric light, heat, power and signaling
purposes used and required in such work, combined with a practical
working knowledge of the requirements and provisions of this chapter
and the rules and regulations of the Board and the laws of the state,
if any, and of the Village for installation of electrical wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment and of the provisions thereof requiring
permits therefor.
B. An individual desiring to take the master's exam shall generally be
assumed to have met the conditions of § 140-22A if he or she can
demonstrate:
(1) Proof of at least four years as a licensed journeyman electrician,
with prior experience in the installation, repair and maintenance of
electrical systems; or
(2) That he or she has received a degree in electrical engineering from
a college or university accredited by the State Department of
Education, holds a license as a professional engineer in the state
and has had at least three years' prior experience in the
installation, repair and maintenance of electrical systems in the
United States, its territories and possessions under the supervision
of a person or persons licensed as a master electrician under the
provisions of this article.
A. No license as a journeyman electrician shall be granted to any person
unless he or she shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Electrical
Examiners that be or she is a competent electrician and qualified to do
electrical repairing and maintenance work; has a working knowledge of
electricity repairing and the natural laws, properties and functions of
electricity and of appliances, apparatus, materials and devices for
electric light, heat, power and signaling purposes, combined with a
practical working knowledge of the requirements and provisions of the
National Electrical Code and a knowledge of the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations of the Board and the laws of the
state, if any, and of the Village for the repair and maintenance of
electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment.
B. An individual desiring to take the journeyman's exam shall generally be
assumed to have met the conditions of § 140-23A if he or she can
demonstrate:
§ 140-22 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-23
138:122
§ 140-24. Signing and issuance of licenses.
Licenses shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board of Electrical
Examiners and the Village Clerk and shall be issued by the Village Clerk
after due certification by the Board.
§ 140-25. Records of issuance, suspension and revocation of
licenses.
In addition to the records kept by the Board of Electrical Examiners as
provided in § 140-16F, it shall be the concurrent duty of the Village Clerk to
keep and maintain records of all licenses issued, suspended or revoked and
to make such records available for public inspection.32
§ 140-26. Restrictions upon licenses. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 1-2002]
(1) Nine thousand hours of electrical experience under a licensed
electrician's supervision; or
(2) Enrollment in, and subsequent completion of an approved
electrical apprenticeship program with at least 8,250 hours of
training completed before applying to take the journeyman's exam;
or
(3) Any other experience comparable to the above training.
A. Assignment; transfer. No license issued hereunder shall be assigned or
transferable.
B. Identification of licensee. Each license as a master electrician issued
hereunder shall specify the name of the person licensed, who shall be
known as the holder of the license, and such persons shall be
designated in the license as the supervisor of all work to be done under
the license.
C. Numbering, form, color, etc. All licenses shall be numbered in the order
in which they are issued and shall be in such form and of such color and
shall contain such information as may be prescribed by the Board of
Electrical Examiners.
D. Display. Each license shall at all times be kept conspicuously displayed
in the place of business or employment, as the case may be, of the
licensee.
E. In case one or more officers of a corporation engaged in such business
shall die, being the holder of master electrician license, the corporation
may continue the business during the time necessarily required to
administer the estate of such deceased officer, not exceeding two years
32.Editor's Note: Original Section 7-33, Minimum age of applicant, refusal of license to
person convicted of felony, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
7-17-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990.
§ 140-23 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-26
138:123
§ 140-27. Suspension and revocation of licenses; fines.
from the granting of letters, provided that one or more officers of the
corporation is the holder of a master electrician's license and, together
with the legal representative of such deceased officer or officers,
actually owns and holds at least 25% of the issued and outstanding
capital stock of said corporation.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, at the
discretion of the Board of Electrical Examiners, after hearing upon due
notice held, upon charges given to the licensee and an opportunity to be
heard in his or her defense in person and/or by attorney, if the Board is
satisfied that the holder of such license or any of his or her or its officers
or employees willfully or by reason of incompetence has violated any
provision of this chapter or of any other law or of any ordinance, local
law or the building code of the Village governing electrical work or
requiring permits therefor or any requirements contained in the rules
and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association, known as
the "National Electrical Code." [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
B. The Board of Electrical Examiners may, in lieu of suspending or
revoking a license hereunder, impose a fine not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.) for the first offense and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for a subsequent offense and
may suspend the license until such fine is paid.
§ 140-26 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 140-27
138:124
Chapter 144
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
§ 140-27 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 140-27
138:125

ARTICLE I
Authority, Title and Purpose
§ 144-1. Authority.33
A local law of the Village of Johnson City, hereinafter referred to as "village,"
is hereby adopted pursuant to Article 8 of the New York Environmental
Conservation Law providing for environmental quality review of actions
which may have a significant effect upon the environment.
§ 144-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Johnson City
Environmental Quality Review Law."
§ 144-3. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of the Village Environmental Quality Review Law is to
incorporate the consideration of environmental factors into the
planning and decisionmaking processes of the village. In adopting the
Village Environmental Quality Review Law, it is the intent of the village
that all agencies operating within its jurisdiction conduct their affairs
with an awareness that they are the stewards of air, water, land and
living resources and that they have an obligation to protect the
environment for the use and enjoyment of this and all future
generations.
B. It is the intent of this chapter that the protection and enhancement of
the environment and human and community resources should be given
appropriate weight with social and economic considerations in public
policy and that those factors be considered together in reaching
decisions on proposed activities. It is the intention of the village that
through implementation of this chapter a suitable balance of social,
economic and environmental factors be incorporated into the
decisionmaking processes of the village. It is not the intention of the
Village Environmental Quality Review Law that environmental factors
be the sole consideration in decisionmaking.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 144-1 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-3
138:127

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 144-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms
and words are herewith defined as follows:
ACTION — Any activity of an agency, except an exempt action as defined in
Article III of this chapter, including, without limitation:
AGENCY — Any state department, agency, board, public benefit
corporation, public authority or commission or any local agency, including
any village, town, city, county, board, district, commission or governing
body, and other political subdivision of the state.
APPLICANT — Any person making an application or other request for action
by the village.
ENVIRONMENT — The physical condition which will be affected by a
proposed action, including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, noise,
objects of historic or aesthetic significance, existing patterns of population
concentration, distribution or growth and existing community or
neighborhood character.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT — A document prepared by an
applicant to assist the municipality in its preparation of an environmental
impact statement. The contents of the report shall be prescribed by the
village although it may include additional information.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A written document prepared
in accordance with Article VI and Article VIII of this chapter. An
"environmental impact statement" may either be a draft or be final.
Physical activities, such as construction, or other activities which
change the use or appearance of any natural resource or a structure;
A.
Funding activities, such as approving, approval or disapproval of
contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, tax abatements or exemptions, or
other forms of direct and indirect financial assistance;
B.
Licensing activities such as the proposing, approval or disapproval of
a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use or
permission to act;
C.
Planning activities such as site selection for other activities and the
proposing, approval or disapproval of a master or long-range plans,
zoning or other land use maps, ordinances or regulations, development
plans or other plans designed to provide a program for future activities;
and
D.
Policy-making activities such as the making, modification or
establishment of rules, regulations, procedures, policies and guidelines.
E.
§ 144-4 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-4
138:129
ENVIRONMENTAL SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT — A written description
and analysis of the environmental impact and effect of a proposed action
which addresses in detail the considerations listed in §§ 144-9 through
144-12 of this chapter.
EXEMPT ACTION — Any action for which an environmental review is not
required in accordance with Article III of this chapter.
MINISTERIAL ACTION — Any action performed upon a given state of
facts in a prescribed manner imposed by law without the exercise of any
judgment or discretion as to the propriety of the action, although the
law may require in some degree a construction of its language or intent,
including all acts listed in Appendix A of this chapter. 34
PERMIT — License, lease, certificate, grant or permission or other
entitlement for use or permission to act as given by the village.
PERSON — Any agency, individual, corporation, governmental entity,
partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act constituting Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law and any amendments thereto.
TYPE I ACTION — The actions or classes of actions that are likely to require
preparation of environmental impact statements because they in almost
every instance have a significant effect upon the environment, including all
those actions or classes of actions listed in Article XI of this chapter.
TYPE II ACTION — The actions or classes of actions which have been
determined not to have a significant effect upon the environment and which
do not require environmental impact statements under the law, including all
those actions or classes of actions listed in Article XI of this chapter.
TYPICAL ASSOCIATED ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS — Effects upon the
environment which are commonly the result of an activity.
UNLISTED ACTION — All actions not excluded or exempt or not listed as
Type I or Type II actions in this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 144-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-4
138:130
ARTICLE III
Exempt Actions
§ 144-5. Actions not requiring environmental review.
The following actions are exempt from the village environmental quality
review, provided that all requirements contained herein have met with
compliance.
§ 144-6. Actions involving federal participation.
Where there has duly been prepared under the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 both a draft environmental impact statement and a
final environmental impact statement for an action under consideration,
the village shall have no obligation to prepare an environmental impact
statement or to make findings under this chapter with respect to the action
so long as the environmental impact statements either contain or are
supplemented by the items concerning growth-inducing aspects and energy
use and conservation as described in § 144-32G and H of this chapter.
§ 144-7. Exempt actions.
The following actions are exempt from the Village Environmental Quality
Review Law pursuant to Part 617.13 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations (NYCRR).
A. Enforcement or criminal proceedings or exercise of prosecutorial
discretion in determining whether or not to institute such proceedings.
B. Ministerial actions.
C. Maintenance or repair involving no substantial changes in an existing
structure or facility.
D. Actions requiring a certificate of environmental compatibility and
public need under Articles VII and VIII of the New York State Public
Service Law35 and consideration, grant or denial of any such certificate.
E. Actions undertaken or approved prior to June 1, 1977, for local
agencies and September 1, 1977, for applicants. An action shall be
deemed to be undertaken or approved prior to the respective above
date if, in the case of construction activities, a contract for substantial
construction activities has been entered into or if a continuous program
of on-site construction or modification has been engaged in.
F. Actions which are immediately necessary on a limited emergency basis
for the protection or preservation of life, health, property or natural
resources.
35.Editor's Note: Article VIII of the Public Service Law is expired.
§ 144-5 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-7
138:131
§ 144-8. Type II actions exempt.
Type II actions as listed in Article XI are exempt from this chapter.
G. Actions of the Legislature of the State of New York or of any court of
law.
§ 144-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-8
138:132
ARTICLE IV
Environmental Significance
§ 144-9. Village to determine significant effect.
If an action is not exempt, as defined in Article III of this chapter,
determination will be made by the village as to whether the action may have
a significant effect upon the environment.
§ 144-10. Actions likely to have a significant effect upon the
environment.
The following actions, in addition to those actions listed as Type I in Article
XI, are likely to have a significant effect upon the environment:
A. A substantial adverse change to ambient air quality or water quality or
noise levels or in solid waste production or drainage or erosion or
flooding.
B. The removal or destruction of large quantities of vegetation or fauna,
the substantial interference with the movement of any resident or
migratory fish or wildlife species, impacts upon critical habitat areas or
the substantial affecting of a rare or endangered species of animal or
plant or the habitat of such species.
C. The encouraging or attracting of a large number of people to a place or
places for more than a few days relative to the number of people who
would come to such a place absent the action.
D. The creation of a material conflict with the community's existing goal or
plans as officially approved or adopted by the village.
E. The impairment of the character or quality of important historical,
archaeological, architectural or aesthetic resources or of existing
community or neighborhood character.
F. A major change in the use of either the quantity or type of energy.
G. The creation of a hazard to human health or safety to any individual or
group.
H. The creation of a material demand for other actions which would result
in one (1) of the above consequences.
I. A substantial change in the use or intensity of use of land or other
natural resources or in their capacity to support existing uses, except
where such an action has been included in broad program statements,
master or area-wide statements or statements for comprehensive plans
for which environmental impact statements have been prepared.
Agencies preparing such a statement shall develop procedures for
amending or supplementing such statements to reflect impacts which
are not addressed or adequately analyzed in such a statement as
initially prepared. Such procedures shall include such provisions for
§ 144-9 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-10
138:133
§ 144-11. Criteria.
informing the public and other agencies of the preparation of such
amendments or supplements and for allowing comment thereon before
incorporation of such amendments or supplements in said statement.
Actions undertaken or approved in conformity with this chapter shall
require no further review under this chapter.
J. Changes in two (2) or more elements of the environment, no one (1) of
which is substantial, but when taken together result in a material
change in the environment.
K. Where there has been duly prepared under the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 a negative declaration or other written threshold
determination that the action will not require a federal impact
statement, the village shall determine whether or not the action may
have a significant effect upon the environment pursuant to the Village
Environmental Quality Review Law.
A. In order to determine whether a proposed Type I or unlisted action may
have a significant effect on the environment, the impacts which may be
reasonably expected to result from the proposed action must be
compared against the criteria in this section, whether or not an
environmental assessment form (EAF) has been prepared. The
following list is not exhaustive; however, these criteria are considered
indicators of significant effects on the environment.
(1) A substantial adverse change in existing air quality, water quality
or noise levels; a substantial increase in solid waste production; a
substantial increase in potential for erosion, flooding or drainage
problems.
(2) The removal or destruction of large quantities of vegetation or
fauna; the substantial interference with the movement of any
resident or migratory fish or wildlife species; impacts on a
significant habitat area; or substantial adverse effects on a
threatened or endangered species of animal or plant or the habitat
of such a species.
(3) The encouraging or attracting of a large number of people to a
place or places for more than a few days compared to the number
of people who would come to such place absent the action.
(4) The creation of a material conflict with a community's existing
plans or goals as officially approved or adopted.
(5) The impairment of the character or quality of important historical,
archeological, architectural or aesthetic resources or of existing
community or neighborhood character.
(6) A major change in the use of either the quantity or type of energy.
§ 144-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-11
138:134
§ 144-12. Significance of consequence.
The significance of a likely consequence as enumerated in §§ 144-10 and
144-11 (i.e., whether it is material, substantial, large, important, etc.)
should be assessed in connection with its setting (i.e., urban or rural), its
probability of occurring, its duration, its irreversibility, its controllability, its
geographic scope and its magnitude.
§ 144-13. Filing procedures for applicants for determining
environmental significance.
(7) The creation of a hazard to human health or safety.
(8) A substantial change in the use or intensity of use of land or other
natural resources or in their capacity to support existing uses.
(9) The creation of a material demand for other actions which would
result in one (1) of the above consequences.
(10) Changes in two (2) or more elements of the environment, no one (1)
of which has a significant effect on the environment, but which
when taken together result in a substantial adverse impact on the
environment.
(11) Two (2) or more related actions undertaken, funded or approved by
an agency, no one (1) of which has or would have a significant effect
on the environment, but which cumulatively meet one (1) or more
of the criteria in this section.
B. For the purpose of determining whether an action will cause one (1) of
the foregoing consequences, the action shall be deemed to include
other simultaneous or subsequent actions which are:
(1) Included in any long-range plan of which the action under
consideration is a part;
(2) Likely to be undertaken as a result thereof; or
(3) Dependent thereon.
C. The significance of a likely consequence (that is whether it is material,
substantial, large, or important) should be assessed in connection with:
(1) Its setting (i.e., urban or rural).
(2) Its probability of occurring.
(3) Its duration.
(4) Its irreversibility.
(5) Its geographic scope.
(6) Its magnitude.
§ 144-11 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-13
138:135
§ 144-14. Form.
The statement provided herein shall be upon a form titled "SEQR"
prescribed by resolution by the village and shall contain relevant
information as shall be required in the prescribed form. Such statement
shall be accompanied by drawings, sketches and maps, if any, together with
any other relevant explanatory material required by the village.
§ 144-15. Processing of environmental statement.
Upon receipt of a complete application, the village shall cause notice
thereof to be posted on the signboard, if any, of the village maintained
by the village and may also cause such notice to be published in the
official newspaper of the village, if any, or in a newspaper having general
circulation within the village. The notice shall describe the nature of the
proposed action and state that written views thereon of any person shall
be received by the village no later than seven (7) days after posting of said
notice.
§ 144-16. Written determination on action.
The village shall render a written determination on such application within
fifteen (15) days following receipt of a complete application and statement;
provided, however, that such period may be extended by mutual agreement
of the applicant and the village. The determination shall state whether
such proposed action may or will not have a significant effect upon the
environment. The village may hold informal meetings with the applicant
and may consult with any other person for the purpose of making a
determination of the application.
§ 144-17. Time limitations.
The time limitations provided in this chapter shall be coordinated with, to
the extent practicable, other time limitations provided by statute or local
law, ordinance or regulation of the village.
A. For the purpose of assisting the village in the determination of whether
an action may or will not have a significant effect upon the environment,
applicants for permits or other approvals shall file a written statement
with the village setting forth:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The location of the real property affected, if any.
(3) A description of the nature of the proposed action.
(4) The effect it may have upon the environment.
B. Such statement shall be filed simultaneously with the application for
action.
§ 144-13 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-18
138:136
§ 144-18. Procedures for determining environmental significance of
actions proposed by village.
Actions proposed by the village shall be assessed to determine whether
or not the action may or will not have a significant effect upon the
environment.
§ 144-19. Statement of environmental significance.
The statement provided herein shall be upon a form as provided in § 144-14
of this chapter.
§ 144-20. Processing of statement.
The statement of environmental significance shall be processed in the
manner prescribed by § 144-15 of this chapter.
§ 144-21. Notification of determination of environmental
significance.
The village, upon determining whether an action proposed by the village or
an applicant to the village may or will not have a significant effect upon the
environment, shall immediately file such a determination as follows:
§ 144-22. Results of determination of environmental significance.
A. One (1) copy with the appropriate regional office of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
B. One (1) copy with the Commissioner of the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation.
C. One (1) copy with the office of the Municipal Clerk of the village.
D. One (1) copy with the appropriate lead agency, if any.
E. One (1) copy with the applicant, if any.
F. One (1) copy with other involved agencies, if any.
A. If it is determined by the village that the action will not have a
significant effect upon the environment, the proposed action may be
processed without further regard to this chapter.
B. If the municipality determines that the proposed action may have a
significant effect upon the environment, the proposed action shall be
reviewed and processed in accordance with the provisions of Article V
and Article VI of this chapter.
§ 144-18 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-22
138:137

ARTICLE V
Lead Agency
§ 144-23. Designation of lead agency.
Upon receipt of a complete application for an action which the village
determines may have a significant effect upon the environment pursuant
to Article IV of this chapter, the village shall immediately notify all other
agencies which may be involved in the proposed action. All involved
agencies shall to the fullest extent possible coordinate their environmental
reviews through a lead agency to the end that the requirements are met by
a single draft environmental impact statement, a single final environmental
impact statement and, if conducted and practicable, a single hearing
process. In order to expedite this coordination, the village shall require
applicants to specify in their applications which other agencies, to the best
of the applicant's knowledge, will have jurisdiction by law over proposed
actions. The designation of the lead agency shall be made within thirty (30)
calendar days following the filing of a complete application.
§ 144-24. Determination of lead agency.
If a question arises between (or among) two (2) or more agencies as to
which agency is the lead agency in an action, the agencies shall resolve the
question themselves and designate a lead agency, in writing, on the basis of
the following:
§ 144-25. Resolution of lead agency determination.
If such agencies are unable to resolve the question within the prescribed
thirty-calendar-day period, they shall submit the question in written form
to the Commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation who shall within five (5) business days, on the basis of the
criteria specified in § 144-24 of this chapter, designate the lead agency.
A. The agency first to act upon the proposed action.
B. A determination of which agency has the greatest responsibility for
supervising or approving the action as a whole.
C. A determination of which agency has more general governmental
powers as compared to single or limited powers or purposes.
D. A determination of which agency has the greatest capability for
providing the most thorough environmental assessment of the action.
E. A determination of whether the anticipated impacts of the action being
considered are primarily of statewide, regional or local concern.
§ 144-23 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-26
138:139
§ 144-26. Notification to applicant.
Once the lead agency has been identified, the lead agency shall immediately
notify the applicant, in writing, that it is the lead agency and request the
applicant to prepare a draft environmental impact statement.
§ 144-27. Responsibilities of other agencies.
The other agencies involved in the action shall have no further obligations
under this Article with respect to the action being considered except:
§ 144-28. Preliminary procedures and approval.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village, an agency or an applicant
from:
A. To provide their reviews where appropriate and, to the extent practical,
appropriate technical analysis and support.
B. To make the finding required by Article IX of this chapter.
C. Not to approve, commence or engage in such action until the
procedures set forth in Article IX of this chapter have been completed.
A. Conducting a contemporaneous environmental, economic feasibility
and other studies and preliminary planning and budgetary processes
necessary to the formulation of a proposal for action which do not
otherwise commit the village or the agency to commence or engage in
such action; or
B. Granting approval of any part of an application which relates only to
technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such partial
approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence the action
unless and until all requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled.
§ 144-26 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-28
138:140
ARTICLE VI
Draft Environmental Impact Statements
§ 144-29. Necessity of draft environmental impact statements.
Following a determination that an action may have a significant effect upon
the environment, the village shall:
§ 144-30. Cover sheet of the draft environmental impact statement.
All draft environmental impact statements shall be preceded by a cover
sheet stating:
§ 144-31. Table of contents.
If the draft environmental impact statement exceeds ten (10) pages in
length, it shall have a table of contents following the cover sheet.
A. In the case of an action not involving an applicant, prepare a draft
environmental impact statement in accordance with the procedures
outlined in this section; or
B. In the case of an action involving an applicant, immediately notify the
applicant to prepare an environmental impact report to assist the
village in carrying out its responsibility under this chapter or may
request the applicant to prepare a draft environmental impact
statement except where the action involves more than one (1) agency,
in which case the procedures outlined in §§ 144-23 and 144-26 of this
chapter shall be followed. If the applicant refuses to submit a draft
environmental impact statement or the environmental impact report,
the village shall prepare or cause to be prepared the draft
environmental impact statement or, in its discretion, notify the
applicant that the processing will cease and no approval will be issued.
A. That it is a draft environmental impact statement.
B. The name or other descriptive title of the action.
C. The location (county, municipality) of the action.
D. The name and address of the municipality or agency which required its
preparation and the name and telephone number of a person at the
municipality or agency to be contacted for further information.
E. Identification of individuals or organizations which prepared any
portion of the statement.
F. The date of its completion.
§ 144-29 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-32
138:141
§ 144-32. Contents of the body of the draft environmental impact
statement.
The body of all draft environmental impact statements shall contain at least
the following:
§ 144-33. Incorporation of other documents by reference.
A draft environmental impact statement may incorporate by reference all
or portions of other documents which contain information relevant to the
statement. The reference document shall be made available to the public
in the Village Clerk's office. When a statement uses incorporation by
reference, the referenced document shall be briefly described and its date
of preparation provided.
§ 144-34. Completion of the draft environmental impact statement.
Upon completion of a draft environmental impact statement prepared by or
at the request of the village, the village shall issue a notice of completion
containing the following:
A. A description of the proposed action in its environmental setting.
B. A statement of the environmental impact of the proposed action,
including its short-term and long-term effects, and typical associated
environmental effects.
C. An identification of any adverse environmental effects which cannot be
avoided if the proposed action is implemented.
D. A discussion of alternatives including the null alternative to the
proposed action and the comparable impacts and effects of such
alternatives.
E. An identification of any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of
resources which would be involved in the proposed action should it be
implemented.
F. A description of mitigation measures proposed to minimize the adverse
environmental impacts.
G. A description of any growth-inducing aspects of the proposed action.
H. A discussion of the effect of the proposed action on the use and
conservation of energy.
I. A list of any underlying studies, reports and other information obtained
and considered in preparing the statement.
J. Any other requirements which the village deems necessary for
adequate assessment of environmental impact.
A. A brief description of the action covered by the statement and the
location of its potential impacts and effects.
§ 144-32 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-34
138:142
§ 144-35. Filing of the notice of completion.
The notice of completion shall be sent to all other agencies involved in
the action, persons who have requested it, the editor of the State Bulletin,
the State Clearinghouse and the Southern Tier East Regional Planning
Development Board, the area-wide clearinghouse designated under the
Federal Office of Management and Budget Circular A-95. The village shall
maintain a file open to public inspection of notices of completion and draft
environmental impact statements it has requested an applicant to prepare,
has or caused to have been prepared.
§ 144-36. Filing of notice of completion and draft environmental
impact statements for public information purposes.
Impact statements and notice of completion shall immediately be filed as
follows:
B. A statement indicating where and how copies of the statement can be
reviewed or obtained.
C. A statement that comments pertaining to the draft environmental
impact statement are requested and will be considered by the village at
the Municipal Building for a period of not less than thirty (30) days from
the first filing and circulation of the notice of completion.
A. One (1) copy with the Municipal Clerk whose jurisdiction most closely
coincides with that of the lead agency.
B. One (1) copy with the Southern Tier Office of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
C. One (1) copy with the Commissioner of the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation.
§ 144-34 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-36
138:143

ARTICLE VII
Public Hearing Process
§ 144-37. Determination of necessity of public hearing.
Upon completion of the draft environmental impact statement prepared by
or at the request of the village, the village shall determine whether or not
to conduct a public hearing concerning the proposed action. In determining
whether or not to hold a hearing, the village shall consider the degree
of interest shown by other persons in the action and the extent to which
a public hearing can aid in the decisionmaking process of the village by
providing a forum for or an efficient mechanism for the collection of public
comment.
§ 144-38. Notification of public hearing.
If a public hearing is to be held, notice thereof may be contained in the
notice of completion or, if not so contained, shall be given in the same
manner in which the notice of completion is sent, filed and circulated
pursuant to § 144-35 of this chapter. In either case, the notice of hearing
shall also be published at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
potential impacts and effects of the action and shall contain a statement
that comments pertaining to the draft environmental impact statement will
be received and considered by the village for not less than ten (10) calendar
days following the public hearing.
§ 144-39. Time frame for conduct of public hearing.
The hearing shall commence no less than fifteen (15) calendar days or
more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the draft environmental impact
statement pursuant to § 144-36 of this chapter, except as the village may
otherwise provide where it determines that additional time is necessary for
public or other agency review of the draft environmental impact statement
or where a different hearing date is required as appropriate under
applicable law. When a SEQR hearing is to be held, it shall be incorporated
into existing hearing procedures of the village.
§ 144-37 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-39
138:145

ARTICLE VIII
Final Environmental Impact Statement
§ 144-40. Determination of necessity of final environmental impact
statement.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the village shall prepare or cause to
be prepared a final environmental statement within forty-five (45) calendar
days after the close of any hearing or within sixty (60) days after the
filing of the draft environmental impact statement, whichever last occurs.
If the proposed action has been withdrawn or if, on the basis of the draft
environmental impact statement or hearing, the village has determined that
the action will not have significant effect upon the environment, no final
environmental impact statement need be prepared.
§ 144-41. Extension for preparation of final environmental impact
statement.
The village may extend the last date for preparation of the final
environmental impact statement:
§ 144-42. Contents of final environmental impact statement.
The final environmental impact statement shall be preceded by a cover
sheet as provided in § 144-30 except that it shall state that it is a final
environmental impact statement. The final environmental impact statement
shall reflect a revision and updating of the matters required as provided
in § 144-32 in the body of the statement in light of further review by the
village, comments received and the record of any hearing. Copies or a
summary of the substantive comments received in response to the draft
environmental impact statement and the response of the village to such
comments shall be included in the final environmental impact statement.
§ 144-43. Filing of final environmental impact statement.
Copies of the final environmental impact statement shall be filed and made
available for review in the same manner as the draft environmental impact
statement. A notice of completion of the final environmental impact
statement shall be sent to all persons and agencies to whom the notice
of completion of the draft environmental impact statement was sent. The
village shall maintain a file open to public inspection of notices of
completion and draft environmental impact statements it has requested or
prepared.
A. Where it determines that additional time is necessary to complete the
statement adequately;
B. Where problems with the proposed action requiring material
reconsideration or modification have been identified; or
C. For other good cause.
§ 144-40 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-43
138:147

ARTICLE IX
Decisionmaking
§ 144-44. Timing of decisionmaking.
No decision to carry out or approve an action which may have a significant
effect upon the environment shall be made until after the filing and
consideration of a final environmental impact statement. The village's
decision whether or not to approve an action which has been the subject
of an environmental impact statement shall be made within thirty (30)
calendar days of the filing of a final environmental impact statement.
§ 144-45. Findings.
When the village decides to carry out or approve an action which may
have a significant effect upon the environment, it shall make the following
findings in a written statement:
§ 144-46. Filing of determination.
For public information purposes, a copy of the determination shall be filed
immediately in the same manner as the draft environmental impact
statement. The village shall maintain a file open to public inspection of all
notices of determination prepared by it.
A. Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations of
state policy, from among the reasonable alternatives thereto, the action
to be carried out or approved is one which minimizes or avoids adverse
environmental effects to the maximum extent possible, including the
effects disclosed in the relevant environmental impact statement; and
B. Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations of
state policy, all practicable means will be taken in carrying out or
approving the action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental
effects.
§ 144-44 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-46
138:149

ARTICLE X
Administrative Procedures
§ 144-47. Fees.
Where an action subject to this chapter involves an applicant and the
village has been responsible for the preparation of environmental impact
statements, the village shall charge a fee not to exceed one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) of the action's total cost to the applicant in order
to recover the costs of preparing and/or reviewing environmental impact
statements.
§ 144-48. Amendments.
The village may, from time to time after public hearing, modify the
procedures of this chapter, broaden the scope of actions for which
environmental review is required and establish further environmental
review criteria. Such amendments shall be no less protective of
environmental values, public participation and agency and judicial review
than the procedures set forth in Part 617 NYCRR and New York State
Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0113.
§ 144-49. Consistency with New York State law.
Upon the written request of any person, the Commissioner of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation shall review and
determine whether any action contained in the village's own list or
classification system is consistent with the criteria of Section 617.9 and
the actions in Section 617.12 of Part 617 of the New York Codes, Rules
and Regulations, State Environmental Quality Review. The Commissioner
shall give written notification of the determination to such persons and the
village within thirty (30) days of receipt of a request.
§ 144-50. Procedures for questioning final determination.
Within ten (10) calendar days after the filing of a final decision of the village
of the environmental impact of a proposed action, the village will accept a
written statement of questions of specific nature pertaining to such decision
by any person(s) or agency(s).
§ 144-51. Establishing of meeting to discussion questions.
At the mutual consent of the village and the person(s) or agency(s) which
has caused the statement of questions to be prepared to the village, the
date, time and location of a meeting of both parties shall be established.
Such meeting shall take place not later than thirty (30) calendar days after
the receipt of the written statement by the village. If more than one (1)
written statement of questions is received by the village, the village may, at
its discretion, hold one (1) meeting to address all statements of questions.
§ 144-47 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-52
138:151
§ 144-52. Notification of receipt of statement of questions.
Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of a written statement of questions,
the village shall cause notice of receipt of such questions to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. Such notice shall
state that the questions may be reviewed at the office of the Village Clerk
and the date, time and location of the meeting between the village and the
person(s) or agency(s) which has caused the statement of questions to be
prepared and that any person(s) or agency(s) that wish to comment upon
the statement of questions may do so at such meeting. The cost of such
notice shall be paid by the person(s) or agency(s) that caused the statement
of questions to be prepared.
§ 144-53. Purpose of meeting.
The purpose of the meeting between the village and the person(s) or
agency(s) that caused the statement of questions to be prepared shall be to
discuss the environmental ramifications, social and economic ramifications
and other mitigating circumstances which led to the final decision made
by the village on the action. Only those questions which appear upon the
written statement of questions shall be discussed at such meeting.
§ 144-54. Determination of final decision.
Based upon the discussion between the village and the person(s) or
agency(s) that caused the statement of questions to be prepared and with
any other person(s) or agency(s) with which the village may wish to consult,
the village may modify its final decision. No further consideration of
questions pertaining to any decision of the village upon the proposed action
as provided in this section will be made. Notice of the final decision shall be
made in the same manner as provided in §§ 144-35, 144-36 and 144-45 of
this chapter. The village shall maintain a file open to public inspection of all
notices of determination prepared by it.
§ 144-55. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on March 1, 1979, for any actions undertaken
by the village. This chapter shall take effect on November 1, 1978, for any
action proposed by an applicant which requires a permit or other approval
from the municipality.
§ 144-52 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-55
138:152
ARTICLE XI
Type I and Type II Actions
§ 144-56. Type I actions.
A. Purpose; construal.
(1) The purpose of the list of actions identified as Type I in this section
is to identify for agencies, project sponsors and the public those
actions and projects that are more likely to require the preparation
of environmental impact statements (EIS's) than those not so listed
(i.e., "unlisted actions"). This Type I list is not exhaustive of those
actions that an agency may determine to have a significant effect
on the environment and to require the preparation of an EIS.
Therefore, the fact that an action or project has not been listed as a
Type I action does not carry with it the presumption that it will not
have a significant effect on the environment. For all individual
actions which are Type I or unlisted, the determination of
significance must be made by comparing the impacts which may be
reasonably expected to result from the proposed action with the
criteria listed in Part 617.11.
(2) The Type I actions on this list are considered more likely to require
the preparation of an EIS than other actions and are likely to
involve review by more than one (1) governmental agency, and
therefore, the procedural requirements for Type I actions are more
extensive than for those unlisted actions (Part 617.6).36
B. The following actions are Type I if they are directly undertaken, funded
or approved by an agency:
(1) The adoption of a municipality's land use plan or zoning regulations
or the adoption by any agency of a comprehensive resource
management plan.
(2) The following changes in the allowable uses within any zoning
district, affecting twenty-five (25) or more acres of the district:
(a) Authorizing industrial or commercial uses within a residential
or agricultural district; or
(b) Authorizing residential uses within an agricultural district.
(3) The granting of a zoning change at the request of an applicant for
an action that meets or exceeds one (1) or more of the thresholds
given in other sections of this list.
(4) The acquisition, sales, lease or other transfer of one hundred (100)
or more contiguous acres of land by a state or local agency.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 144-56 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-56
138:153
(5) Construction of new residential units which meet or exceed the
following thresholds:
(a) Ten (10) units in municipalities which have not adopted zoning
regulations.
(b) Fifty (50) units not to be connected (at commencement of
habitation) to community or publicly owned utilities.
(c) In a city, town or village having a population of less than one
hundred fifty thousand (150,000): two hundred fifty (250) units
to be connected (at the commencement of habitation) to
community or publicly owned utilities.
(d) In a city, town or village having a population of greater than
one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) but less than one million
(1,000,000): one thousand (1,000) units to be connected (at the
commencement of habitation) to community or publicly owned
utilities.
(e) In a city or town having a population of greater than one
million (1,000,000): two thousand five hundred (2,500) units to
be connected (at the commencement of habitation) to
community or publicly owned utilities.
(6) Construction of new nonresidential facilities which meet or exceed
any of the following thresholds or the expansion of existing
nonresidential facilities by more than fifty percent (50%) of any of
the following thresholds, provided that the expansion and the
existing facilities, when combined, meet or exceed any threshold
contained in this section:
(a) A project or action which involves the physical alteration of ten
(10) acres.
(b) A project or action which would use ground or surface water in
excess of two million (2,000,000) gallons per day.
(c) Parking for one thousand (1,000) vehicles.
(d) In a city, town or village having a population of one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) persons or fewer: a facility with more
than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
(e) In a city, town or village having a population of more than one
hundred fifty thousand (150,000) persons: a facility with more
than two hundred forty thousand (240,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
(7) Any structure exceeding one hundred (100) feet above original
ground level in a locality without any zoning regulation pertaining
to height.
§ 144-56 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-56
138:154
§ 144-57. Type II actions.
(8) Any nonagricultural use occurring wholly or partially within an
agricultural district (certified pursuant to the Agriculture and
Markets Law, Article 25-AA, § 303) which exceeds ten percent
(10%) of any threshold established in this section.
(9) Any action (unless the action is designated for the preservation of
the facility or site) occurring wholly or partially within or
contiguous to any facility or site listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or any historic building, structure or site or
prehistoric site that has been proposed by the Committee on the
Registers for consideration by the New York State Board on
Historic Preservation for a recommendation to the State Historic
Officer for nomination for inclusion in said National Register.
(10) Any project or action which exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of
any threshold in this section, occurring wholly or partially within or
substantially contiguous to any publicly owned or operated park
land, recreation area or designated open space.
(11) Any action which exceeds the locally established thresholds or, if
no such thresholds are established, any action which takes place
wholly or partially within or substantially contiguous to any critical
environmental area designated by a local agency pursuant to Part
617.4.
A. Actions or classes of actions which have been determined not to have a
significant effect on the environment are classified as Type II actions
and do not require environmental impact statements or any other
determination or procedure under this chapter.
B. Each agency may adopt its own Type II list, provided that it finds that
each of the actions contained on it:
(1) Is no less protective of the environment than the list in this section;
and
(2) Will in no case have a significant effect on the environment based
on the criteria contained in 617.11 and any additional criteria
contained in its procedures adopted pursuant to Part 617.4.
C. An agency may not designate as Type I any action on the Type II list.
D. The following actions are Type II actions:
(1) Replacement of a facility, in kind, on the same site unless such
facility meets any of the thresholds in Part 617.13.37
(2) The granting of individual setback and lot line variances.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 144-56 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-57
138:155
(3) Agricultural farm management practices, including construction,
maintenance and repair of farm buildings and structures and land
use changes consistent with generally accepted principles of
farming.
(4) Repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of new
travel lanes.
(5) Street openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance of
existing utility facilities.
(6) Installation of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and
highways.
(7) Public or private forest management practices other than the
removal of trees or the application of herbicides or pesticides.
(8) Construction or placement of minor structures accessory or
appurtenant to existing facilities, including garages, carports,
patios, home swimming pools, fences, barns or other buildings not
changing land use or density.
(9) Maintenance of existing landscaping or natural growth.
(10) Mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, uses and ownership
patterns.
(11) Inspections and licensing activities relating to the qualifications of
individuals or businesses to engage in their business or profession.
(12) Sales of surplus government property other than land, radioactive
material, pesticides, herbicides or other hazardous materials.
(13) Collective bargaining activities.
(14) Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement
systems.
(15) Routine or continuing agency administration and management, not
including new programs or major reordering of priorities.
(16) License and permit renewals where there will be no material
change in permit conditions or the scope of permitted activities.
(17) Routine activities of educational institutions which do not include
capital construction.
(18) Information collection including basic data collection and research,
master plan study components, water quality and pollution studies,
traffic counts, engineering studies, boring studies, surveys and
soils studies that are not a preliminary step towards any given Type
I project.
§ 144-57 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 144-57
138:156
§ 144-58. Fees and costs.
(19) Minor temporary uses of land having negligible or no permanent
effect on the environment.
A. Environmental impact statement.
(1) When an action subject to this chapter involves an applicant, the
lead agency may charge a fee to the applicant in order to recover
the actual costs of preparing or reviewing the EIS; provided,
however, that an applicant may not be charged a separate fee for
both the preparation and review of an EIS and provided further
that any fee charged must reflect the actual costs to the lead
agency for such preparation or review.
(2) Where an applicant does not choose to prepare the EIS, the agency
shall provide the applicant, upon request, with an estimate of the
costs for preparing such statement based on the total cost of the
project for which funding or approval is sought.
B. Calculation of project costs.
(1) For residential projects, the total project cost shall be the cost of
the land plus the cost of all site improvements required, not
including the cost of buildings and structures.
(2) In the case of a residential project, the fee charged by an agency
may not exceed two percent (2%) of the total project cost.
C. Construction projects.
(1) For nonresidential construction projects, the total project cost shall
be the cost of supplying utility service to the project, the cost of site
preparation and the cost of labor and material as determined with
reference to a current cost data publication in common usage, such
as Building Construction Cost Data by Means.
(2) In the case of construction projects, the fee charged may not
exceed one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of the total project cost.
D. Appeals procedure. When a dispute arises concerning fees charged to
an applicant by a state agency, the applicant may make a written
request to the agency setting forth reasons why it is felt that such fees
are inequitable. Upon receipt of a request, the chief fiscal officer of the
agency or his or her designee shall examine the agency record and
prepare a written response to the applicant setting forth reasons why
the applicant's claims are valid or invalid.
E. The technical services of the department may be made available to
other agencies on a fee basis reflecting the costs thereof, and the fee
charged to any applicant pursuant to Subsection A of this section may
reflect such costs.
§ 144-57 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-58
138:157

ARTICLE XII
Lead Agency
§ 144-59. Creation and authority.
The village hereby establishes the Chairman of the Village Planning Board,
the Chairman of the Village Zoning Board of Appeals and the Village
Planning Coordinator as the lead agency in connection with this chapter and
invests such agency with the duties and authority hereinbefore set forth and
implied to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 144-59 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 144-59
138:159
Chapter 146
CIVILIAN FINGERPRINTING
§ 146-1. Police Department to provide service.
The Johnson City Police Department shall, upon application and the
payment of the required fee (if any), provide fingerprinting for civilians and
others not members of the Johnson City Police Department.
§ 146-2. Fee.
Chapter 147
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration — See Ch. 114. Fire prevention — See Ch. 148.
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, any inconsistent provision of law notwithstanding,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official of the Village of Johnson City.
LIEN — Any lien, including liens for taxes, special ad valorem levies, special
assessments and municipal charges, arising by operation of law against
property in favor of the Village and remaining undischarged for a period of
one year or more.
REAL PROPERTY — Property upon which there is erected any residential,
commercial or industrial building or structure except an owner-occupied
A. The fee for taking fingerprints of civilians and others not members of
the Johnson City Police Department shall be $15.
B. This fee shall be waived for employees of the Village of Johnson City,
employees of the Johnson City Central School District and members of
local, state and federal law enforcement agencies for work related
purposes only.
C. Payment of the fee may be made by personal check, company check,
money order or cash to the Police Department records clerk. Checks or
money orders should be made payable to the Village of Johnson City. If
the records clerk is not on duty payment may be made at the Village
Clerk/Treasurer's office and a receipt signed by the Village Clerk/
Treasurer must be produced as proof of payment prior to
fingerprinting.
§ 144-59 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 147-1
146:160
single-family residential structure and owner-occupied two-family
residential structures.[Amended 12-5-2017 by L.L. No. 12-2017]
SPECIAL LIEN — A lien upon fire insurance proceeds pursuant to this
chapter and § 22 of the General Municipal Law and § 331 of the Insurance
Law and any amendments thereto.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Village of Johnson City.
§ 147-2. Notice of intention to claim.
The Treasurer shall file a notice of intention to claim against the proceeds
of fire insurance policies, pursuant to § 22 of the General Municipal Law,
with the State Superintendent of Financial Services for entry in the index of
liens maintained by him as provided in § 331 of the Insurance Law.
§ 147-3. Filing of claim by Treasurer.
Prior to the payment of any proceeds of a policy of insurance for damages
caused by fire to real property, which policy insures the interest of an owner
and is issued on real property located within the Village, and following
notification to the Treasurer by an insurer of the filing of a claim for
payment of such proceeds, the Treasurer shall claim, by serving a certificate
of lien, against such proceeds to the extent of any lien (including interest
and penalties to the date of the claim) thereon, which claim, when made
and perfected in the manner provided for in § 22 of the General Municipal
Law and § 331 of the Insurance Law, shall constitute a special lien against
such proceeds and shall, as to such proceeds, be prior to all other liens and
claims, except the claims of a mortgagee of record named in such policy.
Notice of the service of the certificate of the special lien shall be given to
the insured by certified mail to the address as it appears on the records of
the insurer.
§ 147-4. Additional powers of Village.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to alter or
impair the right of the Village to acquire or enforce the lien against property
but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to acquire or
enforce such right.
§ 147-5. Powers of Building Official.
The Building Official is empowered, authorized and directed to administer
the provisions of this chapter. So far as practicable and subject to the
approval of the Village Board, the services of all other Village departments
and agencies shall be made available by their respective heads to the
Building Official for the carrying out of his or her functions.
§ 147-6. Release of proceeds to insured.
Whenever the proceeds of a policy of fire insurance will be or have been
paid to the Village instead of an insured, all or part of such proceeds may be
§ 147-1 CIVILIAN FINGERPRINTING § 147-6
146:161
paid or released to the insured if the insured satisfies the Building Official
that the affected premises has been or will be repaired or restored, that
such repairs or restoration are in the public interest, and the insured is
issued and complies with a certificate of the Building Official pursuant to
this chapter. To secure such payment or release of proceeds, the insured
must notify the Building Official, in writing, within 45 days after the mailing
to the insured of a notice of the service of the certificate of special lien, of
the intention to restore or repair the affected premises and must file with
the Building Official a completed application with all required supporting
documentation pursuant to this chapter within 60 days thereafter, unless
the Building Official grants an extension for a stated period of time.
§ 147-7. Conditions and documentation for release of proceeds.
The release or return to the insured of any amounts to which he or she
would otherwise be entitled to claim shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. Such release or return shall be subject to the repair or restoration of
the affected premises, in accordance with applicable building laws, to
the condition it was in prior to the time the lien of the Village arose, or
to an improved condition.
B. The insured shall file with the Building Official an application in
affidavit form with such supporting documentation as he or she shall
require containing the following:
(1) A complete description of the nature and extent of the damage to
the insured premises and of the condition of the premises prior to
the time the lien of the Village arose.
(2) A complete description of the nature of the repairs or restoration to
be undertaken and the cost thereof.
(3) A statement as to the source of funds needed to complete such
repairs or restoration if the insurance proceeds are not sufficient.
(4) The name and address of each contractor who will effect such
repairs or restoration.
(5) An estimated time schedule showing how long the repairs or
restoration, and each phase thereof, will take.
(6) Such other information as may be required by the Building Official
to enable him or her to determine whether the repairs or
restoration are in the public interest and will be or have been
timely and properly made.
C. Upon a preliminary approval by the Building Official of an application
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, he or she may issue a
certificate evidencing the right of release to the insured of amounts
§ 147-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 147-7
146:162
§ 147-8. Termination of rights.
If the insured fails to notify the Village of his or its intention to repair
or restore the affected premises as required in this chapter, fails to file a
completed application pursuant to this chapter or fails to obtain a certificate
from the Building Official or comply therewith within the time set forth, the
right of the insured to assert a claim against the insurance proceeds, except
to the extent they exceed the amount of the lien, shall terminate.
§ 147-9. Fund established.
There shall be established in the office of the Treasurer a fund for the
deposit of fire insurance proceeds to be held and applied in accordance with
this chapter. Such funds shall not be held together with the general tax
levies in the general fund.
§ 147-10. Deposit of funds.
Until termination of the insured's right to claim against the insurance
proceeds, any proceeds received by the Village shall be deposited in a
special fund and shall be retained therein. Upon termination of the insured's
right to claim against the proceeds, the proceeds and any interest accrued
thereon shall be applied to the liens affecting the premises in a manner
determined by the Treasurer and may be transferred to the general fund.
representing insurance proceeds, upon such conditions as may be set
forth therein.
D. The repairs or restoration required shall be completed in compliance
with the terms and conditions of the certificate prior to the release or
return of any part of the insurance proceeds; provided, however, that
the Building Official may, upon the written request of the insured and in
his or her sole discretion, approve a prior release of such proceeds or a
portion thereof, in a lump sum or in installments, where the insured
certifies and demonstrates that such release is required to permit such
repairs or restoration to go forward. Any such insurance proceeds
released or returned prior to the completion of the repairs or
restoration required by the Building Official may be paid directly to the
contractor or contractors responsible for making such repairs or
restoration. Such payment shall, to the extent thereof, release the
Building Official from further liability to the insured.
E. Whenever the Building Official approves a release of all or part of the
insurance proceeds prior to compliance with the terms and conditions
of the agreement, the Building Official may require the insured to post
an undertaking in an amount sufficient to assume the restoration or
improvement of the property, obtain a performance bond or deposit
such proceeds in an escrow account.
§ 147-7 CIVILIAN FINGERPRINTING § 147-11
146:163
§ 147-11. Liens in effect until paid.
The lien or liens against the affected premises upon which the special lien
against proceeds is based shall continue in full force and effect, except to
the extent that such lien or liens are or have been paid.
§ 147-12. Adjustment of lien; restoration work.
The Building Official may, pursuant to this chapter, release, compromise
or adjust the special lien upon insurance proceeds created by this chapter.
Any certificate issued by such Building Official pursuant to this chapter
shall be for the purpose of preserving and evidencing the right of release
of the special lien created by this chapter subject solely to the provisions
of this chapter and shall not be deemed to be a contract subject to Village
regulation. Any repair or restoration performed in anticipation of a release
of insurance proceeds shall not be deemed to be a public work or municipal
project or to have been done pursuant to a municipal contract.
§ 147-13. Rules, regulations and forms.
The Building Official shall be empowered to promulgate rules and
regulations and to adopt approved forms to be used by applicants.
Chapter 148
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code — See Ch. 114.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Storage of flammable gases — See Ch. 154.
Outdoor woodburning furnaces — See Ch.
184.
§ 148-1. Use of Village fire equipment outside Village limits.
A. Authorized subject to certain conditions. Pursuant to the provisions of
§ 209 of the General Municipal Law, the Village is authorized and
permitted to go to the aid of any city, village, town, fire district or
territory outside the Village of Johnson City within the County of
Broome and counties adjacent to the County of Broome, and permission
is hereby given to the Chief and other employees of the Fire
Department of the Village employed by it to use the fire trucks and
other apparatus and equipment owned by the Village for such purposes.
Such authorization and permission for the extension of such aid shall,
however, be subject to the following conditions and regulations:
(1) All calls for such aid in connection with fires occurring in any such
outside city, village, town, fire district or territory shall be refused
§ 147-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 148-1
148:164
§ 148-2. Open fires.
It is the intent of this section to protect the general health, welfare and
safety of the people of the Village of Johnson City by prohibiting open fires,
which are dangerous to life and property.
if, at the time of such calls or any of them, said apparatus and
equipment shall be engaged in any service within said Village.
(2) All calls for outside assistance shall be refused unless at the time of
such call such apparatus and equipment can be safely used for the
purpose of responding to such calls without impairing or
endangering the same and unless the highways and weather
conditions are favorable. Such facts shall be determined by the
Chief or Acting Chief of the Fire Department or by such other
person or persons as the Board of Trustees shall designate and
appoint for such purpose.
(3) Any such call for assistance from any outside city, village, town, fire
district or territory shall not be responded to and shall be refused
unless such calls are made by such person or persons as shall have
been duly designated, pursuant to resolution duly adopted by the
governing body of such city, village, town, fire district or territory,
and the name and address of such designee filed with the Clerk of
the Village of Johnson City.
(4) Any such call shall not be responded to and shall be refused unless
the city, village, town, fire district or territory by which such call
shall be made shall have, by suitable resolution duly adopted by its
governing body, consented and agreed to abide by the terms,
regulations, conditions and provisions herein provided and shall
have agreed to pay to the Village of Johnson City any and all loss or
damage to said fire apparatus or equipment of said Village together
with the expenses incurred in the operation of the same in
connection with any and all of such calls for aid and assume
responsibility for compensation for such firemen employed by said
Village as shall receive injuries while performing their duties as
such, while going to a fire, while working at a fire or returning
therefrom.
B. Claims for services. The Board of Trustees shall from time to time fix
the value of services rendered to outside cities, villages, towns, fire
districts or territories in responding to calls for assistance and for any
loss or damage to the fire apparatus or equipment of the Village used in
connection with any such call or calls, together with the expenses
incurred with the operation of the same in connection with such call or
calls, and shall submit to any such city, village, town, fire district or
territory as shall have made and received response to any such call a
written claim or claims for compensation therefor within 60 days after
the same shall be determined pursuant to the statute in such case made
and provided.
§ 148-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 148-2
148:165
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food.
OPEN FIRE — Any outdoor fire or outdoor smoke-producing process
from which air contaminants are emitted directly into the outdoor
atmosphere.
REFUSE — All waste material, including but not limited to garbage,
rubbish, incinerator residue, street sweepings, dead animals and offal.
RUBBISH — Solid or liquid waste material, including but not limited to
paper and paper products; rags; trees or leaves, needles and branches
therefrom; vines; lawn and garden debris; furniture; cans; crockery;
plastic; cartons; chemicals; paint; grease; sludge; oils and other
petroleum products; lumber; sawdust; demolition materials; tires; and
automobiles and other vehicles and parts for junk, salvage or disposal.
B. Prohibited burning. The following fires are prohibited in Johnson City:
(1) The burning of garbage, refuse and rubbish in any manner is
prohibited.
(2) All open fires are prohibited in Johnson City, with the exception of
those in conformity with the provisions of § 148-2C of this chapter.
(3) Open burning for outdoor cooking is prohibited in or on multipledwelling
structures.
C. Permitted burning. Burning in an open fire, provided that it is not
contrary to any other federal, state, county or local law, ordinance, rule
or regulation, will be permitted as follows:
(1) Bonfires. Bonfires shall be permitted only for a publicly-sponsored
celebration or event, or for an organization-sponsored event, or for
a public or private school-sponsored event, and shall be subject to
meeting all requirements of the bonfire permit application obtained
from and filed with the Fire Marshal's office, prior to any bonfire
being lit and taking place. No fire shall be ignited prior to an on-site
inspection of the location where the bonfire is to take place and
shall be subject to any and all conditions or restrictions the Fire
Marshal's office may impose for the safety of life and property, nor
shall any fire be ignited prior to the issuance of a bonfire permit
issued by the Fire Marshal's office. The Fire Department shall be
notified prior to igniting any said bonfire permitted by the Fire
Marshal's office.
(2) Outdoor cooking. Open burning will be permitted for outdoor
cooking when the fire is limited to the minimal size necessary and
contained in a device or cooking utensil commonly referred to as a
"grill" or "hibachi" and designed for outdoor cooking purposes. All
§ 148-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 148-2
148:166
applicable and/or reasonable safety precautions shall be taken
when using said devices or utensils.
(3) Recreational fires or campfires. Small recreational fires or
campfires shall be permitted only when all of the following are
adhered to:
(a) When the fire is contained to a device designed to hold a small
fire, such as an outdoor fireplace, or commercially
manufactured steel or ceramic portable fireplace, and used
according to the manufacturer's directions.
(b) Said fire is solely for a recreational purpose.
(c) Said fire is placed no closer than 25 feet to any structure.
(d) Said fire is properly attended and controlled at all times by a
responsible party with appropriate fire extinguishing
equipment readily available.
(e) Said fire shall not present a safety hazard to life or property,
nor create a nuisance.
D. Control of fires within the Village. If, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal
or the Fire Chief, weather conditions are such that the starting or the
continuation of burning is a risk to life, health or property within the
Village, he or she shall have the right to declare that any and all burning
shall cease immediately until further notice.
E. Enforcement. The Fire Marshal and such firefighting personnel as he or
she shall designate are hereby vested with authority to enforce the
provisions of this section. The Fire Department is hereby authorized to
extinguish any open burning fire being conducted in violation of any of
the provisions of this section.
F. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of
this section shall be deemed a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
(2) Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this
section shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
(3) Each day (twenty-four-hour period) that a violation of this section is
committed or permitted to exist shall be deemed to constitute a
distinct and separate violation.
§ 148-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 148-3
148:167
§ 148-3. Depositing lighted cigars, cigarettes and matches
prohibited.
No person shall throw, drop or place any lighted match, cigar, cigarette or
any burning fragment or part thereof or any burning contents of any pipe in,
upon or through any grating in any sidewalk or any window of any building
or any vehicle or into any accumulation of combustible material adjacent to
any building in the Village.
§ 148-4. Accumulations of rubbish prohibited.
No person shall store or keep or permit to be kept or to remain in any
building or in any cellar or basement of any building in the Village any
accumulation of empty boxes, barrels, paper, rubbish or combustible
material which, in the judgment of the Chief of the Fire Department,
presents or increases a fire hazard.
§ 148-5. Deposits of combustible materials near buildings.
No person shall deposit or keep or cause or permit to be deposited or kept
in the Village any hay, straw, excelsior, empty boxes, barrels, wastepaper or
other combustible material in any street, avenue, lane, alley, yard or place
adjacent to any building or within 10 feet of any place where fire exists or
ashes are stored unless such combustible materials are kept in a closed and
separate receptacle.
§ 148-6. Deposits of ashes near wooden buildings.
No person shall deposit or keep or cause or permit to be deposited or
kept any ashes in or within 10 feet of any building or part of a building
constructed in whole or in part of wood in the Village except in a securely
closed container made of metal or other incombustible material.
§ 148-7. Storage of excelsior and packing materials.
No person shall keep or store or permit to be kept or stored any excelsior,
paper, shavings or other material of a combustible nature, commonly used
for packing, in any building in the Village unless the same shall be kept in a
covered metal container.
§ 148-8. Keeping of oily waste and rags.
No person shall keep or permit to be kept in any building in the Village any
oily waste or oily rags unless at all times when not in use such oily waste
or oily rags shall be kept in a separate metal can with a self-closing cover
and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the
container at least four inches above the floor.
§ 148-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 148-9
148:168
§ 148-9. Sprinkler system or smoke detector in nursing homes.
All public areas, all bedroom areas and all storage areas of nursing homes
constructed within the Village of Johnson City shall be equipped with a
sprinkler system or smoke detector device.
Chapter 154
FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 148, Art. II.
§ 154-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the use, storage and handling of compressed
liquefied petroleum or other flammable gases.
§ 154-2. Permit application; issuance.
An application for a permit accompanied by plans shall be made to the
Village Engineer and Fire Chief for all systems connected from real property
to liquefied petroleum or other compressed flammable gas container or
containers. Upon certification by the Village Engineer and Fire Chief, a
permit will be issued by the Enforcement Officer.
§ 154-3. Restriction of storage.
The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee may restrict the storage
of compressed or liquefied gases inside the Village of Johnson City to any
amount which they deem safe; the restrictions must be approved by the
Village Board.
§ 154-4. Adoption of standards.
The National Fire Protection Association standards for the storage and
handling of liquefied petroleum gases shall be accepted as necessary
requirements in this chapter.
§ 154-5. Continuance of existing uses.
Existing installations for the storage or use of compressed flammable or
liquefied petroleum gas may be continued in use, provided that such use
does not constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property.
§ 148-9 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 154-5
154:169
Chapter 156
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage and watercourses — See Ch. 136.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 144.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 176.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 237.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 238.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
Wellhead, aquifer recharge and watershed
protection zones — See Ch. 272.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 156-1. Findings; purpose; objectives.
A. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City finds that
the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Johnson City and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and
injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such
damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set
forth, this chapter is adopted.
B. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages.
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
§ 154-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-1
154:170
§ 156-2. Definitions.
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are to:
(1) Protect human life and health.
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas.
(7) Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and
where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-99, V, VO, VE OR V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as
the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
§ 156-1 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-2
154:171
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below grade level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the Village of Johnson City published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance
Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses
studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of the
Village of Johnson City, issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have
been defined but no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of the
Village of Johnson City, on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the
Federal Management Agency to the Village of Johnson City. The report
contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map
and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
§ 156-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-2
154:172
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., the top slab in concrete slab construction or the top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of
the lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
§ 156-2 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-2
154:173
§ 156-3. General provisions.
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 156-4B(3)(b) of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration of the property,
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms.
It also includes the placement and/or installation on the property of
accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage trailers and building
materials. For manufactured homes, the "actual start" means the
affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to commence when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
(2)
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of Johnson
City.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the Village of Johnson City, of Broome County, New
York" (community number: 360047B), dated September 30, 1977, with
§ 156-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-3
154:174
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary -
Floodway Maps (Map Panel H and 1-01), are hereby adopted and
declared to be part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps
are on file at the Planning Department in the Village offices.
C. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
(1) This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National
Flood Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and shall
supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining eligibility for flood insurance.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the
most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall
govern.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or substantially altered and
no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties of § 156-7 of this chapter. Each day of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Village of Johnson City from taking such other lawful action as
necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not
compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved
variance under § 156-6 will be declared noncompliant and notification
sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village
of Johnson City, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
§ 156-3 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-3
154:175
§ 156-4. Administration.
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Designation of the local administrator. The Code Enforcement Officer is
hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
B. Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before the start of construction or any other development
within the areas of special flood hazard as established in § 156-3B.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms supplied
by the local administrator and may include but not be limited to plans,
in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location
of the foregoing.
(1) Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor including basement or cellar) of all structures.
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
(c) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional
engineer or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet
the criteria in § 156-5A(3)(a).
(d) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 156-5B.
(e) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(2) Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or
floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in relation to
mean sea level. The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the floodproofing
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by the
same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission and
approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
§ 156-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-4
154:176
local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project
unless immediately corrected.
(3) Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the
local administrator shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Permit application review.
[1] Review all development permit applications to determine
that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
[2] Review all development permit applications to determine
that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
[3] Review all development permit applications to determine
if the proposed development adversely affects the areas of
special flood hazard. For the purpose of this chapter,
"adversely affects" means physical damage to adjacent
properties. An engineering study may be required of the
applicant for this purpose.
[a] If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be
granted consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
[b] If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage
mitigation measures shall be made a condition of the
permit.
[4] Review all development permits for compliance with the
provisions of § 156-5A(5), Encroachments.
(b) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
§ 156-3B, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the local administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 156-5A(4)(d) in order to administer
§ 156-5C, Floodways.
(c) Information to be obtained and maintained.
[1] Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean
sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar
of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement or cellar.
[2] For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures:
§ 156-4 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-4
154:177
[a] Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to
mean sea level, to which the structure has been
floodproofed; and
[b] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 156-5A and B.
(d) Alteration of watercourses.
[1] Notify adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to any
alteration of relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region II, 26
Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
[2] Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is not diminished.
(e) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
[1] The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict
between the limits of the federally identified areas of
special flood hazard and actual field conditions. Base flood
elevation data established pursuant to § 156-3B and/or
§ 156-4B(3)(b), when available, shall be used to accurately
delineate the areas of special flood hazard.
[2] The local administrator shall use flood information from
any other authoritative source, including historical data, to
establish the limits of the areas of special flood hazard
when base flood elevations are not available.
(f) Stop-work orders.
[1] All floodplain development found ongoing without an
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 156-3E of this chapter.
[2] All floodplain development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 156-3E of this chapter.
(g) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in
§ 156-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-4
154:178
§ 156-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and to
enable said inspector to certify that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of either the development
permit or the approved variance.
(h) Certificate of compliance.
[1] It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or
substantially altered or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the
local administrator stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
[2] All other development occurring within the designated
flood hazard area will have upon completion a certificate
of compliance issued by the local administrator.
[3] All certifications shall be based upon the inspections
conducted subject to § 156-4B(3)(g) and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic information, floodproofing,
anchoring requirements or encroachment analysis which
may have been required as a condition of the approved
permit.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or
above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest
adjacent grade when no base elevation has been determined.
Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement
is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
§ 156-4 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-5
154:179
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a
professional engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(b) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(4) Subdivision standards.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
(5) Encroachments.
(a) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be
analyzed to determine the effects on the flood-carrying
capacity of the areas of special flood hazard set forth in
§ 156-5B(3)(a)[3]. This may require the submission of
additional technical data to assist in the determination.
§ 156-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-5
154:180
(b) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood
elevation data is available pursuant to § 156-4B(3)(b) or
156-5A(4)(d) and no floodway has been determined, the
cumulative effects of any proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point.
(c) In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is
provided or available pursuant to § 156-4B(3)(b), the
requirements of § 156-5C, Floodways, shall apply.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data has been approved as set forth in § 156-3B, Basis for
establishing the areas of special flood hazard, and § 156-4B(3)(b), Use
of other base flood and floodway data, the following standards are
required:
(1) Residential construction. New residential construction and
substantial improvements of any residential structure shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above the base flood elevation.
(b) Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood elevation or
be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base
flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. All structural components located below the base flood level
§ 156-5 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-5
154:181
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
(a) If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically
(without human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting these
requirements must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to the flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverage or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(b) If the structure is to be floodproofed:
[1] A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop
and/or review structural design, specifications and plans
for the construction and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice to make the structure watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy; and
[2] A licensed professional engineer or land surveyor shall
certify the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the structure is floodproofed.
(c) The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all
such certificates noted in this section.
(3) Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without
base flood elevations. New construction or substantial
improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
base flood elevation as may be determined in § 156-4B(3)(b) or two
feet above the highest adjacent grade where no elevation data is
available.
(a) New construction or substantial improvements of structures
including manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor
§ 156-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-5
154:182
§ 156-6. Variance procedure.
(including basement) elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the
structure.
(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed
architect or meet the following criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or openings, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas
designated as floodways. (See definition in § 156-2.) The floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying
debris and posing additional threats from potential erosion forces.
When floodway data is available for a particular site as provided by
§§ 156-3B and 156-4B(3)(b), all encroachments including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments are
prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a technical
evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of
Johnson City shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 156-5 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-6
154:183
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 156-6A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
§ 156-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 156-6
154:184
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in § 156-6A(4)(a) through (1) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places, without regard to the contributing structures
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section
are met.
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be increased within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense or create nuisances or cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
§ 156-6 FLAMMABLE GASES, STORAGE OF § 156-7
154:185
§ 156-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided
in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, of this Code; provided,
however, that the date of the violation will commence on the terminal date
for correcting the violation as established by the Enforcement Officer in the
notice of violation. Each week's continued violation after that established
date shall constitute a separate additional violation.
Chapter 158
FUMIGATION
§ 158-1. Supervision; notification of authorities.
All fumigation in the village shall be made under the supervision of the
Health Officer. At least twenty-four (24) hours before making a fumigation,
the attending physician shall notify the Health Officer and the Chief of the
Fire Department and the Chief of Police, in writing, of his or her intention
to fumigate the premises.
Chapter 162
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 110.
§ 162-1. Authorization; title.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the "Games of Chance
Local Law of the Village of Johnson City."
§ 162-2. License required; conduct of games.
It shall hereinafter be lawful for any authorized organization, upon
obtaining a license therefor, to conduct games of chance within the Village
of Johnson City subject to the provisions of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law and the provisions of this chapter and subject to the
provisions and rules governing such games of chance as set forth by the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board. The conduct of such games of
chance shall be subject to the restrictions imposed by § 189 of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 156-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 162-3
158:186
§ 162-3. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, unless otherwise provided herein or the context requires a different
meaning;
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes any bona fide religious or
charitable organization or bona fide educational, fraternal or service
organization or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen
which, by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution or act of
the legislature, shall have among its dominate purposes one (1) or more
of the lawful purposes as defined in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, provided that each shall operate without profit to its members, and
provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one (1) or
more of the lawful purposes as defined in Article 9-A for a period of three
(3) years immediately prior to applying for a license under this chapter. No
organization shall be deemed an authorized organization which is formed
primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance and which does
not devote at least seventy-five percent (75%) of its activities to other
than conducting games of chance. No political party shall be deemed an
authorized organization.
BELL JARS — Includes those games in which a participant shall draw a card
from a jar or other suitable container which contains numbers, colors or
symbols that are covered and which, when uncovered, may reveal that a
prize shall be awarded on the basis of a designated winning number, color
or symbol or combination of numbers, colors or symbols.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Includes only the games known as "merchandise
wheels" and "bell jars" and such other specific games as may be authorized
by the State Racing and Wagering Board in which prizes are awarded on the
basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color or colors, symbol
or symbols, determined by chance, but not including games commonly
known as "bingo" or "lotto" which are controlled under Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law or this chapter and also not including "slot
machines," "policy or number games" and "lottery" as defined in § 225.00 of
the Penal Law. No "game of chance" shall involve wagering of money by one
(1) player against another player.
OFFICER — The chief law enforcement officer of the Village of Johnson City.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City.
§ 162-4. Regulations for conduct of games.
A. No game or games of chance shall be conducted under any license
issued under this chapter more often than twelve (12) times in any
calendar year. No particular premises shall be used for the conduct of
games of chance on more than twenty-four (24) license periods during
any one (1) calendar year. Games shall be conducted only between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday, and only between the hours of 12:00 noon on
§ 162-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 162-4
162:187
Chapter 163
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
Property and building nuisances — See Ch.
206.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 208.
§ 163-1. Legislative findings and considerations.
The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City hereby finds and declares
that graffiti poses a serious problem for its residents and merchants. The
unabated proliferation of graffiti is a physical blight upon the landscape
of our Village and costs taxpayers, merchants and homeowners substantial
monies to remove and repair. The defacing of such property and the use of
foul language in many of the writings is harmful to the public and violates
the welfare and general good of the citizens and residents of the Village.
§ 163-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFACE — To mar, disfigure, injure, or otherwise spoil the face, surface, or
appearance of public or private property.
GRAFFITI — A writing, drawing, or mark etched, painted, placed or drawn
upon public or private property with the intent to deface said property.
§ 163-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall place graffiti, or cause others to place graffiti, upon any
building or structure or any other real or personal property located in
the Village without the property owner's, or the owner's duly authorized
agent's, express written permission.
Friday and 2:00 a.m. Saturday and 12:00 noon on Saturday and 2:00
a.m. Sunday. The 2:00 a.m. closing period shall also apply to a legal
holiday. The above restrictions shall not apply when only the game of
chance known as the "bell jar" is conducted.
B. Games of chance may be commenced under any license issued pursuant
to this chapter on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00
midnight only, except that the application for a license may request
approval to conduct such games of chance beyond 12:00 midnight if the
following day is a legal holiday. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this section, no games of chance shall be conducted on
Easter Sunday, Christmas Day or New Year's Eve.
§ 162-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 163-4
162:188
§ 163-4. Penalties for offenses.
§ 163-5. Repair and removal of graffiti; costs.
§ 163-6. Enforcement.
The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City, or its enforcement office, is
hereby authorized in the name and on behalf of the Village to undertake and
prosecute any proceedings necessary or appropriate to enforce compliance
with this chapter.
A. Any person who violates § 163-3 of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 15 days. Additionally, that person shall be liable for the cost of
repairing and/or removing the graffiti from the property and, in the
Court's discretion, may be ordered to perform appropriate community
services.
B. The parent or legal guardian of any minor over the age of 10 and under
the age of 18 who violates § 163-3 of this chapter shall be held liable for
any damages and/or cleanup costs that result from said violation.
A. Repair and removal of graffiti. Regardless of any action by a Court as
provided in this chapter, the owner of record or his/her agent of any
premises located within the Village which has graffiti upon it without
the owner's written permission shall be required to repair, remove and/
or paint over the graffiti within 15 days after the Village has given the
owner or his agent written notice of the graffiti. Where the property in
question was previously painted, the same color paint shall be used on
the surface that has graffiti upon it.
B. Remedy by Village. If the owner of record or his/her agent does not cure
or correct the property's condition within 15 days after written notice
by the Village, then the Village shall have the right to enter the
premises to cure or correct the property's condition as set forth in this
section.
C. Cost. In the event that the Village cures or corrects the property's
condition as set forth in this section, the property's owner of record
shall bear the cost of the cure or correction. The Village will bill the cost
of such service, together with any other costs incidental to such cure or
correction, to said owner. Upon that property owner's failure to pay said
charge within 30 days of presentment, said charge shall thereupon
become a lien upon the property which the Village cured or corrected
and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied on such real property, and the same shall be
collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 163-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 163-6
162:189
Chapter 164
HISTORIC PROTECTION DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration — See Ch. 114.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 164-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
§ 164-2. Definitions.
A. Safeguard the heritage of the Village of Johnson City by preserving and
promoting, for the education, pleasure and welfare of its residents,
districts, areas and landmarks which reflect periods of its cultural,
social, economic, political, artistic and architectural history.
B. Promote the education and cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
landmarks and districts of historic and cultural significance.
C. Stabilize and improve property values.
D. Foster civic pride in the legacy of physical, social and artistic
achievements of the past.
E. Protect and enhance the Village's attraction to tourists and visitors and
provide a stimulus to new business.
F. Contribute to the effectiveness and value of the overall Urban Cultural
Park Program of the State of New York.
A. For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined
herein. Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this
chapter shall carry their customary meanings.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF HISTORIC REVIEW — A certificate issued by the
Historic Review Board which indicates that the Board has reviewed
and approved or approved with modifications any proposal to make
any alteration to the appearance of a landmark or structure, memorial,
statue or site within an Historic District or area as may be delineated
on the Zoning Map described herein.
CHANGE OF APPEARANCE — One or more of the following actions:
§ 163-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 164-2
162:190
§ 164-3. Historic Review Board.
The Planning Board of the Village of Johnson City shall act as the Historic
Review Board for the purposes of this chapter. In making its review and
determination, the Review Board must consult with an advisory committee
appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the Mayor. The advisory
committee will review and make a recommendation on all certificate of
historic review applications to the Review Board. Such advisory committee
should include an architect or engineer, landscape architect and historian if
such professionals are available in the Village.
§ 164-4. Duties of Review Board.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR AREA — An area which contains
improvements which:
LANDMARK — One or more structures, memorials or sites, including
the adjacent areas necessary for the appreciation of the landmark,
deemed worthy of preservation by virtue of its value to the Village as:
Change or reconstruction or alteration of the size or external
appearance of a structure or memorial, including siding and
repainting.
(1)
(2) Demolition of a structure or memorial.
Commencement of or change in the location of advertising on the
external part of any structure or land in an Historic District or area.
(3)
(1) Have special character or special or aesthetic interest or value;
Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture, typical of
one or more eras in the history of the Village of Johnson City; and
(2)
Cause such an area, by reason of such factors, to be a visibly
perceptible and definable section of the Village.
(3)
An outstanding example of a structure or memorial representative
of its era;
(1)
One of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style or
combination of styles;
(2)
A place where an historical event of significance to the Village,
region, state or nation or representative activity of the past era
took place; or
(3)
A structure, memorial or site which has a special character, special
aesthetic interest and value as part of the development, heritage
and cultural characteristic of the Village of Johnson City.
(4)
A. Identification of districts. The Review Board may identify and define
landmarks and areas of historic and cultural significance in the Village
in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 164-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 164-4
162:191
§ 164-5. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature in the district
which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward
appearance thereof. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any exterior
architectural feature which the Building Inspector shall determine (certify)
is required by public safety because of dangerous or unsafe conditions.
§ 164-6. Application for certificate of historic review.
(1) Background information providing historical or cultural
justification for the landmark or historic area and its boundaries
shall be gathered as specified in § 164-2, definitions of "historic
district or area" and "landmark." This may include comments from
the State Historic Preservation Officer and the director of the
Susquehanna Urban Cultural Park as to the significance of the
proposed district.
(2) A duly advertised public hearing shall be held by the Review Board.
All owners of property within the proposed historic area shall be
notified, in writing, at least five working days in advance of the
time, place and purpose of the hearing.
(3) Within 30 days of the public hearing, the Review Board shall submit
a report and recommendation on the proposed landmark or historic
area to the Village Board.
(4) Within 30 days from receipt of such report and recommendation
from the Review Board, the Village Board shall approve or
disapprove the proposal or refer it back to the Review Board for
additional consideration.
B. Alteration or construction. After the date of Village Board approval of a
designated landmark or historical area, no material change in the
exterior appearance or location of any public or private landmark,
structure, memorial, statue or site within the designated area shall be
permitted until a certificate of historic review has been obtained from
the Code Enforcement Officer. No building permit will be issued unless
a certificate of historic review has first been issued by the Historic
Review Board.
C. Demolition. Demolition of structures or landmarks located within a
designated historic area shall not be permitted until such demolition
proposal has been reviewed by the Review Board and a report of the
architectural or historic significance of the structure or landmark to be
demolished has been made by the advisory committee. The Review
Board shall have 30 days to review the report, at the end of which
thirty-day period the Board shall make a determination of approval/
disapproval of demolition.
§ 164-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 164-6
162:192
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent local law, code or regulation
concerning the issuance of building permits, no action which would
result in a change in any exterior architectural facade or feature in a
designated historic area, as established by § 164-4A of this chapter,
shall be commenced nor shall any building permit for such change be
issued until a certificate of historic review has been issued by the
Historic Review Board. The certificate of historic review required by
this section may not be substituted for the normal building or use
permit required by any other Chapter, code or regulation of the Village
of Johnson City.
B. Application for an certificate of historic review shall be made in writing
on forms available from the Code Enforcement Officer and shall contain
the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location of the building, structure or site which is to have its
exterior facade or architectural features changed.
(3) Elevation sketches of proposed changes.
(4) Samples of colors and materials to be used.
(5) Where the proposed change includes a sign or lettering, a scale
drawing showing lettering type, colors and sign dimensions and
location and any illumination proposed.
(6) Any other graphic material that will explain the proposal.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive an application for a
certificate of historic review and immediately transmit such application
to the Chairpersons of the Historic Review Board and advisory
committee along with all supporting information.
D. The Review Board shall, at its next regular meeting, review and discuss
the application and report of the advisory committee with the applicant
or a representative. A special meeting of the Board may be called, if
necessary, to expedite the review process.
E. In its discussion with the applicant, the Review Board shall consider the
appropriateness of the proposal including the architectural style,
general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the facade
or exterior architectural feature involved and the relationship thereof
to the facades or exterior architectural features of other structures in
the immediate neighborhood. The Review Board shall be guided by the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.
F. Within 20 working days from the meeting date at which such
application is discussed or some later date if mutually agreed upon, the
Review Board shall prepare a report and determination of approval/
disapproval on such application. If the application is approved, the
Board shall issue a certificate of historic review.
§ 164-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 164-6
162:193
§ 164-7. Hardship criteria.
An applicant whose application for a certificate of historic review has been
denied may apply for relief from landmark designation on the grounds that
designation is working a hardship upon the applicant. In order to prove the
existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
§ 164-8. Hardship application procedure.
G. Upon receipt of the certificate of historic review from the Review
Board, the Code Enforcement Officer shall file such certificate and issue
a building permit, if all other applicable chapters, codes and regulations
have also been complied with. If no certificate of historic review is
issued, no building permit may be issued.
A. The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of
whether that return represents the most profitable return possible;
B. The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable
return; and
C. Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
A. After receiving written notification from the Review Board of the denial
of a certificate of historic review, an applicant may commence the
hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be
issued unless the Board makes a finding that a hardship exists.
B. The Review Board must hold a public hearing on the hardship
application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and
opponents of the application to present their views.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Review Board,
advisory committee groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to
seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Board must be in writing. A copy must be sent to the
applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the Village Clerk's
office for public inspection. The Board's decision shall state the reasons
for granting or denying the hardship application.
§ 164-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 164-8
162:194
Chapter 166
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing authority — See Ch. 23.
Building Code administration — See Ch. 114.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 140.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 148.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 176.
Plumbing — See Ch. 200.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 208.
Sewers — See Ch. 222.
Water — See Ch. 270.
§ 164-8 GAMES OF CHANCE § 164-8
162:195

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 166-1. Word usage; definitions. [Amended 9-7-1982 by L.L. No.
7-1982; 9-4-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part
thereof."
B. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that
temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a
"dwelling."
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer and the
Building Inspector of the Village or such other person or persons as
may be designated by the Mayor and/or the Board of Trustees.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food or by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized
and legal pest elimination methods approved by the enforcement
officer.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence within or around a dwelling of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
§ 166-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-1
162:197
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS — The temperature 15º
F. above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year
period.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — All of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner
or operator to more than three persons who are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to each other or the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, with
or without cooking or eating facilities.
RUBBISH — Combustible or noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rag, cartons,
boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials other than a building to
form a construction that is safe and stable and includes, among other
things, stadiums, gospel and circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms,
stagings, observation towers, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, walls,
fences and display signs; the term "structure" shall be construed as if
followed by the words "or part thereof."
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent
as if he or she were the owner.
(2)
§ 166-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-1
162:198
§ 166-2. Applicable laws. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
The provisions of the Building Code, New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, the Plumbing Code, the Fire Prevention
Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the Village,38 the Multiple Residence Law
of the State of New York, where applicable, the National Electrical Code
and any other state, local law, ordinance or regulation issued by the proper
authorities thereof shall be applicable for all installations, alterations and
repairs to buildings and materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in
connection therewith.
§ 166-3. Conflict with other regulations.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code
of the Village existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which
the provisions of this chapter are derived, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people shall prevail; in any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any ordinance or code
of the Village existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which
this chapter is derived which establishes a lower standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in
conflict with this chapter.
§ 166-4. Applicability. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
This chapter shall apply to premises within the Village as follows:
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system
on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
UNOCCUPIED HAZARD — Any building or part thereof which remains
unoccupied for a period of more than six months with either doors,
windows or other openings broken, removed or boarded or sealed up
or any building under construction upon which little or no construction
work has been performed for a period of six months or more.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land which are vacant or upon which buildings
used for dwellings, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial or storage
uses, whether occupied or vacant, are located.
B. Residential buildings and multiple dwellings, including single-family
owner-occupied dwellings.
C. Buildings of mixed occupancy, occupied in whole or in part.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Fire Prevention, Ch. 200, Plumbing, and Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 166-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-4
162:199
§ 166-5. Availability of remedies.
Notwithstanding the availability of other remedies for enforcement of the
provisions contained in any ordinance or code of the Village and in any
other state or local law, ordinance or regulation enforced by the Village, the
remedies and enforcement procedures as set forth in this chapter are made
available to enforce the provisions of the aforesaid ordinances, codes and
laws and shall be deemed cumulative to other enforcement procedures and
remedies.
D. Commercial, industrial and storage buildings.
E. Vacant residential, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial and
storage buildings which are under construction or demolition, including
buildings not completed, to the extent that a nuisance or practice exists
or is being carried out which is a danger to the public health, safety or
welfare.
F. Accessory structures, accessory to dwellings or commercial, industrial
or vacant buildings.
§ 166-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-5
162:200
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 166-6. Adoption of rules and regulations by enforcement officer.
The enforcement officer shall recommend rules and regulations as may be
deemed reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter which shall be adopted only upon approval of the Village Board.
§ 166-7. Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises.
§ 166-8. Registration of rental units; penalty.
A. Authorized. The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed
to make inspections to determine whether the condition of dwellings,
dwelling units and rooming units and premises located within the
Village are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Right of entry. For the purpose set forth in Subsection A and in order
that he or she may perform his or her duty of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants of such dwelling and the general public, the
enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
at reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units and premises with
permission of the occupant and/or owner. However, such inspections
shall be made upon request to the owner or manager and/or occupant
of the premises to be inspected and at the convenience of such owner or
manager and/or occupant. In the event that access to such dwelling or
premises cannot be obtained by permission, the enforcement officer, if
he or she has reason to believe any part of said dwelling or premises is
in violation of one or more of the provisions of this chapter, may apply to
a Justice of the Supreme Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction of the State of New York, upon petition for an order
directing that said enforcement officer have access to said dwelling or
premises for the purpose of making his or her inspection. Upon
granting of a court order, the enforcement officer shall thereupon
proceed to make such inspection.
A. No owner shall let to any occupant any vacant dwelling unit or rooming
unit unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter, and provided
that said owner of a non-owner-occupied dwelling unit has registered at
least every two years, or more frequently where the code enforcement
officer and conditions require it, his or her rental units and received for
those units a rental permit. Upon each rental or rerental of a dwelling
unit, the owner shall obtain from the Code Enforcement Officer a
certificate of compliance or similar rental permit. [Amended 9-7-1982
by L.L. No. 7-1982]
B. Nonresidential owners of premises who are not employed or engaged in
businesses within the community and do not customarily and regularly
come into the community to attend a business office shall designate a
§ 166-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-8
162:201
§ 166-9. Service of notices and order; hearings. [Amended
8-21-1987 by L.L. No. 8-1987; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
responsible agent who resides within the community or customarily
and regularly engages in and attends a business in the community. The
name, address and telephone number of the responsible agent shall be
recorded on the rental permit.
C. Penalty. An owner who fails to register rental units as required in
Subsection A for a continuous period of 30 days or more after notice of
the violation is mailed by the enforcement officer shall be subject to a
fine of $50 for a first violation and $100 for any subsequent violation.
[Added 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee shall
determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he or she shall give notice of the
alleged violation to the person or persons responsible. The notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a specific statement of the reasons why it is being issued
and list the sections of this chapter deemed to be violated.
(3) Direct removal or correction of such violation within the following
time frames:
(a) In cases of emergency, the responsible party shall have 24
hours to commence work to correct, alleviate or eliminate the
emergency, and 72 hours to reasonably complete such work.
(b) For the provisions listed under § 208-3, Regulations,
Subsection A(1) and (2), removal and correction shall be
immediate upon notification by the enforcement officer.
(c) All other violations shall be corrected within 10 days after the
service of such notice, except when, for good cause shown, the
Code Enforcement Officer grants an extension of time in
writing.
(4) Be served upon, or sent by registered or certified mail, to the owner
or his agent, or the occupant, or both, as the case may require.
Where the notice is sent by registered or certified mail, a copy of
said notice shall also be posted on the property.
(5) Maintain a copy on file in the Code Enforcement Office for
inspection by the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant or the
general public.
(6) Notices may also contain an outline of remedial action which if
taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 166-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-9
162:202
§ 166-10. Designation of unfit dwellings and legal procedure of
condemnation.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit
dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out by the enforcement officer
in compliance with the following requirements:
B. If the violation is not corrected within the appropriate time frame, the
owner, occupant or person having control of said premises shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter, and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be authorized to issue an appearance ticket for such violation
returnable in Village Court.
A. Generally. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have
any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the enforcement
officer:
(1) Which by reason of its failure to comply with the requirements of
this chapter is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation required by
this chapter so as to adequately protect the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public.
B. Vacation of premises. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit
for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the
enforcement officer shall be vacated within such time as ordered by the
enforcement officer.
C. Removal of defects required. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has
been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured
from and such placard is removed by the enforcement officer. The
enforcement officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action are based
have been eliminated.
D. Defacing or removing placard. No person shall deface or remove the
placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned
as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided
in Subsection C.
E. Notice of condemnation: hearing. No such dwelling shall be placarded
as unfit for human habitation until at least 10 days after written notice
of its condemnation has been given by the enforcement officer to the
owner and occupants of such dwelling.
§ 166-9 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-11
162:203
§ 166-11. Certificates of compliance; statement of noncompliance;
fee.
§ 166-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II.
A. Issuance. Upon request of the property owner or on his or her own
initiative, the enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of compliance
setting forth that on the date of said certificate, the building in question
complied with all the terms, conditions and requirements of this
chapter. In the event that the premises do not comply with the terms
and requirements of this chapter, the enforcement officer shall issue a
written statement setting forth in what manner the terms and
requirements of this chapter are violated.
B. Effect of failure; refusal to issue. The failure or refusal of the
enforcement officer to issue a certificate of compliance or a statement
setting forth the manner in which said premises do not comply with the
terms and requirements of this chapter shall entitle the owner to a
hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
C. Fee. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of compliance requested by
the property owner shall be $25 for the first two residential units and
$10 for each residential unit thereafter, and $50 for each industrial and/
or commercial structure. [Added 3-6-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
§ 166-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-12
162:204
ARTICLE III
Appeals Board
§ 166-13. Term defined. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
The word "Board," when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean
the Zoning Board of Appeals.39
§ 166-14. Jurisdiction.
§ 166-15. Appeals to Board.
A. The Board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the enforcement
officer.
B. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or notice of determination
of the enforcement officer. Every decision of such Board is subject to
review by the courts of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal may be
taken subsequent to a decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
A. Procedure. An appeal shall be initiated within 20 days by filing with the
enforcement officer a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board
the written notice of appeal.
B. Appeal to stay proceedings; exception. An appeal stays all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the enforcement
officer certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him or her that, by reason of facts stated in the notice of violation,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Notice of hearing; conduct of hearing; action of Board. The Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice
thereof to the parties either by registered or certified mail. The Board
shall establish a hearing date within 10 days. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the notice of violation.
When there are practical difficulties of unnecessary hardship in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Board shall have the
power of passing upon appeals to vary or modify any of its rules,
regulations or provisions relating to the construction, structural
changes in, equipment or alteration of buildings or structures so that
the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and
39.Editor's Note: Original Sections 9 1/2-33 and 9 1/2-34, regarding the establishment,
membership and meetings of the former Property Maintenance Board of Appeals, were
deleted 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993.
§ 166-13 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-15
162:205
substantial justice done. The decision of the Board shall be made within
10 days of the hearing date.
§ 166-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-15
162:206
ARTICLE IV
Minimum Standards
§ 166-16. Basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not
comply with the following requirements:
A. Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and properly connected to a potable water supply
and to a sewer system in a manner to comply with the plumbing code40
and the Code of the Village.
B. Flush water closet; lavatory basin. Every dwelling unit shall contain,
within a room which affords privacy, a flush water closet and a lavatory
basin in good working condition and properly connected to a potable
water supply and to a sewer system in a manner which complies with
the plumbing code and the Code of the Village.
C. Bathtub; shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which
affords privacy, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to a potable water supply and to a sewer system in a
manner to comply with the plumbing code and the ordinances of the
Village.
D. Hot and cold water lines. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub
or shower required under the provisions of this section shall be
properly connected with both operable hot and cold water lines.
E. Rubbish and garbage storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have
adequate rubbish and garbage storage facilities of a kind sufficient to
meet the requirements of the Department of Public Works for garbage
and rubbish collection and disposal.
F. Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate
garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and
location of which are approved by the enforcement officer.
G. Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, are properly connected with the hot water lines
required under the provisions of Subsection C and are capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount
of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120º F.
H. Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed
means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as
required by the laws of this state and Village.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Plumbing.
§ 166-16 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-16
162:207

ARTICLE V
Light, Ventilation and Heating
§ 166-17. Minimum standards established. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Lighting generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. Whenever walls or other
portions of structures face a window of any such room and such lightobstruction
structures are located less than three feet from the window
and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. The total window area in every habitable room shall be at least 8%
of the floor surface area of such room.
B. Artificial lighting.
(1) Where there is electric service available from power lines which
run not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable
room of such dwelling shall contain at least one electric receptacle
for every 20 linear feet (or major fraction) of the total distance
around a room as measured horizontally along the wall at the floor
line. Such receptacles shall, insofar as practicable, be spaced equal
distances apart.
(2) Each habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall-type
electrical outlets or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electrical light fixture. Every water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public
hall and similar space shall be provided with artificial light
adequate for the intended use of such room or space. Every such
outlet, fixture or receptacle shall be properly installed and be
maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
(a) Overcurrent protection.
[1] Fuseholders for plug fuses of 30 amperes or less shall not
be installed or used unless they are of the Type S with the
adaptor inserted or of the Type S construction. Fuses or
circuit breakers shall not exceed wire (conductor) capacity
of the circuit.
[2] There shall be at least one lighting circuit for each 500
square feet of floor space and at least one circuit for
kitchen appliances which is separate from the lighting
circuits.
§ 166-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-17
162:209
[3] In a multiple-occupancy building, each occupant shall have
access to his or her disconnecting means and overcurrent
protection at all times.
C. Ventilation generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other approved
method which will adequately ventilate the room.
D. Lighting and ventilation of bathrooms and water closets. Every
bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in Subsections
A and B of this § 166-17, except that no window or skylight shall be
required in bathrooms and water closets adequately equipped with a
ventilation system approved by the enforcement officer and kept in
operable condition.
E. Self-closing devices or screens required during certain times. From
May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be provided
with self-closing-type screen doors. Windows and other openings used
for ventilation shall be properly screened.
F. Heating. The owner or operator shall furnish heating facilities which
are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working
condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling
unit to a temperature of at least 68º F. at a distance of three feet above
floor level under ordinary minimum winter conditions. It shall be the
duty of every person who shall have contracted to furnish heat for any
building or portion thereof occupied as a home or place of residence of
one or more persons to heat or furnish heat for every occupied room in
such building or portion thereof so that the minimum temperature of
68º F. may be maintained at all times when the outer or street
temperature falls below 50º F. Whenever the building is heated by
means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the
owner, agent or lessee of such building, such owner, agent or lessee, in
the absence of a written contract or agreement to the contrary, shall be
deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself or herself to
furnish heat in accordance with the provision of this subsection.
G. Storm windows. If a tenant is responsible for the payment of heating
bills, the owner or operator shall furnish storm windows or an
appropriate equivalent from October 1 to May 1 of each calendar year.
§ 166-17 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-17
162:210
ARTICLE VI
Space, Use and Location Requirements
§ 166-18. Minimum requirements established.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living herein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
A. Minimum floor space. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100
additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant
thereof. The floor space shall be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
B. Floor space requirements in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of
two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof,
except that where the occupants of such room are all less than 15 years
of age, a room having at least 70 square feet of floor space may be
occupied by additional persons, provided that the floor space per
occupant does not become less than 35 square feet.
C. Location of sleeping rooms. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two
or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access
to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by
occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such
that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through
another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment,
except that where such a dwelling is occupied only by a husband or wife
or a husband or wife and child or children under the age of 15, this
subsection shall not apply.
D. Ceiling height. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of
that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall
not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
E. Use of basement or cellar space for habitable room. No basement or
cellar space shall be used as a habitable room unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 166-17A.
§ 166-18 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-18
162:211
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(4) The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 166-17B, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the enforcement officer.
F. Calculation. For the purpose of this chapter, each person 15 years of
age and older shall be counted as one person, children more than one
year old but less than 15 years old shall be deemed to be 1/2 person and
infants up to one year shall not be counted. The floor area shall be
based upon the area of habitable rooms contained within the living unit,
exclusive of utility and storage rooms, halls, closets, porches and any
connecting spaces. Any area in a habitable room which has a ceiling
height of less than five feet shall not be counted or included in the
computation of space.
§ 166-18 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-18
162:212
ARTICLE VII
Rooming Houses
§ 166-19. Compliance with chapter required. [Amended 9-7-1982 by
L.L. No. 7-1982]
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter except the provisions of
§ 166-16.
§ 166-20. Applicability of chapter provisions to hotels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found
in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any
state board or agency.
§ 166-21. Permits.
§ 166-22. Hearing on refusal to issue permit. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house has
been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Zoning Board of Appeals, under the procedure provided by
§ 166-15 of this chapter.
§ 166-23. Notice of sale.
Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to § 166-21 shall give notice,
in writing, to the enforcement officer within 24 hours after having sold,
A. Required; application; issuance. No person shall operate a rooming
house unless he or she holds a valid rooming house permit issued by the
enforcement officer in the name of the operator and for the specific
dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the enforcement
officer for such permit, which shall be issued by the enforcement officer
upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. Display of permit; permit nontransferable. The permit issued under the
provisions of this section shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
within the rooming house at all times. No such permit shall be
transferable.
C. Renewal. Every such permit shall be renewable annually upon written
application to the enforcement officer at least three days before the
expiration of one year from its issuance or last renewal, unless such
permit is subject to revocation for violation of this chapter or
ordinances or law applicable to said premises.
§ 166-19 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-23
162:213
transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest
in or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name
and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such
rooming house.
§ 166-24. Abatement of violations; revocation of permit.
Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the enforcement officer
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any law or any ordinance of the Village, the
enforcement officer shall give notice, in writing, to the operator of such
rooming house that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within
a reasonable period, to be determined by the enforcement officer, the
operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the enforcement officer shall reinspect such rooming house, and if
he or she finds such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he
or she shall give notice, in writing, to the operator that the latter's permit
has been revoked. Upon receipt of notice of revocation, such operator shall
immediately cease operations of such rooming house, and no person shall
occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
§ 166-25. Hearing on revocation of permit. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been revoked or
who has received notice from the enforcement officer that his or her permit
is to be revoked unless existing conditions or practices at his or her rooming
house are corrected may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Zoning Board of Appeals under the procedure provided by
§ 166-15; provided that such person must file the petition for hearing within
10 days following receipt of notice of permit revocation.
§ 166-26. Sanitary requirements.
A. Generally. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house; and he or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building is leased or occupied by the operator.
B. Bed linens; towels. No operator of a rooming house is required by
Village ordinance or local law to furnish bed linen and towels. However,
if any operator shall supply bed linen and towels for use therein, said
bed linen and towels shall be changed at least once each week and prior
to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all bedding supplied by the operator
in a clean and sanitary manner. [Amended 5-7-1985 by L.L. No.
8-1985]
§ 166-23 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-26
162:214
§ 166-27. Floor space requirements in rooms occupied for sleeping
purposes. [Amended 5-7-1985 by L.L. No. 7-1985]
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 60 square feet of
floor space for each occupant thereof.
§ 166-28. Means of egress.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading
to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state
and the Village.
§ 166-29. Smoke detector requirement. [Amended 9-7-1982 by L.L.
No. 7-1982]
Every rooming house unit shall have a hard-wired smoke detector.
C. Toilet facilities. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower shall be in a room providing privacy. These facilities
shall be properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good
working condition. One such facility shall be supplied for each eight
persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the operator's family whenever they share the use of said
facilities, provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2 the
required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located
within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall
or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all
times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by
written approval of the enforcement officer.
§ 166-26 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-29
162:215

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Requirements
§ 166-30. Compliance required. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any structure, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements
set forth herein.
§ 166-31. Violations declared nuisance; abatement.
All buildings, dwellings, dwelling units, multiple dwellings, rooming units,
rooming houses, yards, courts, open areas and vacant lots which are in
violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
abated by being corrected, made sanitary, repaired, vacated or demolished
in accordance with the order of the enforcement officer.
§ 166-32. General requirements for maintenance of buildings.
[Amended 6-23-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
Residential, commercial and industrial buildings, whether occupied or
vacant, and accessory structures shall be maintained in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter so as to assure the desirable character of the
property.
A. Fences. Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in a
safe and substantial condition.
B. Steps and driveways. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved areas shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage
under normal use and weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards
that may exist shall be filled or necessary repairs or replacement
carried out.
C. Yards; courts; vacant lots. Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept
clean and free of physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation.
They shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent dust or other
particles from being blown about the neighborhood. Open wells,
cesspools or cisterns shall be securely closed or barricaded from access
to the public.
D. Undergrowth; accumulations of plant growth. Heavy undergrowth and
accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to
health shall be eliminated. Any trees or portions thereof located on
private property and constituting a hazard to persons or property shall
be trimmed or removed.
§ 166-30 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-33
162:217
§ 166-33. Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings and roofs.
Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight and rodent-proof, shall be capable of affording privacy and
shall be kept in good repair.
§ 166-34. Windows, exterior doors and basement hatchways.
Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound
working condition and good repair.
§ 166-35. Stairs, porches and appurtenances thereto.
Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair. Adequate railings or guards shall be
provided on all open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells
more than 33 inches above surrounding ground or floor level.
§ 166-36. Plumbing fixtures; water and waste pipes.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions, in compliance with Village, county and state codes.
§ 166-37. Construction and maintenance of water closet
compartment and bathroom floors.
Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit
the maintenance of wooden floors in such rooms, provided that such floors
are as impervious to water as may reasonably be required of wellmaintained
wood floors.
§ 166-38. Construction, installation and maintenance of facilities,
equipment and utilities.
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under
this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely
and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
§ 166-39. Discontinuance of services, facilities and equipment.
[Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. Discontinued service. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
§ 166-33 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-39
162:218
§ 166-40. Maintenance of exterior exposed surfaces. [Amended
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall
be repaired, coated, treated, or sealed to protect them from deterioration
or weathering. The exterior surface shall be so maintained as to protect
the inhabitants therein from the elements of the weather. All exterior walls,
structures, doors, basement hatchways, and windows shall be maintained
to prevent excessive heat loss during the winter months by the installation
of insulation, weather stripping, or other devices reasonably calculated to
prevent excessive loss. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner
to demonstrate that the proposed solution shall be compliant with state fire
and building codes and demonstrate sufficient insulation value without the
loss of minimum ventilation and provide access to the exterior in cases of
emergency.
§ 166-41. Maintenance of vacated buildings.
The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform such
acts as may be required of him or her by the Code Enforcement Officer to
ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe and secure and
do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the public. Buildings and
structures shall be maintained to such condition that they shall not become
an unoccupied hazard. In any building, any floor area maintained in a vacant
status or about to become vacant is to have at least one access thereto
which meets the approval of the enforcement officer.
occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
temporary emergencies.
B. Separate meters. No owner or operator shall cause to be rented any
dwelling unit or rooming unit for which the occupant pays for all or part
of his utilities unless said utility serves only the occupant's unit and is
separately metered.
§ 166-39 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-41
162:219

ARTICLE IX
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 166-42. Manager for multiple dwellings.
§ 166-43. Maintenance of shared and public places.
Every owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean
and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and
premises thereof and shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible thereafter,
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which party
shall assume such responsibility.
§ 166-44. Maintenance of individual dwelling or dwelling unit.
§ 166-45. Disposal of rubbish and garbage; abandonment of
refrigerators.
A. Required. Every owner of a multiple dwelling who does not reside
therein and every corporate owner shall designate a manager or agent
to be responsible for maintaining said dwelling in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Said manager or agent may be a resident of
said dwelling or a unit thereof or a responsible person employed by the
owner for that purpose. Such person's name and address and telephone
number shall be made readily available to the enforcement officer.
B. Registering of manager's name, address and phone number. The owner
shall register the name, address and phone number of said designated
manager or agent with the enforcement officer so as to enable the
enforcement officer to contact said manager or agent at all reasonable
times for the purpose of maintaining said dwelling in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Effect of designation upon occupant's responsibilities. Designation of a
manager or agent pursuant to this section shall in no way decrease or
affect the responsibilities of individual owners or occupants of said
dwelling units.
A. Duty of occupant. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he or she occupies and
controls.
B. Liability of occupant. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall be liable if a violation is caused by his or her own willful act,
assistance or negligence or that of any member of his or her family or
household or his or her guests.
§ 166-42 GAMES OF CHANCE § 166-45
162:221
§ 166-46. Extermination of insects.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
verminproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 166-47. Maintenance and use of plumbing fixtures.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein
in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise
of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. This liability on
the part of the occupant shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of
remedying any defect, nor of any other liability imposed upon the owner by
law, but it shall subject the occupant to the penalties of this chapter upon
proper proof of any willful or malicious act he or she has performed.
§ 166-48. Maintenance of yards, lawns and courts.
Yards, lawns and courts shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition and free from infestation insofar as said occupant occupies or
controls said yards, lawns and courts or any part thereof.
A. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or
her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by § 166-16E.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or
her garbage and any other organic waste, which might provide food for
rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by § 166-16F.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or
containers for all dwelling units. It shall be prohibited to store or
accumulate garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways. No
refrigerator may be discarded, abandoned or stored in a place
accessible to children without first removing any locking devices or the
hinges of the door or doors.
§ 166-45 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 166-48
162:222
Chapter 172
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 88.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 92.
Auctions — See Ch. 104.
Bingo — See Ch. 110.
Circuses, carnivals and amusements — See
Ch. 124.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 132.
Games of chance — See Ch. 162.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 196.
Pornography — See Ch. 204.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 226.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 254.
Towing — See Ch. 258.
§ 166-48 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 166-48
172:223

ARTICLE I
Regulations Governing License Applications
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. I of Ch. 10 of the 1973 Code]
§ 172-1. Applicability.
All licenses required to be obtained in accordance with any resolution,
ordinance, rule, regulation, local law or provision of this Code or in
accordance with any statute or requirement of the state or of any other
municipality where the license is to be issued by the village or any of its
officers or agencies and where the statute or requirement does not specify
the manner or form in which the license shall be applied for or granted shall
be obtained in accordance with the provisions of §§ 172-2 through 172-11.
§ 172-2. Fees; return upon denial of application.
Where a fee is required, such fee shall be paid at the time the application for
a license is submitted. Unless otherwise specified, any fee submitted shall
be returned if the application is denied.
§ 172-3. Application procedure.
Unless otherwise provided, the following regulations shall govern license
applications:
A. Applications for all licenses shall be on a standard form prepared by the
Village Clerk and available from him or her free of charge to all
applicants.
B. The application shall be completed and filed in triplicate.
C. Any additional pages required shall be of the same size as the form.
D. All license applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall
contain his or her residence address.
E. Where the license applies to particular real property, the street address
and the tax map number of the real property shall be shown, and there
shall be annexed to the application a site plan and a sketch or copy of
the Broome County Tax Map showing the property and adjoining
property.
F. Where the license relates to any zoning ordinance, the application shall
show the present zoning of the property and refer to any previous
license or variance relating to the zoning, and a copy of the legal
description shall be annexed.
G. Each copy of the application shall contain a full statement of the basis
upon which the license is requested, including the ordinance or other
statute or regulation providing for issuance of such a license and any
particular items of information required by such statute or regulation.
§ 172-1 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-3
172:225
§ 172-4. Form of application.
The form of the license application shall be as follows or as the same may
be changed from time to time by the Village Clerk.
Application for License
Applicant:
Residence address, if an individual:
Business address:
Application is hereby made for a license to .
Issuance of such a license is authorized by (give specific legislation): .
If this license relates to real property, the street address of the real
property is _________________________; and the tax map number of the
property is .
If this license is granted in connection with a zoning regulation, the tax
map number of the real property is ______________________; and a legal
description of the real property is attached and marked Exhibit A.
The following is a statement of the manner in which the applicant meets
the requirements for granting this license (if additional space is required,
attach additional sheets marked Exhibit B):
The following items of information are furnished in accordance with the
legislation authorizing the granting of this license (if additional space is
required, attach additional sheets marked Exhibit C):
Dated: _________________
______________________
Applicant
§ 172-5. Issuance and signing of license.
Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be issued by and under the
signature of the Village Clerk. Where a license is required to be granted by
the Board of Trustees, it shall be signed by the Village Clerk acting on behalf
of the Board. Where the license is required to be granted by the Mayor, it
shall be signed by the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor or the Acting Mayor. Where
the license is required to be granted by any other village agency, it shall be
signed by the Chairman or Acting Chairman of that agency, and where it is
required to be granted by any other village officer, it shall be signed by that
officer or his or her deputy.
§ 172-6. Expiration of licenses.
Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall expire on the 31st day of
December following the issuance of the license.
H. All applications shall be submitted to the Village Clerk.
§ 172-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-7
172:226
§ 172-7. Records of licenses.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under the
provisions of this Code or under any resolution, rule, regulation, ordinance
or local law, which record shall include the number and date of the license,
the time and purpose for which such license is granted and the amount of
the fee to be paid therefor.
§ 172-8. To whom license will issue; grounds for refusal of certain
licenses.
A license shall be issued only to such person as shall be deemed a fit and
proper person to conduct the trade, occupation or business for which such
license is required, and a license may be refused for any trade or occupation
specified in Subdivisions 3 and 4 of Section 91 of the Village Law,41 which
shall, in the judgment of the Mayor, be carried on or is intended to be
carried on in any building or place which is not provided with a suitable and
safe means of ingress and egress in case of panic or fire or which shall, in
the judgment of the Mayor, be likely to be immoral or improper or disturb
the peace and order of the village.
§ 172-9. Appeals to Board of Trustees.
Any applicant for a license who shall have been refused a license may apply
to the Board of Trustees at a meeting thereof for the same, and such license
may be granted or refused by the Board of Trustees.
§ 172-10. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
The Mayor may suspend any license which has been granted until the next
meeting of the Board of Trustees, and thereupon, such license may be
continued or may be revoked by said Board for cause shown, after notice
has been given to the licensee.
§ 172-11. Notice of license revocation.
Whenever any license shall have been revoked by the Board of Trustees,
a notice of such revocation shall be served by the Village Clerk upon the
licensee, either personally or by mail, whereupon such license shall be of no
force or effect.42
41.Editor's Note: Section 91 of the Village Law was omitted when the Village Law was
recodified in 1972.
42.Editor's Note: Original § 10-12, Restaurants, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993.
§ 172-7 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-11
172:227

ARTICLE II
Pawnbrokers
[Adopted 10-6-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
§ 172-12. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of pawnbroker
in the village without obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
§ 172-13. Qualifications of applicant for license.
No person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker who has not been a resident
of Broome County for at least six months next preceding the date of such
license and is not of the age of 21 years.
§ 172-14. Issuance of license; fee.
The Village Clerk, upon proper application being made to him, shall, under
his hand and the seal of the village, issue and deliver to any proper and
suitable applicant therefor a license to conduct the business of pawnbroker,
upon payment to said Clerk of $100.
§ 172-15. Place of business to be stated in license application;
change in place of business.
Any person applying for a license under the provisions of this article shall
state in his application for such license the street and number of the
building where he proposes to carry an such business, which street and
number shall be stated in said license, and the licensee shall not be
permitted to change said location to any other place without permission
from the Clerk. An applicant for a license must present a valid picture
identification with current legal address at the time of application.
§ 172-16. Sign required; inscription thereon.
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall place or
suspend in front of his place of business in a conspicuous manner a sign
bearing his name and the words "Licensed Pawnbroker."
§ 172-17. Pawnbroker to keep records; contents; duration.
Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions of this article shall keep a
book in which shall be fairly written at the time of each loan an accurate
account and description of the goods, articles and things pawned, the
amount of money loaned thereon the time of pledging the same, the rate
of interest to be charged, the name, residence, age, complexion, sex, style
of beard, if any, height, weight and a general description of the person
pawning or pledging such goods, articles or things and a copy of the valid
picture identification of said person. Such books shall be kept for a period
of at least six years and shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion.
§ 172-12 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-18
172:229
§ 172-18. Records open to inspection.
The book required to be kept pursuant to § 172-17 shall at all times be open
to the inspection of any and all persons holding office under the Village Law
and the Public Officers Law.
§ 172-19. Memorandum to be given.
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person
pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things a memorandum or note,
signed by him and containing the substance of the entry required to be
made in his book, mentioned in § 172-17, and no charge shall be made for
such entry or memorandum.
§ 172-20. Dealing with certain persons prohibited.
No pawnbroker shall receive or take any goods in pledge from any person
who shall appear to be or who shall be known to such pawnbroker to be
under the age of 18 years or intoxicated or a habitual drunkard.
§ 172-21. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way
of pawn or pledge, excepting between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, nor shall any business be transacted by
pawnbrokers as such between the hours of 6:00 p.m. on Saturday and 7:00
a.m. on Monday.
§ 172-22. Minimum age requirement for clerks.
It shall be unlawful for a pawnbroker to employ any clerk or any other
person under the age of 16 years to take any pledge.
§ 172-23. Reports to Chief of Police.
Every person licensed as a pawnbroker under the provisions of this article
shall, before 10:00 a.m. of each and every business day, including
Saturdays, report to the Chief of Police of the village, on blank forms to be
furnished by the village, a description of all articles received by him in pawn
the business day immediately preceding, together with the number of the
pawn ticket issued therefor and the amount loaned thereon.
§ 172-24. Lost or stolen articles.
A. If any goods, articles or things shall be advertised in a daily newspaper
printed and published in the county as having been lost or stolen, and if
the goods, articles or things so advertised, or any part or portion
thereof, shall be or shall thereafter come into the possession of any
licensee, he shall forthwith give information thereof, in writing, to the
office of the Chief of Police and he shall also state from whom the same
§ 172-18 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-24
172:230
§ 172-25. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be punished as provided in § 1-15 of this Code. Nothing
herein shall be interpreted nor is it the intent of this article to affect the
requirements for pawnbrokers under New York State General Business Law
§ 40 et seq.
was received and shall not offer the same for sale without the written
approval of the Chief of Police.
B. Every licensee woo shall receive or be in possession of any goods,
articles or things which may have been lost or stolen, or which are
alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall forthwith, on
demand, exhibit the same to the Chief of Police or any Municipal Court
Judge or any Judge of any criminal court or any policeman who may be
authorized by any of the aforementioned officers or Judges to make
such a demand.
§ 172-24 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-25
172:231

ARTICLE III
Dealers in Secondhand Goods
[Adopted 1-5-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 172-26. Legislative purpose.
§ 172-27. License required.
§ 172-28. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
DEALER IN SECONDHAND GOODS — Any person engaged in the
commercial exchange, purchase and/or sale of the following secondhand
articles: radios, televisions, household appliances (except for refrigerators,
freezers, stoves/ranges, dishwashers and trash compactors), either
electrical or mechanical, cameras, bicycles, electronic equipment, office
furniture, business machines, jewelry, old gold, silver, platinum or other
precious metals, firearms, rifles and shotguns.
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership,
society or any other organization.
A. The Board of Trustees has observed that the Village of Johnson City has
experienced an increase in the number of house burglaries during the
late 1980's and early 1990's. This Board has found and determined that
the disposition of such stolen property is easily accomplished by the
perpetrators of such crimes and offenses at secondhand and junk shops
on a "no questions asked" basis.
B. This board is vested with the power to provide for the licensing and
regulation of dealers in secondhand goods pursuant to § 4-412 of the
Village Law. Said power is predicated upon the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare. Accordingly, this article is enacted for the
purpose of licensing dealers in secondhand goods for the protection of
the public and to aid law enforcement officials in their efforts to control
and reduce the incidents of crime involving stolen personal property.
A. No person, either as principal, agent or employee, shall, within the
incorporated limits of the Village of Johnson City, establish, engage in or
carry on the business of a dealer in secondhand goods as defined
herein, either separately or in connection with some other business,
without first having obtained and paid for and having in full force and
effect a license as provided by this article.
B. The fee for licenses issued under this article shall be $50 per year.
§ 172-26 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-29
172:233
§ 172-29. Application for license.
Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file with
the Village Clerk a verified application upon a blank form prepared by the
Village Clerk and furnished by the village. Such application shall contain the
following information:
§ 172-30. Combined secondhand dealers/pawnbrokers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a combined secondhand
dealer/pawnbroker shop pursuant to the provisions of § 47 of the General
Business Law.
§ 172-31. Issuance of license.
A. Name, description, date of birth and social security number of the
applicant.
B. Home address of the applicant.
C. Business address of the applicant.
D. Telephone number of the business.
E. Name of the business.
F. Type of business (i.e., firm, partnership, association, corporation, etc.).
(1) If a partnership, names and addresses of all partners, both general
and limited.
(2) If a corporation or association, names and addresses of all principal
officers.
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, any partner or any
principal officer has been convicted of any crime, or any violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty therefor.
H. A certificate from the sealer of weights and measures of the County of
Broome certifying that all weighing and measuring devices to be used
by the applicant have been examined and approved pursuant to law.
I. A statement as to whether the business is permanent or transient.
Transient vendors shall be subject to the transient retail merchants tax
set forth in Chapter 196 of this Code.
J. A statement from the Code Enforcement Officer that the location of said
business complies with the Zoning Code of the Village of Johnson City.43
A. The Village Clerk shall send a copy of the above-mentioned verified
application to the Chief of Police of the Village of Johnson City for
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 274, Zoning.
§ 172-29 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-31
172:234
§ 172-32. Appeal from denial of license.
investigation. The Chief of Police shall report findings, if any, to the
Village Clerk within seven business days of the receipt and filing of said
application.
B. Upon receipt of the findings of the Chief of Police, the Village Clerk
shall, except as set forth below, issue to the applicant a license as
required by § 172-27, signed by the Village Clerk or the Deputy Village
Clerk.
C. Denial of license.
(1) In accordance with the legislative purpose of this article, no license
shall be denied except when the applicant(s) and/or principal(s) of
the business have been convicted, in a court of competent
jurisdiction, within five years prior to the date of said application,
of any of the following:
(a) Offenses involving damage to or intrusion upon property.
(b) Offenses involving theft.
(c) Offenses involving fraud.
(d) Felonies against the person involving physical injury.
(e) Violations of this chapter.
(f) Offenses involving possession of stolen property.
(2) However, the denial of a license for any above-enumerated grounds
shall be consistent with the provisions of Article 23-A of the New
York State Correction Law.
D. All licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper
reference stubs kept for that purpose, numbered in the order in which
they are issued.
E. No license shall be issued to an applicant who does not agree to comply
with all local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village of
Johnson City pertaining to the operation of a business or occupation.
A. Any applicant refused a license by the Village Clerk may apply, in
writing, within five business days of such refusal, to the Mayor for a
hearing on his application before a hearing officer designated by the
Mayor. The Mayor may, in his discretion, designate a village officer as
permanent hearing officer for appeals under this section, or he may
make such designations on an individual basis.
B. Rejection of an application based upon any of the grounds set forth in
§ 172-31C(1)(a) through (e) shall create a rebuttable presumption that
the applicant is not entitled to receive a license hereunder. Accordingly,
the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant in the hearing.
§ 172-31 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-32
172:235
§ 172-33. Contents of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall state clearly the following
information:
§ 172-34. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall automatically
expire on December 31 following the date of issuance of such licenses.
§ 172-35. Record of licenses.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a record of all applications
and of all licenses granted under the provisions of this article, giving the
number and date of each license, the name and residence of the persons
licensed, the amount of the license fee paid and the date of revocation of all
licenses revoked.
§ 172-36. Revocation of license.
C. The hearing officer shall explain his denial or approval of the
application, in writing, to the Village Clerk and the applicant within five
business days of the hearing.
D. If the hearing officer grants the application, the Village Clerk shall issue
the license pursuant to § 172-5 of this Code.
A. The name and address of the licensee and the fee paid for the license.
B. The name and address of the business of the license.
C. The number of the license.
D. The date of issuance and expiration of the license.
A. The Mayor of the Village of Johnson City may revoke or suspend any
license issued under the provisions of this article for any of the
following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business licensed under this Code.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of this article.
(4) Conviction of the licensee or any principal upon any of the grounds
set forth above in § 172-31C(1)(a) through (e) of this article during
the term of the license.
(5) Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
§ 172-32 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-36
172:236
§ 172-37. Appeal from revocation or suspension of license.
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. When a license shall be revoked or suspended, no refund of any
unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. The Mayor shall
notify the Village Clerk of the revocation or suspension of any license,
and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the
Village Clerk upon the licensee personally or by mailing by registered
mail a copy of the same to the business address given by the licensee. A
copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
A. Any licensee whose license has been revoked or suspended by the
village may apply in writing to the Mayor, within five business days of
receipt of the notice required by § 172-36, for a hearing on such
revocation or suspension before a hearing officer to be designated by
the Mayor. The Mayor may, in his discretion, designate a village officer
as permanent hearing officer for appeals under this section, or he may
make such designations on an individual basis.
B. Such application for a hearing shall stay the effect of any order of
revocation or suspension until such time as the administrative appeal
has been completed.
C. Said hearing shall be held within five business days of the receipt of the
request by the Mayor.
D. The hearing officer shall explain his affirmance or reversal of the
revocation or suspension of the license, in writing, to the Village Clerk,
the Mayor and the licensee within five business days of the hearing.
E. The hearing officer shall have the power to modify any revocation or
suspension upon such terms as are deemed equitable by him under the
circumstances. In no event shall the hearing officer have the power to
increase any penalty.
F. Revocation or suspension of a license upon any of the grounds set forth
in § 172-36A(1) through (5) shall create a rebuttable presumption that
the license was properly revoked or suspended except as provided
below in Subsection G. Accordingly, the burden of proof shall be upon
the applicant in the hearing.
G. Any revocation or suspension of a license upon the grounds that the
licensee has been convicted of any offense involving the sale and/or
possession of stolen property in relation to the place of business for
which said license has been issued shall create an irrebuttable
presumption that the revocation or suspension was proper, provided
that an appropriate certificate of conviction has been entered as part of
the record. In such cases, the hearing officer's powers shall be limited
to reviewing the penalty as determined by the Mayor.
§ 172-36 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-38
172:237
§ 172-38. Exhibition of license upon request.
Every person to whom a license has been granted hereunder, while
exercising his license, shall exhibit said license upon request of any
individual.
§ 172-39. Assignment of license prohibited.
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall not be assignable.
Any holder of such a license who permits it to be used by any other person,
and any person who uses such license granted to any other person, shall
each be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 172-40. Issuance of license to minors prohibited; exception.
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article to a person
under 18 years of age unless the parent or legal guardian of any such minor
is a coapplicant with such minor for a license under this article.
§ 172-41. Application after license has been refused or revoked.
No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a license
which has been revoked shall make further application until a period of
at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection or
revocation, unless the applicant can show that the reason for such rejection
no longer exists.
§ 172-42. Regulations applicable to licensees.
A. Changing place of business. If any licensee shall move his place of
business from the place designated in the license, he shall immediately
give notice to the Village Clerk and have the same endorsed on. No
licensee shall carry on business at any other place than the one
designated in the license.
B. Cooperation with police. It shall be the duty of every licensee to
cooperate with the Village of Johnson City Police Department in
preventing the sale or exchange of stolen property. If a licensee has
reason to believe that an attempt is being made to sell stolen property,
he shall notify the Police Department at once.
C. Lost or stolen property.
(1) If any article shall be advertised in the newspaper designated by
the village for the publication of legal notices as having been lost or
stolen, and if any goods or articles answering such advertised
description or any part thereof shall be in or come into the
possession of any dealer in secondhand goods, upon receiving
actual written or oral notice of the similarity of the description of
such articles, such dealer shall immediately give information
relating thereto to the police.
§ 172-38 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-42
172:238
(2) No disposition of such articles shall be effected until authorization
to do so shall be given to such dealer by the police.
(3) A dealer in secondhand goods, when notified by the police that
property in his possession is stolen or alleged to be stolen, shall
take immediate steps to secure that property, and such items shall
be marked "police stop." Thereafter, such property shall not be sold
or removed from the premises until notification is made to the
dealer, in writing, by the police allowing such removal or sale.
Whenever practicable, the police shall personally render such
notification within 24 hours of the marking of the police stop.
D. Records of purchases to be kept by licensee.
(1) Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a bound book of
consecutively numbered transactions, in which shall be legibly
written in English, at the time of every purchase or receipt of
secondhand goods from a person other than a dealer in secondhand
goods, the following information:
(a) The date of the transaction.
(b) The name and address of the person from whom goods are
purchased.
(c) Proof of identity as prescribed herein. Only the following shall
be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
[1] Any official document, except a social security account
number card, issued by the United States government or
any state, county, municipality or subdivision thereof or
any public agency or department thereof or any public or
private employer, which requires and bears the signature
of the person to whom it is issued.
[2] Other identification documentation which, under the
circumstances of any particular purchase, would lead a
reasonable person to believe to be accurate and reliable,
when identification under Subsection D(1)(c)[1] of this
section is not available.
[3] Proof that the seller is over 16 years of age as required by
Subsection F.
[4] General description of goods involved in the transaction,
including make and model, serial number and any other
distinguishing monograms or marks.
(2) Every dealer in secondhand goods who receives secondhand
articles on consignment shall keep a record, in the aboveprescribed
book, describing the articles and the name and
description of the person such items are received from as
prescribed above in Subsection D(1).
§ 172-42 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 172-42
172:239
§ 172-43. Penalties for offenses.
(3) Such records shall be kept on the business premises of the
secondhand dealership or at a place so designated on the duly
approved license at all times during normal business hours. Such
records shall be open during normal business hours to inspection
by members of the Bureau of Police or any person duly authorized
in writing by the Chief of Police for such purposes who shall exhibit
such written authority to the dealer.
E. Retention of records. All records to be kept under Subsections A
through D, inclusive, shall be kept by the licensee for a period of at least
two years from the date said record was made.
F. Restrictions on purchases from children; exceptions.
(1) No person licensed under this article shall receive or purchase any
goods, chattels, wares or merchandise from any child under the
age of 16 years. However, such purchases may be made if said child
is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
(2) Said restrictions on children shall not apply to transactions
involving the purchase or sale of stamps, currency or coins.
(3) It shall be no defense to a prosecution for a violation of this section
that, in the transaction upon which the prosecution is based, the
child acted as the agent or representative of another or that the
defendant dealt with such child as the agent or representative of
another.
A. Unlicensed dealers. Any person who, himself, or by his clerk, agent or
employee, shall act as a dealer in secondhand goods as herein defined
without a license, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article, or who, having had his license revoked, shall continue to act as
a secondhand dealer, shall upon conviction be punished as provided in
§ 1-15 of this Code.
B. Violations by licensees. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 1-15 of this
Code, any person, duly licensed under this article, who shall not comply
with the provisions of § 172-42A through F of this article, entitled
"Regulations applicable to licensees," shall be subject to administrative
penalties, including revocation or suspension of any such license and/or
the commencement of a civil action for a penalty as provided for by
§ 1-15 of this Code.
C. Injunctive relief available. In addition to the above-provided penalties
and punishment, the Village Board may maintain an action or
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance
with the provisions of this article or to restrain by injunction offenses
against this article as provided by § 1-17.
§ 172-42 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 172-43
172:240
Chapter 174
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adopt-a-road-and-lot program — See Ch. 84.
Transient retail businesses and
vendors — See Ch. 196
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 238
Zoning — See Ch. 300
§ 174-1. Declaration of intent.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the Village
of Johnson City is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health, fire
and safety hazard and pollutant; that an all-out litter-control campaign can
result in substantial savings to taxpayers of the Village; and that litter is a
matter affecting the public interest and consequently should be subject to
supervision and administrative control for the purpose of safeguarding the
public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Village.
§ 174-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings indicated.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words used in the plural number include the
singular number; and words used in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
COMMERCIAL PLACE — Any store or building or group thereof,
including shopping centers, shopping plazas and other similar places
wherein mercantile activities and services are offered to the public and
shall include all parking areas thereat.
GARBAGE —
Every waste accumulation of animal, vegetable, fruit or similar
organic matter that attends the preparation, use, dealing in or
storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable; metal containers,
paper cartons or other containers that have contained food
materials and beverages; smoking products, discarded paper,
rubber (excluding tires), cloth, leather, sweepings, as well as
inorganic waste such as glass, porcelain or other similar waste
materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home, business or
industry. Garbage shall not, however, include those items
designated by ordinance, rule or regulations as recyclables.
(1)
§ 172-43 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 174-2
172:241
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or creates
unsightliness. Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic,
glass or miscellaneous solid waste which may be classified as trash,
debris, garbage or junk.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the Village, owned or used by the Village and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch,
steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all sidewalks, public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — In all cases, the property owner;
additionally, when readily identifiable, shall also mean the tenant whose
solid waste is at issue.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SOLID WASTE — All material described as garbage, yard waste and
trash as defined in this chapter.
TRASH — Discarded household furniture, bedding and mattresses, and
other bulky household materials not specifically prohibited by this
chapter, too large to place in standard refuse containers, except those
items designated by ordinance, rule or regulation as recyclables. Trash
shall not include concrete, cinder, block, stone or other masonry
materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Further exclusions. Prohibited materials include flammable or
explosive substances, paint, paint thinners or solvents, pesticides,
acids, caustics, or similar wastes, oil, tires, batteries, garbage or
trash generated outside the Village and medical waste.
(2)
§ 174-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 174-2
172:242
§ 174-3. Litter in public places.
§ 174-4. Placing litter in receptacles to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 174-5. Litter in gutters.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter or other public place within
the Village the accumulation of litter from any building or litter from any
public sidewalk or driveway.
§ 174-6. Litter from vehicles.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City in the County of Broome.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, garden materials, leaves and brush
trimmings.
A. It is unlawful to deposit or throw litter in or upon any sidewalk or other
public place within the Village, except in containers or areas lawfully
provided therefor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit in any
gutter, street or other public place within the Village the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk
or driveway.
C. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, river or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within
the Village or on the banks of any such body of water within the Village.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter from any vehicle upon any street
or other public place within the Village, or upon private property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or organization to
transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle within the
limits of the Village unless said cargo is secured and covered in such a
manner as to prevent depositing of litter.
C. Vehicles used to transport upon the street any garbage or other
offensive liquid or substance shall have watertight boxes or vessels so
as to prevent the contents from leaking.
D. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Village unless such vehicle is so constructed or located as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Village the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
§ 174-2 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 174-6
172:243
§ 174-7. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Village, except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all
such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided herein.
§ 174-8. Litter on publicly patronized or used establishments;
maintenance of containers.
To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, publicly
patronized or used establishments and institutions such as, but not limited
to, fast-food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets,
commercial parking lots, motels and schools shall provide, regularly empty
and maintain in good condition adequate containers that meet the
standards as prescribed by the Village by its Public Services Department
and/or Code Enforcement.
§ 174-9. Litter in public waters.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Village.
§ 174-10. Litter on private and commercial premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
or commercial place within the Village, whether owned by such person
or not, and whether occupied or vacant, except that the owner or person
in control of such private property or commercial place may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any public place or upon any private property. The owner or person in
control of private property or any portion thereof shall at all times maintain
the premises, or that portion controlled by him or her, free of litter. This
requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter, but to materials that
already are, or become, trapped in such locations as fences and wall bases,
borders, embankments and other lodging points.
§ 174-11. Owners to maintain commercial premises litter-free.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including
shopping centers and delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep said
places, parking fields, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas
which are a part of such commercial place free from litter.
any public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
§ 174-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 174-12
172:244
§ 174-12. Owners to maintain private premises litter-free.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free from litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 174-13. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Village, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 174-14. Notice to remove.
Any peace officers and any Code Enforcement Officers are hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private
property or commercial place within the Village or the agent of such owner
to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property, which litter is
a nuisance or dangerous to public health, safety or welfare.
§ 174-15. Penalties for offenses and enforcement.
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $150 and/or 20 hours of community service, but
not exceeding $700 and/or 20 hours of community service. The
penalties for a second offense within a two-year period shall be a
minimum fine of $700 and/or 40 hours of community service, but not
exceeding $1,000 and/or 40 hours of community service, imprisonment
not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine, community service or
imprisonment. The penalties for a third offense within a three-year
period shall be a minimum fine of $1,000, but not exceeding $1,500
and/or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days. Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Any peace officer and any Code Enforcement Officer may enforce this
chapter and report a violation. The officer shall file with the Village
Court an information charging the violation of the appropriate section
and serve, either in person or by regular mail, the respondent with the
information. However, any person who observes an individual violating
the respective sections and committing any violation as described
thereunder, may file a signed information under oath with the Village
Justice specifying the specific violative conduct, the date thereof, the
place where the conduct was observed and the name of the individual
committing the violation. Thereafter, the Court shall issue a notice of
violation, which shall be served either personally or by regular mail
upon the individual.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Village of Johnson
City from seeking judicial or equitable relief to abate violations of this
chapter. Nothing contained herein shall require notice as a prerequisite
§ 174-12 LICENSED OCCUPATIONS § 174-15
172:245
Chapter 176
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mobile Home Park Districts — See Ch. 274,
Art. XV.
§ 176-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or structure, including but not limited to an
automobile trailer, mobile home and trailer coach, mounted or capable of
being mounted on wheels for use on highways and streets and designed for
use as a dwelling or for the conduct of a business, trade or occupation.
MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT — A mobile home which does not have a
flush toilet and bath or shower.
MOBILE HOME, INDEPENDENT — A mobile home which has a flush toilet
and a bath or shower.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A "mobile home park" or camp shall consist of
two (2) or more mobile homes or trailers located on one (1) or more lots
or plots which shall be designed to provide the necessary facilities and
appurtenances for the mobile homes to be used as dwellings.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A lot within a mobile home park designated for
the accommodation of one (1) mobile home.
§ 176-2. License required.
to the issuance of a summons or appearance ticket for a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Filing of license application; approval by Village Board. Application for
an initial mobile home park license shall be filed with the enforcement
officer. Issuance of an initial license shall be made by the enforcement
officer only after approval by the Village Board.
B. Form and content of license application. The application shall be on
forms provided by the village and signed by the applicant and shall
include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The locational and legal description of the park.
§ 174-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 176-2
176:246
§ 176-3. Additions to park after application approval.
Provision for additional mobile homes or spaces after initial application
approval shall not be allowed unless the park owner files another
application according to the procedures enumerated in § 176-2.
§ 176-4. Requirements for mobile home park plan.
The mobile home park shall be subject to site plan review. The plan shall
comply with the minimum requirements set forth in this section.
(3) A complete site plan of the park at a scale of one (1) inch to fifty
(50) feet or at a scale of fewer feet to the inch.
(4) Plans and specifications to scale of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the park.
Proposed construction shall be completed before a license is
issued.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the enforcement
officer or the Village Planning Board to enable them to determine if
the proposed park will comply with legal requirements and
standards of this chapter.
C. Application, plans and specifications to be filed in triplicate; review,
approval of park plan by County Health Department. The application
and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in
triplicate. The park plan shall be reviewed by the County Health
Department and shall be subject to its approval before a license is
issued by the village.
D. Renewal of license. Annual renewal of the license to operate a park
shall be issued by the Village Clerk only after an inspection by the
enforcement officer.
A. General standards.
(1) Yard requirements. Mobile homes shall be so located that the
following minimum yard requirements for the park shall be
maintained:
(a) Front yard: Thirty (30) feet measured from the road right-ofway.
(b) Side yard: Each side, fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Rear yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
(2) Drainage. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, the
grading of which ensures rapid drainage and freedom from
stagnant pools of water.
§ 176-2 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 176-4
176:247
(3) Size of spaces. Mobile home spaces shall consist of a minimum of
twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet per unit. Each space shall
be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width.
(4) Width of driveways; access to public street. All mobile homes
spaces shall abut on a driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in
width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or
highway.
(5) Width of walkways. Walkways not less than two (2) feet wide shall
be provided from the mobile home spaces to the service buildings.
(6) Surfacing lighting of walkways and driveways. All driveways and
walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and lighted at
night with electric lamps of not less than twenty-five (25) watts
each, spaced at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet.
(7) Service buildings required. Each park shall provide service
buildings to house such toilet, bathing and other sanitation
facilities as are hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
(8) Electrical outlets. An electrical outlet supplying at least one
hundred ten (110) volts shall be provided for each mobile home
space.
(9) Maintenance of spaces. The mobile home spaces shall at all times
be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance.
(10) Location of homes on spaces. Mobile homes shall be so located on
each space that there shall be at least twelve (12) feet clearance
between them.
(11) Area coverage. The mobile home space area shall not be covered in
excess of fifty percent (50%). The determination of area coverage
shall include the mobile home vehicle and any accessory structure
adjacent to the mobile home.
B. Water supply. An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and
domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes in all buildings and mobile
home spaces within the park, to meet the requirements of the park.
Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap at least
four (4) inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot water shall
be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing,
cleansing and laundry facilities.
C. Sanitation facilities.
(1) Toilet facilities for males. Toilet facilities for males shall consist of
not fewer than two (2) flush toilets and two (2) urinals for the first
fifteen (15) dependent mobile homes or any lesser number thereof
and for dependent mobile homes in excess of fifteen (15), not fewer
than one (1) additional flush toilet and one (1) additional urinal for
§ 176-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 176-4
176:248
every fifteen (15) additional dependent mobile homes or fractional
number thereof.
(2) Toilet facilities for females. Toilet facilities for females shall consist
of not fewer than two (2) flush toilets or comparable facilities for
the first ten (10) dependent mobile homes or any lesser number
thereof and for dependent mobile homes in excess of ten (10), no
fewer than one (1) additional flush toilet for every ten (10)
additional dependent mobile homes or fractional number thereof.
(3) Lavatory; bath facilities. Each sex shall be provided with not fewer
than one (1) lavatory and one (1) shower or bathtub with individual
dressing accommodations for the first ten (10) dependent mobile
homes or any lesser number thereof and for dependent mobile
homes in excess of ten (10), not fewer than one (1) additional
lavatory and one (1) additional shower or bathtub with individual
dressing accommodations for every ten (10) dependent mobile
homes or fractional number thereof.
(4) Sanitation facilities to be private. Each toilet and each shower or
bathtub with individual dressing accommodations, for which
provision is made in Subsection C(1), (2) and (3) above, shall be in a
private compartment or stall.
(5) Separation of facilities for males and females. The toilet and other
sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either in
separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by
a soundproof wall.
(6) Flush toilet bowl receptacles. There shall be provided in a separate
compartment or stall not fewer than one (1) flush toilet bowl
receptacle for emptying bedpans or other containers of human
excrement and an adequate supply of hot running water for
cleansing such bedpans or containers.
D. Laundry facilities.
(1) Laundry trays; washing machines. Not fewer than two (2) laundry
trays and two (2) automatic or semiautomatic-type washing
machines for the first twenty-five (25) mobile home spaces or any
lesser number thereof and, for mobile home spaces in excess of
twenty-five (25), not fewer than one (1) additional single laundry
tray and one (1) additional automatic or semiautomatic-type
washing machine for every twenty-five (25) additional mobile home
spaces or fractional number thereof shall be provided.
(2) Electrical outlets for machines; drying space. An ample number of
electrical outlets shall be provided supplying current sufficient to
operate each machine. Drying space shall be provided sufficient to
accommodate the laundry of the mobile home occupants if
automatic drying equipment is not supplied.
§ 176-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 176-4
176:249
(3) Location of facilities. The laundry facilities shall be either in a
separate building or, if in the same building where sanitation
facilities are housed, shall be separated from the rooms housing the
sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
E. Service buildings.
(1) To be permanent structures. Service buildings housing sanitation
laundry facilities or any of such facilities shall be permanent
structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installation and plumbing and
sanitation systems.
(2) Lighting; ventilation; construction materials; temperature during
certain months. The service buildings shall be well-lighted at all
times, day and night; shall be well ventilated with screened
openings; shall be constructed of such moistureproof material,
including painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and
washing; and shall be maintained at a temperature of at least sixty
degrees Fahrenheit (60º F.) during the period from October 1 to
May 1. The floors of the service buildings shall be of water
impervious material.
(3) Proximity to dependent mobile homes. Service buildings housing
sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than ten (10) feet or
farther than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home space
on which a dependent mobile home is located.
(4) Maintenance. All service buildings and the grounds of the park
shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of
any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the
public or constitute a nuisance.
F. Sewage and refuse disposal.
(1) Disposal of sewage. Water from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets,
urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service shall be
discharged into a public sewer system or into a private sewer and
disposal plant or septic tank system only after approval by the
County Department of Health.
(2) Use of chemical toilets. If a mobile home is equipped with a
chemical toilet, such facility may be used so long as it does not
become objectionable, at which time its use shall cease and park
facilities shall be used as ordered by the County Department of
Health or the enforcement officer.
(3) Yard sanitary sewer for discharge of chemical tanks. A yard
sanitary sewer with capped connection shall be provided for the
discharge of chemical tanks. One (1) such connection, properly
vented, shall be provided for every twenty-five (25) mobile home
spaces or any lesser number thereof.
§ 176-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 176-4
176:250
§ 176-5. Registration of park occupants.
§ 176-6. Supervision of park.
§ 176-7. Revocation and reissuance of license.
The County Health Officer or the enforcement officer shall recommend to
the Village Clerk the revocation of any license to maintain and operate a
(4) Disposal of garbage, rubbish. Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting
covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal
of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be located not
farther than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home space.
The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. Garbage
and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may
be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow.
G. Fire protection. Every park shall be equipped at all times with fireextinguishing
equipment in good working order, of such type, size and
number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable
reasonable regulations of the Fire Department. No open fires shall be
permitted at any place which may endanger life or property. No fires
shall be left unattended at any time.
A. Duty of licensee. It shall be the duty of each person licensed under the
provisions of this chapter to operate a mobile home park to keep a
register containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants
located within the park. The register shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
(2) The state, territory or county issuing licenses for each mobile home
and motor vehicle.
B. Inspection and destruction of register. The park shall keep the register
available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public
health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition
of the information contained in the register. The register record for
each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one (1)
year following the date of departure of the registrant from the park.
A. The mobile home park licensee or a duly authorized attendant or
caretaker shall be in charge of the mobile home park at all times and
shall keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be
answerable with the licensee for the violation of any provision of this
chapter to which the licensee is subject.
B. It shall also be the duty of the licensee to immediately notify the Health
Officer of the county or the Village Enforcement Officer of any
communicable disease in the park.
§ 176-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 176-7
176:251
mobile home park when the licensee has been found in violation of any
provision of this chapter to which the licensee is subject. After such citation
of violation, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to
revocation have been remedied and the park is maintained and operated in
full compliance with the law.
Chapter 180
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 240.
§ 180-1. Prior notice required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the village for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or for damages or injuries to person
or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or
ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert unless
written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition
or of the existence of the snow or ice, relating to the particular place, was
actually given to the Village Clerk and there was a failure or neglect within
a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remove the
defect, danger or obstruction complained of or to cause the snow or ice to
be removed or the place otherwise made reasonably safe.
Chapter 184
OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 184-1. Purpose.
Although outdoor furnaces may provide an economical alternative to
conventional heating systems, concerns have been raised regarding the
safety and environmental impacts of these heating devices, particularly the
production of offensive odors and potential health effects of uncontrolled
emissions. It is generally recognized that the types of fuel used, and the
scale and duration of burning by outdoor woodburning furnaces, create
§ 176-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 184-1
180:252
noxious and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors and air pollution, can be
detrimental to citizens' health, and can deprive neighboring residents of the
enjoyment of their property or premises. Therefore, with the adoption of
this chapter, it is the intention of the Village of Johnson City Village Board
of Trustees to establish and impose restrictions upon the construction and
operation of outdoor woodburning furnaces within the limits of the Village
for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, and welfare of the Village and its inhabitants.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACE — An accessory structure,
designed and intended, through the burning of wood, for the purpose of
heating the principal structure or any other site, building, or structure on
the premises.
VIOLATOR or ANY PERSON WHO VIOLATED ANY PROVISION OF THIS
CHAPTER — Any person who owns or occupies the property at the time the
outdoor woodburning furnace has been installed and/or operated.
§ 184-3. Construction and operation prohibited.
The construction and operation of outdoor wood burning furnaces are
hereby prohibited within the Village of Johnson City.
§ 184-4. Enforcement.
The Village of Johnson City Code Enforcement Officer, or any other person
who may hereafter be designated by resolution of the Village Board, is
hereby authorized in the name and on behalf of the Village of Johnson City
to undertake and prosecute any proceedings necessary or appropriate to
enforce compliance with this chapter.
§ 184-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Any subsequent offense shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period of not more
than 30 days, or both. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. The owners of premises upon which prohibited acts
occur shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of this chapter.
B. Compliance with this chapter may also be compelled and violations
restrained by order or by injunction of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall also be
subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500, to be recovered by the
Village of Johnson City in a civil action. Each day that a violation occurs
§ 184-1 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 184-5
184:253
§ 184-6. Nonconforming uses; abandoned outdoor woodburning
furnaces.
shall constitute a separate offense. The owners of premises upon which
prohibited acts occur shall be jointly and severally liable for violations
of this chapter.
C. In the event the Village is required to take legal action to enforce this
chapter, the violator will be responsible for any and all necessary costs
incurred by the Village of Johnson City relative thereto, including
attorney's fees, and such amount shall be determined and assessed by
the court. If such expense is not paid in full within 30 days from the date
it is determined and assessed by the court, such expense shall be
charged to the property so affected by including such expenses in the
next annual Village of Johnson City tax levy against the property. The
owners of premises upon which prohibited acts occur shall be jointly
and severally liable for violations of this chapter.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the lawful use of any outdoor
woodburning furnace existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter
may be continued, although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No outdoor woodburning furnace existing at the time of the adoption of
this chapter shall thereafter be extended or enlarged.
C. Any existing outdoor woodburning furnace which is abandoned or
discontinued for a period of seven consecutive months shall not be
permitted to be reestablished as a nonconforming use, and must be
immediately removed by the property owner from the subject premises.
(1) If the property owner fails to remove the outdoor woodburning
furnace by the end of said seven-consecutive-month period, the
Village of Johnson City Code Enforcement Officer shall give written
notice by certified mail or personal service to the owner of the
property upon which the outdoor woodburning furnace is located.
Such notice shall provide that said owner shall remove the outdoor
woodburning furnace within 15 days of the date the notice is either
postmarked or personally served upon the owner.
(2) Should the outdoor woodburning furnace not be removed within
the time specified, the Village of Johnson City shall take reasonable
steps to effect its removal.
(3) The costs incurred by the Village to effect said removal (including
any attorneys' fees incurred by the Village to effect the removal),
plus an amount equal to 50% of said costs of removal, shall be
charged to the owner of said premises. Said expense shall be paid
by the owner of the property so affected within 30 days from the
date said costs are presented to the owner. If said expense is not
paid within said thirty-day time frame, then said expense shall be
§ 184-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 184-6
184:254
§ 184-7. Severability; when effective.
Chapter 188
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of parks and recreation — See
Ch. 51.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 188-1. Purpose.
The Village of Johnson City has established various parks to be administered
by the Village of Johnson City Department of Public Works. For the better
management of these parks, it is necessary to establish certain rules and
regulations for all persons entering, using, visiting or who are otherwise
within the boundaries of said parks.
§ 188-2. Establishment of rules and regulations.
This chapter does hereby establish the following rules and regulations.
§ 188-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Village of Johnson City Department of Public Works.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Services and/or his/her duly authorized
personnel.
PARK — Any and all land and/or physical structures owned or controlled by
the Village of Johnson City, administered by its Department of Public Works,
and designated as a park. These shall include areas designated as parks,
charged to the property so affected by including such expense
in the next annual Village of Johnson City tax levy against the
property.
D. No existing outdoor woodburning furnace which has been damaged by
any reason to the extent of more than 50% of its assessed value for
Village of Johnson City tax purposes shall be repaired or rebuilt.
A. The provisions of this chapter are severable and the invalidity of a
particular provision shall not invalidate any other provisions.
B. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
New York Secretary of State.
§ 184-6 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 188-3
184:255
picnic areas, nature reserves and other special use areas as designated by
the Parks Department.
PERSON — Includes persons and corporations and other groups.
§ 188-4. Preservation of property and natural resources.
No person shall:
§ 188-5. Disposal of rubbish, garbage, sewage and noxious
materials.
§ 188-6. Weapons and explosives.
§ 188-7. Harassment of others.
No person shall:
A. Injure, deface, destroy, disturb, remove or misuse any part of the park
nor any building, sign, equipment, plant, plant material or other
property.
B. Operate chain saws within the park.
A. No person shall leave behind or dump any material of any kind in the
park except the refuse, ashes, garbage and other material of a
permitted activity, and such material shall be deposited in receptacles
provided for such purposes.
B. No person shall, within the park, place or permit to be placed in any
river, brook, stream, ditch or drain any liquid or aqueous waste which
shall fail to comply with the minimum requirements as set by the New
York State Department of Health for quality standards for Class B
waters.
A. No person shall use, carry or possess any firearms within the park.
B. No person shall use, carry or possess any fireworks or explosive
substances within the park.
C. No person shall possess any other dangerous weapons or instruments
within the park.
A. Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject another person to physical
contact or attempt to do the same with the intent to harass, annoy or
alarm such other person.
B. Follow a person about the park with the intent to harass, annoy or
alarm such other person.
C. Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which alarm
or seriously annoy such other person and which serve no legitimate
purpose.
§ 188-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 188-7
184:256
§ 188-8. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof:
§ 188-9. Lewd behavior.
No person shall commit, perform or engage in any lewd, lascivious, obscene
or indecent act or behavior.
§ 188-10. Advertising, signs and commercial enterprises.
No person shall:
§ 188-11. Compliance with orders of Director; setting of
regulations.
§ 188-12. Camps and camping.
D. Threaten or menace any other person with any instrument or by using
any animal to do the same with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm
such other person.
A. Engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.
B. Make unreasonable noise.
C. Use abusive or obscene language or make obscene gestures in a public
place.
A. Distribute or place any commercial or political sign, advertisement,
circular, notice, statement, banner, emblem or design within the park.
B. Beg, hawk, peddle or solicit within the park.
C. Sell or offer for sale any article, thing, privilege or service.
A. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any reasonable order
relating to the regulation, direction or control of traffic or with any
other order lawfully given by the Director or willfully resist, obstruct or
abuse any police officer or other official in the execution of his/her
office.
B. The Director may set such regulations from time to time that will help in
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of persons and the
orderly administration of the park pursuant to policies established by
the Village Board of the Village of Johnson City.
A. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary
lodging or sleeping place within the park.
B. Any facility or area rented, leased or otherwise reserved shall be open
for inspection by authorized employees of the Department for the
§ 188-7 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 188-12
184:257
§ 188-13. Fires.
§ 188-14. Entry after hours.
No person shall be permitted to enter or remain within the confines of the
park or other park facilities after closing hours or before opening hours as
set and established from time to time by the Director.
§ 188-15. Hunting and fishing.
§ 188-16. Animals.
No person shall bring or release any animal into or upon any park or park
facility.
§ 188-17. Swimming.
§ 188-18. Certain toys/items of amusement prohibited.
purpose of assuring compliance with rules and regulations and proper
use of Department property.
A. No person shall start a fire in the park, except small fires for culinary
purposes in park grills or privately owned grills or fires in the places or
designated areas approved by the Director. The Director may prohibit,
at his discretion, fires at any location or for any purpose when
necessary for the protection of park property.
B. No person starting or using fires shall leave the immediate vicinity of
the fires before they are extinguished. The dumping of hot ashes or fire
from portable picnic grills is permitted only in designated receptacles.
A. No person within the confines of the park shall hunt, pursue with dogs,
trap or in any way harass or molest any wild bird or animal found within
the confines of the park.
B. No person shall fish in park waters in violation of the rules and
regulations of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
A. Swimming is prohibited except at areas designated for that purpose
and only when lifeguards are on duty.
B. No glass bottles, metal cans or other hazardous objects are permitted in
swimming areas.
A. Models, such as miniature planes, cars, rockets or boats, which produce
loud noises or are hazardous, are prohibited from all parks and park
facilities.
B. Bounce houses, trampolines, inflatable slides, and other similar
equipment are prohibited from all parks and park facilities.
§ 188-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 188-19
184:258
§ 188-19. Metal detectors.
No person shall use any metal detector within the confines of the park.
§ 188-20. Alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and illegal substances.
No person shall offer for sale or be under the influence of any beer, wine,
liquor, tobacco product or other intoxicating beverage or any illegal
substance, drug, stimulant, depressant or hallucinating agent within any
park or park facility. No person shall possess, consume or use any beer,
wine, liquor, tobacco products or any illegal substance, drug, stimulant,
depressant or hallucinating agent within any park or park facility.
§ 188-21. Hours of closing.
§ 188-22. Traffic regulations.
A. No person is permitted to remain, stop or park within the confines of
any park or park facility between the hours of sunset and sunrise. In
case of an emergency or when, in the judgment of the Director, the
public interest demands it, a portion of the park may be closed to the
public or designated persons until permission is given to reopen.
A. Purposes of way.
(1) No persons shall use any portion of the park for purposes of way
except drives, roadways, paths, walks and trails established for
such purposes. Paths established as bridle paths, footpaths,
exercise trails, nature trails or bicycle paths shall not be used for
vehicular traffic.
(2) Snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), unlicensed trail bikes and
recreation vehicles are prohibited within all parks and park
facilities.
B. Driving on closed roads or drives. No person shall drive upon or along
any park road or drive which has been closed and posted with
appropriate signs or barricades. The Director shall have authority to
order roads or drives closed.
C. Speed limit. No person shall drive at a speed in excess of that posted for
the area. The Village Board shall determine the speed limits in the park.
D. Reckless driving. No person shall operate a vehicle along or over any
road or drive within the park in a reckless manner or without due
regard for the safety and the rights of pedestrians and drivers and
occupants of all other vehicles.
E. Motorcycles.
(1) All motorcycles, licensed trail bikes, minibikes, motor scooters or
mopeds operated within the park shall be operated only on those
roadways provided for the use of motor vehicles.
§ 188-19 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 188-22
184:259
§ 188-23. Fees and permits.
§ 188-24. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of the foregoing rules and regulations or
any amendment thereto shall be deemed a violation, and any person found
guilty thereof shall be liable to a fine which shall not exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment,
or, at the discretion of the Director, be banned from the parks for a period
of time specified in writing. Persons so notified are prohibited from entering
or remaining upon park property.
§ 188-25. Enforcement.
The Director, Village Code Enforcement Officers, and other agents
designated by the Director, in addition to local, county or state police or
(2) All persons operating and passengers riding on motorcycles,
licensed trail bikes, minibikes, motor scooters or mopeds within the
confines of the park shall wear approved safety helmets, as per the
requirements of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles,
at all times while such vehicle is in motion.
F. Parking.
(1) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon:
(a) Any roadway in the park or at any location where posted signs
or symbols painted on the pavement prohibit parking.
(b) Any lawn or grassy area unless specifically authorized by the
Director on a case-by-case basis.
(2) Any motor vehicle left unattended in a Village park after closing
hours is subject to the vehicle being towed at the owner's expense.
A. Fees and charges for park use may be established by resolution of the
Village Board.
B. Any person or group wishing to sponsor or engage in any activity
otherwise prohibited herein, or of a nature other than normal and
customary park activity, is required to obtain written permission for
such activity from the Village Board, which may require such person or
group to enter into a written contract for such activity, upon such terms
and conditions as considered necessary and appropriate by the Village
Board and subject to review by the Village Attorney.
C. The Department will follow a strict policy of no refunds, except as
outlined in specific contracts or as otherwise approved by the Village
Board.
D. Once permitted, every activity undertaken hereunder must be in
accordance with appropriate local and New York State law.
§ 188-22 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 188-25
184:260
law enforcement officers, are hereby authorized to and they shall enforce
the foregoing rules and regulations, which power shall include but not be
limited to the power to issue appearance tickets and to exercise such other
legal methods of enforcement of the foregoing rules and regulations as the
Director or his/her agents may deem appropriate and necessary.
§ 188-26. Department activities.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, Village of Johnson City
personnel may undertake any of the activities otherwise prohibited herein
if otherwise lawful or authorized by the Director or Village Board.
Chapter 192
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 192-1. Abandoned iceboxes and refrigerators.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any icebox, refrigerator or
any other similar container or receptacle in an abandoned, unattended or
discarded condition outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible
to children without first removing the door or doors, latch or latches and
lock or locks from such icebox, refrigerator or other container or receptacle.
§ 192-2. Conduct at scene of fire; obedience to firemen.
Each and every person, whether fireman or not, who is present at a fire
shall conduct himself or herself in an orderly manner without noise or
disturbance and shall promptly obey any order he or she may receive from
the Fire Chief or any of his or her aides or assistants.
§ 192-3. Curfew for minors. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CURFEW HOURS — 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week until 6:00 a.m.
of the following day.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life.
GUARDIAN —
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor.
(1)
§ 188-25 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 192-3
184:261
MINOR — Any person under 17 years of age.
PARENT —
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common area of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
(2)
A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person;
or
(1)
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
(2)
B. Offenses.
(1) Any minor under the age of 17 years shall not be in or upon any of
the streets, parks or public places in the Village in the nighttime
after the hour of 10:00 p.m. and before the hour of 6:00 a.m. the
following day, unless involved in an exempted activity.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent, guardian or any other
person having the legal care and custody of any child under the age
of 17 years to allow, permit or encourage such minor to violate
§ 192-3B(1).
C. Exceptions. Minors under the age of 17 years are not in violation of the
curfew if involved in one of the following activities or circumstances:
(1) The minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian; or
(2) The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent or guardian
without any detour or stop (written direction must be signed, timed
and dated by the parent or guardian and must indicate the specific
errand); or
(3) The minor has been legally emancipated; or
(4) The minor is on the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the nextdoor-
neighbor's residence; or
(5) The minor is in a vehicle involved in interstate travel; or
(6) The minor is engaged in certain employment activity, or going to or
from employment without any detour or stop; or
(7) The minor is involved in an emergency; or
(8) The minor is in attendance or traveling to or from an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity sponsored by the Village of
§ 192-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 192-3
184:262
§ 192-4. Discharge of firearms or explosives. [Amended 4-16-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002]
No person shall fire, set off, or discharge any cannon, air or other gun,
pistol, rocket, gun powder or other explosive in the Village. This section
shall not apply to ceremonial discharges, provided prior approval for such
discharge has been obtained from the Village of Johnson City Police
Department.
§ 192-5. Disorderly conduct.
Any person who, with intent to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a
breach of the peace may be occasioned, commits any of the following acts
shall be deemed to have committed the offense of disorderly conduct:
Johnson City, a civic organization, or another similar entity
supervised by adults that take responsibility for the minor; or
(9) Where the minor is generally exercising First Amendment rights
such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly.
D. Enforcement.
(1) Any police official, upon finding a minor in violation of § 192-3(1)
shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and shall warn
the minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and shall direct the
minor to proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of
abode. The police officer shall report such action to the parent,
guardian, custodian or responsible adult having custody or control
of such minor.
(2) If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any
police officer or refuses to give such police officer his or her correct
name or address, or if the minor had been warned on a previous
occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew, the minor shall be
escorted to his or her home or usual place of abode and delivered to
the care, custody and charge of the minor's parent, guardian,
custodian, or other responsible adult.
(3) If the parent, guardian, custodian or other responsible adult above
cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor
shall be released to the Broome County Department of Social
Services.
E. Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of each day during which the
offense is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
A. Uses offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language,
conduct or behavior.
§ 192-3 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 192-5
184:263
§ 192-6. Distribution of drugs for advertising purposes.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed for advertising
purposes in the Village any free package, box, bottle or paper containing
any pills, powder, potion, salve, ointment or other medicinal preparation
unless the same is delivered into the hands of an adult person.
§ 192-7. False fire alarms.
No person shall knowingly give or assist in giving a false alarm of fire in
the Village, either by firing any material or substance for the purpose of
creating such false alarm or by false cries of fire or by pulling or interfering
with any fire alarm box or apparatus in the Village for the purpose of giving
a notification of fire to the Fire Department.
§ 192-8. Injury to property.
B. Acts in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or
be offensive to others.
C. Congregates with others on public streets or loiters in door entrances,
doorways or stairways adjacent thereto or about any public place in the
Village and refuses to move on when ordered by the police.
D. By his or her actions causes a crowd to collect, except when lawfully
addressing such crowd.
E. Shouts or makes a noise either outside of or inside a building during the
nighttime or daytime to the annoyance or disturbance of any
considerable number of persons.
F. Interferes with any person in any place by jostling against such person
or unnecessarily crowding him or her or by placing a hand in the
proximity of such person's pocket, pocketbook or handbag.
G. Stations himself or herself on a public street or follows pedestrians for
the purpose of soliciting alms, or solicits alms on the public streets
unlawfully.
H. Causes a disturbance in any public conveyance by running through it,
climbing through windows or upon seats or otherwise annoying
passengers or employees therein.
I. Stands on sidewalks or street corners and makes insulting remarks to
or about passing pedestrians or annoys such pedestrians.
A. Generally. No person shall willfully and unlawfully cut, injure, mark,
break, deface, remove or destroy any building, structure, bridge, fence,
awning, sign, signboard, tree, shrubbery or other property or part
thereof or willfully and unlawfully break any window or window glass in
any building or structure or tear down or remove any notice lawfully
posted in the Village.
§ 192-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 192-8
184:264
§ 192-9. Interfering with public work.
No person shall unlawfully hinder, obstruct or delay any person employed
by the Village or any contractor or subcontractor engaged in constructing
or repairing any public work in the Village.
§ 192-10. Music in public places.
§ 192-11. Obscene writing, pictures or marks.
No person shall write, paint, print, draw, cut or place in or upon any
building, post, fence, walk, bridge, sign or other object exposed to public
view in the Village any indecent or obscene mark, figure, character, word,
image, sentence or design or aid or advise in so doing.
§ 192-12. Obstructing fire hydrants.
No person shall place, throw or deposit any ice, snow, dirt, sand, gravel,
brick, stone, lumber or other material or rubbish upon, near or about any
B. Public lamps and fixtures. No person shall willfully deface, injure, break
or destroy any lamp, lamppost, lamp supporter or part thereof or any
globe, wire, fixture or protection of such lamp, lamppost or lamp
supporter or part thereof or willfully interfere with or light any lamp or
obstruct or extinguish the light thereof on any public street, avenue,
sidewalk, lane, alley or in any public place in the Village.
C. Fire and police apparatus; Department of Public Works' property; other
Village property. No person shall willfully injure or destroy any engine,
motor truck, vehicle, hose, ladder, apparatus or implement of the Fire
Department or any enginehouse, fire station or place where fire
apparatus of any kind is kept or stored or any fixture, article or property
in or about such place or willfully and unlawfully remove any engine,
motor truck, vehicle, hose, ladder, apparatus or implement from any
such engine room, fire station or place, nor shall any person willfully or
unlawfully injure, damage or destroy any police car, motorcycle,
apparatus or equipment or any fixtures, article or other property of the
Police Department or property of the Public Works Department or any
property owned by the Village.
A. Regulated. The playing of any musical instrument or device for dancing
in any public assemblage in the Village between the hours of 12:00
midnight Saturday and until after 12:00 midnight on Sunday is
prohibited. There is hereby excepted from the provisions of this section
the playing of any musical instrument or device for dancing at a public
dance for which a license has been issued under § 132-2 of this Code.
B. Exception to section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit dances commencing on Saturday evening and continuing until
1:00 a.m. on Sunday, provided that the same are authorized in
accordance with Chapter 132, Dances and Dance Halls, of this Code.
§ 192-8 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 192-12
184:265
fire hydrant in the Village so as to hinder, obstruct or delay free access
thereto nor within ten (10) feet thereof.
§ 192-13. Public intoxication.
No person shall be intoxicated on any public street, avenue, sidewalk, alley
or lane or in any public place in the Village.
§ 192-14. Rendering assistance at fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department or any of his or her assistants or any
police officer may command the aid of any person to assist in extinguishing
a fire or the aid of any driver or person in charge of any motor vehicle or
other vehicle to assist with such vehicle in taking any fire apparatus to any
fire, and when so requested, it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or
neglect to assist in extinguishing such fire.
§ 192-15. Resisting or obstructing officers in performance of duties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harm, obstruct or resist any officer
of the Village in the performance of any duty required of him or her as
such officer or to refuse or neglect to assist in extinguishing any fire or to
refuse or neglect to assist any officer of the Village in the execution of his
or her duties when requested so to do by such officer or to fail or refuse to
obey any lawful sign or signal by hand, voice or otherwise given by a police
officer in the discharge of his or her duties as such.
§ 192-16. Swimming; bathing.
No person shall bathe or swim in any river, stream or pond in the Village,
either in a nude state or so clothed as to make any indecent exposure of
the person, nor shall any person, in preparing to swim or bathe, make such
exposure.
Chapter 196
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES AND VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 172.
§ 196-1. Short title and purpose.
A. The short title of this chapter shall be the "Transient Retail Business
and Vendor Law."
B. The Board of Trustees, as a matter of legislative determination, does
hereby determine that the business, occupation or activity of transient
§ 192-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 196-1
184:266
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in the chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
FARMERS MARKET — Any building or buildings, structure or structures or
premises used by four or more persons for the sale at retail of produce,
goods, wares or merchandise. The term "farmers market" shall be deemed
to not include "flea market" and similar terms.
PERSON — The singular and the plural, and shall also mean and include
any person, firm or corporation, association, club, partnership, society or
any other organization.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — A business conducted in a store, hotel,
motel, house, building, vehicle, structure or outdoor sale area located on
private property, and which is intended to be conducted for a temporary
period of time and not permanently. Pursuant to § 85-a of the General
Municipal Law, if the place in or from which a business is conducted is
rented, leased or occupied for a period of six months or less, such fact shall
be presumptive evidence that the business carried on therein is a transient
retail business.
VENDOR — A retailer of goods, or provider of services as a buyer or seller,
in the public streets and places and from door to door in the Village. The
term "vendor" shall include persons commonly referred to as "hawkers,"
"peddlers," "salespeople," or "canvassers." The term "vendor" shall not
include persons retailing goods or rendering services as a buyer or seller, if
such persons conduct their business in a store, hotel, motel, house, building,
vehicle, structure, or outdoor sale area located on private property.
§ 196-3. License not required.
retail businesses and vendors should be regulated as doing so is
necessary for the enforcement of law, the regulation of traffic, the
prevention of congestion of travel and for the protection and
preservation of the safety, health and general welfare and property of
the inhabitants of the Village and to protect such inhabitants against
the unlawful activities or operations of persons of criminal habits or
tendencies representing themselves as engaged in such business or
occupation, and that such persons shall be registered and required to
furnish such information as shall be necessary or desirable for purposes
of identification and to pay reasonable license fees and taxes.
Accordingly, the Village declares that the purpose of this chapter is to
establish, implement and enforce licensing procedures to be applicable
to all transient retail businesses and vendors within the Village of
Johnson City.
A. For all vendors selling goods in the farmers market located in the
Johnson City Senior Center located at 30 Brocton Street, Johnson City,
New York 13790, no license shall be required.
§ 196-1 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 196-3
184:267
§ 196-4. License required; fee; time effective.
B. Vendors engaged in the sale of newspapers, milk, bakery goods, cheese,
eggs, soft drinks, potato chips, beer, ice cream, cream and poultry and
farmers and growers of farm and garden produce, or regularly
established retailers in the Village and the duly appointed agents,
servants and employees of such persons, shall not be required to apply
for and obtain a license or pay a fee under the provisions of this chapter.
Vendors and transient retail businesses not required to obtain licenses
shall still be required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
C. This chapter shall not apply to sales in a residence when the person has
a permanent residence within the Village of Johnson City, and shall not
apply to door-to-door sales by civic groups, churches, Girl or Boy
Scouts, Rotary Clubs, Lions Clubs, Kiwanis and like civic-minded
groups, nor to garage and lawn sales. Further, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to persons engaged in the sale of cosmetics,
Tupperware, pots and pans and like items of personal property;
provided, however, that such sales occur solely and exclusively within a
residence by permission of the owner thereof. It is the intent of this
section to except such persons who sell Avon products, Tupperware,
Mary Kay cosmetics, or similar products, and like groups that conduct
sales of goods in residences with permission of the owner thereof.
D. This chapter shall not apply to farm stands as defined by § 300-40.8 of
the Zoning Code.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to activities sponsored by and held
for the benefit of any bona fide museum or any fraternal, charitable,
educational or religious organization. The burden of proving
entitlement to this exemption shall be upon the person who would be
required to otherwise make an application for a license under this
chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the Village as a vendor
or transient retail business without first applying for and securing a
license, hereinafter called, as applicable, a "vendor's license" or
"transient retail business license."
B. Before any license may be issued under the provisions of this chapter,
the applicant shall pay a fee to the Village Clerk, who shall issue a
receipt therefor to the applicant. The fee for such license shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. Said license fees
are nonrefundable. Any disabled veteran of any division of the United
States Armed Forces, although he or she must qualify for a vendor's
license pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if he or she does so qualify,
shall receive a vendor's license without fee.
C. A vendor's license issued under this chapter shall be valid for 60 days
from its date of issuance. A transient retail business license shall be
valid for 180 days from its date of issuance. Licenses issued may only be
§ 196-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 196-4
184:268
§ 196-5. Application requirements for licenses.
renewed upon reapplication by the person seeking to act as a vendor or
transient retail business.
A. Vendor's license. An applicant for a vendor's license required by this
chapter shall execute an application form at the office of the Village
Clerk, which application form shall require the following:
(1) The applicant's name and home, business and local address, if any.
(2) A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's
age, sex, height, weight, complexion, color of hair and eyes and any
other distinguishing physical characteristics.
(3) The name and address or local principal office of the person, firm,
organization or corporation, if any, for or through whom or under
whose auspices the applicant is authorized to conduct such activity;
if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if a
corporation, the name and addresses of the president, vice
president, secretary and treasurer; or a statement that the
applicant is engaged in such activity solely on his or her own
behalf.
(4) A brief description of the type or types of goods or services for
which sales, purchases or orders are to be solicited.
(5) A statement as to the approximate amount to be collected by the
applicant and whether in full or partial payment.
(6) The length of time during which the applicant intends to remain in
the Village for the purpose of engaging in such activity.
(7) A statement as to whether any license similar to or like that
provided for in this chapter was issued or denied to the applicant
within the current or prior calendar year, whether in said Village or
elsewhere, and if issued, whether such license has been revoked,
setting forth the reasons for such revocation.
(8) A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested for or
convicted of any crime or the violation of any municipal ordinances
or if so, the place where, the nature of the offense and punishment
or penalty assessed therefor or if the matter is pending.
(9) Sample copy of order form. The applicant shall attach to such
application a sample copy of the order or receipt form, if any, used
by him or her in connection with such activity.
(10) Credentials. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for
whom the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the
applicant to act as such representative, shall also be presented.
§ 196-4 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 196-5
184:269
§ 196-6. Responsibilities of Village Clerk and Chief of Police.
The Village Clerk shall refer all applications and applicants for a license
to be issued under this chapter to the Chief of Police for fingerprint
identification and to furnish such other information as shall be required
for purposes of identification, and the Chief of Police shall conduct such
investigation as he or she shall deem necessary. He or she shall make a
report of his or her investigation directly to the Village Clerk, who shall
thereafter make his or her recommendation for approval or disapproval of
the application to the Mayor.
§ 196-7. Approval of application; signing and form of license.
(11) Proof of registration with the New York State Department of
Taxation and Finance, or proof of exemption from such registration.
B. Transient retail business license. Any person desiring to conduct a
transient retail business in the Village shall present to the Village Clerk
a verified application stating:
(1) The name and permanent address of the person desiring to conduct
such business.
(2) The place where and the time during which said business is to be
conducted.
(3) The name and local address of the person to be in immediate
charge of said business.
(4) The character of the goods or services to be dealt in.
(5) Proof of registration with the New York State Department of
Taxation and Finance, or proof of exemption from such registration.
(6) The estimated amount of gross sales which may be made.
A. Should the Mayor approve the license application provided for herein, a
license shall be issued by the Village Clerk. The Mayor shall not
approve, and no license shall be issued to, any applicant who shall have
been convicted of any crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance
or to any person whose license has been revoked unless the Mayor shall
find upon good cause that the issuance thereof would not be contrary to
the provisions of this chapter. No license shall be issued to any person
where the Mayor finds that the issuance thereof would be contrary to
the provisions of this chapter.
B. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be signed by
the Village Clerk and shall be in such form as the Village Clerk may
prescribe; provided, however, that such form shall include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 196-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 196-7
184:270
§ 196-8. Place of business; signage.
No person shall act as a vendor or conduct a transient retail business within
the Village at any place other than that set forth on the permit issued by the
Village Clerk pursuant to this chapter. Transient retail businesses cannot be
located on a residential parcel or property zoned residential. Any signage
must conform to Chapter 300 of the Village Code.
§ 196-9. Business to begin within 30 days.
In the event that any person fails to begin conducting the transient retail
business or acting as a vendor at the place or in the manner specified in
the license within 30 days after the issuance of said license, such person
shall not thereafter conduct any transient retail business or act as a vendor
within the Village until five days shall have elapsed after the filing of a new
application duly verified and containing the information set forth above in
§ 196-5A if a vendor, or § 196-5B if a transient retail business.
§ 196-10. Bond required; imposition of tax; filing of reports; right of
entry.
(2) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, for
or through whom or under whose auspices the applicant is
authorized to vend or conduct a transient retail business or, if none,
a statement to such effect.
(3) A brief description of the type or types of goods, wares and
merchandise to be sold.
(4) The expiration date of the license.
(5) If a transient retail business, the address where such business will
be conducted; if a vendor, the approximate area within the Village
where vending will occur.
A. Before any person shall commence a transient retail business in the
Village, such person shall file with the Village Clerk a cash deposit or
bond in an amount of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000, the
amount to be fixed in proportion to the estimated amount of business to
be done, conditioned that such person will make a full and complete
report of the gross amount of sales made in such transient retail
business in the Village and shall file such reports as may be requested
with the Village Clerk and will faithfully comply with the General
Municipal Law in relation to taxation of transient merchants and with
the provisions of this chapter and will pay the amount of tax therein
levied when the same shall become due and payable, said bond to be
approved by the Village Attorney as to form and by the Mayor as to
sufficiency.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of the General Municipal Law, as amended, a
tax shall be levied upon all persons now conducting or who may
§ 196-7 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 196-10
184:271
§ 196-11. Exhibition of license.
hereafter conduct a transient retail business in the Village. Such tax
shall be based upon the gross amount of sales and shall be computed at
the same rate as other property is taxed for the year in the Village. If at
the time such tax becomes due and payable the tax rate for the current
year of the Village has not been fixed, the same shall be estimated by
the Assessors thereof, and such rate as estimated shall be taxed.
C. Filing of reports.
(1) Stock on hand. Any person receiving a transient retail business
license under the provisions of this chapter shall, before beginning
business, file with the Village Clerk a verified report of the stock on
hand and the aggregate value thereof with which it is intended to
conduct said business.
(2) Added stock. As further stock is received, such person shall within
two days after the receipt thereof file a verified report with the
Village Clerk of such added stock and of the aggregate value
thereof.
(3) Daily statement. Any person granted a transient retail business
license under this chapter shall file with the Village Clerk a verified
statement of each day's sales not later than 12:00 noon of the
following day and the amount for which the same was sold.
(4) Final report. At the expiration of a transient retail business license,
a verified report setting forth the total amount of stock sold and the
total amount for which it was sold shall be filed with the Village
Clerk by the transient retail business.
D. The Village Clerk and such officers of the Village designated by the
Clerk for said purpose shall have the power and authority to enter any
store or building in which a transient retail business may be carried on
at any time during business hours for the purpose of ascertaining the
amount of sales made. At all times the Village Clerk shall have access to
the books of such businesses that relate to the transient retail
business's operation in the Village.
A. Any person to whom a vendor's license has been issued under this
chapter shall have such license in his or her possession at all times and
shall exhibit the same at any time upon demand by any police officer,
Village official, Village employee or the person approached by any
vendor.
B. Any person to whom a transient retail business license has been issued
shall have such license displayed to the public within five feet of such
business's register or point of sale.
§ 196-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 196-12
184:272
§ 196-12. Inspection of scales and measures.
Any person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter
and carrying, keeping or using scales, measures or other appliances for
weighing or measuring shall first have the same inspected by the County
Sealer of Weights and Measures, and if the latter shall find such appliances
correct and true, he or she shall issue his or her certificate to that effect,
and such certificate shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place. Such
persons shall not carry, keep for use or use any such appliance which shall
not be correct and true and which does not record and give the weight and
quantity claimed by said person.
§ 196-13. Conduct generally.
Any person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall conduct himself or herself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner.
§ 196-14. Condition of vehicles and receptecles; protection of
wares.
A licensee hereunder shall keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him or
her in a clean and sanitary condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered
for sale, if any, well covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
§ 196-15. Unlawful noises.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed hereunder to use, blow upon,
ring or sound any instrument or thing or to shout or cry out for the purpose
of attracting attention to his or her wares or giving notice of his or her
approach.
§ 196-16. False statements or misrepresentations.
Persons licensed hereunder shall make no false statements or
misrepresentations in the course of their activities.
§ 196-17. Unauthorized entry upon property by vendors.
Vendors shall not enter in or upon any house or building or on any land or
property where there is posted on the front of the building or premises a
written notice stating that vendors are not desired, unless the vendor has
received the prior consent of the occupant thereof.
§ 196-18. Sales near schools by vendors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a vendor's license has been
issued under the provisions of this chapter to sell any confectionery or ice
cream within 250 feet of any school between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on school days.
§ 196-12 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 196-19
184:273
§ 196-19. Littering of streets and public places by vendors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a vendor's license has been
issued hereunder, directly or indirectly, to cause or permit the public streets
and places of the Village to be littered with papers, wrappings or other
debris or refuse.
§ 196-20. Interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall conduct his or
her activities in such manner as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
use of the public streets and places.
§ 196-21. Times of operation.
§ 196-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as follows:
Chapter 200
PLUMBING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Sewers — See Ch. 222.
Water — See Ch. 270.
A. Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter who shall
conduct business door to door shall only be permitted to do so at the
following times:
(1) Monday to Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., local standard time.
(2) Saturday and Sunday: 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., local standard time.
B. Such persons shall be prohibited from doing business on any federally
recognized holiday.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
violation and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
B. In addition to the penalties hereinabove imposed, the permit of such
person shall be canceled and revoked and forfeited.
§ 196-19 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 196-22
184:274
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 200-1. Definitions.
Terms used in this chapter relating to plumbing, drainage, ventilation and
sewer pipe laying shall have the following meanings:
BOARD — The Village Board of Trustees.
CONDUCTORS AND LEADERS — Pipes conveying the storm and rainwater
from the roofs of buildings to the house drain.
CONTINUOUS VENT PIPE — A system of ventilating by means of which
siphonage and back pressure on the seal of traps is prevented by running
or extending from the highest point of the waste pipe and running through
the roof or joining with the main ventilating pipe.
FIXTURES — Any article supplied with water that drains into a sewer,
cesspool or watercourse.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Broome County Health Officer.
HOUSE DRAIN — The system of horizontal piping that extends to and
connects with the house lateral, at least two feet from the outside of any
building, to receive the drainage from conductors, waste and soil pipes or
other drainage.
HOUSE LATERAL — The drain connecting with the street sewer and
extending to the house drain.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — A person having six years' experience doing
work in connection with the installation, erection, alteration, extension or
repair of plumbing.
PLUMBING — The connecting of any pipe used to convey water from the
water main into any building or the connecting of any soil, waste, ventilating
or sewer pipe that is or may be intended to connect with any water used
plumbing fixtures supplied shall constitute "plumbing" within the meaning
of this chapter.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The inspector of all plumbing, drainage and
ventilation.
SEWER — The general term for the drain used to convey the drainage from
the soil, waste and conductor pipes to the street sewer. It consists of the
house lateral and the house drain.
SOIL PIPES — Pipes conveying the discharge from water closets to the
house drain.
STACK — The general term for any line of combined waste and ventilating
pipes extending from the cellar through the roof.
TRAP — A fitting to prevent the passage of air or gas through a pipe without
materially affecting the flow of sewage or drainage.
§ 200-1 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-1
184:275
VENTILATING PIPES — Pipe connections with the soil or waste pipe,
generally at its highest point and extending above the roof of the building.
WASTE PIPES — Pipes conveying the wastewater from all fixtures except
water closets or house drains.
§ 200-2. Appointment, qualifications and compensation of plumbing
inspectors. [Amended 12-16-1986 by L.L. No. 12-1986; 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
The Village Board shall detail, designate or appoint an inspector or
inspectors of plumbing, subject, however, to the provisions or limitations
of law regulating the appointment of such inspectors by such Board. All
inspectors shall be practicing plumbers and shall not inspect any plumbing
that they have done in the Village of Johnson City during the period of their
appointment. Before entering upon the discharge of their duties as such
inspectors, they shall each be required to obtain a certificate of competency
from such Plumbing Board. They shall be entitled to compensation to be
fixed by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
§ 200-3. Duties of Plumbing Inspector. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993]
A. Inspections, reports. The Plumbing Inspector appointed pursuant to
§ 200-2, in addition to the duties prescribed by law and those which
may be enjoined or required by the Broome County Department of
Health, shall be required to inspect the construction and alteration of
all plumbing work performed in the Village and to report, in writing, the
results of such construction to the Broome County Department of
Health. Such Inspector shall inspect all houses in the course of
erection, alteration or repair as often as may be necessary and shall see
that all work for plumbing and drainage is done in accordance with this
chapter and with the laws of the state. The Inspector shall also report in
like manner any person engaged in or carrying on the business of
employing a plumber without having the certificate hereinafter
provided. The Inspector shall inspect all sewer connections and
external house drains within 24 hours after notification from the
plumber or person laying the same and all waste and vent pipes and
other inside plumbing within three days after notification, otherwise
the plumber may cover the work and consider it passed upon, provided
that said plumber shall file with the Health Officer a written statement
that the inspection was not made within the above-mentioned time.
B. Issuance of notices and certificates; review of plans. It shall be the duty
of the Plumbing Inspector to sign and issue all notices and certificates
required by this chapter, to pass upon all plans submitted and to keep a
record of his or her work, including all notices and applications
received, violation of these rules and regulations and all other matters
which may pertain thereto.
§ 200-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-4
184:276
§ 200-4. Plans to be submitted. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
The plumbing and drainage of all buildings, both public and private, in the
Village shall be executed in accordance with plans previously approved, in
writing, by the Plumbing Inspector. Suitable drawings and descriptions of
said plumbing and drainage in accordance with this chapter shall, in each
case, be submitted and placed on file in the office of the Broome County
Department of Health.
§ 200-5. Requirements to be met in submission of plans and
specifications.
§ 200-6. Abstract of specifications. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
Every plan must be accompanied by a clear description thereof or abstract
of the specification on a blank to be prescribed and supplied for this purpose
by the Broome County Department of Health, showing ward and street,
number of each house, size, kind and weight of pipes, kind of traps, closets
and fixtures to be used. When new plumbing is put in and attached to an
old system, the plan must show the old system sufficiently to indicate that
the addition of the new plumbing will not impair the sanitary conditions or
violate any sanitary or plumbing regulation.
§ 200-7. Statement of time of beginning work; failure to begin work
at time stated.
Plans of plumbing work, filed for approval, shall state within what time the
work therein described will be begun. If it is not begun under approved
plans within the time therein specified, such plans must be again presented
for approval or reconsideration.
§ 200-8. Approval or disapproval of plans; resubmission upon
disapproval. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
Plans and specifications filed for approval as required by §§ 200-4 through
200-7 shall be examined by the Plumbing Inspector within three days from
the date of filing. If such plans and specifications are in accordance with
the general plans and specifications contained in this chapter, the Plumbing
A. Plans of the plumbing and drainage of buildings must be drawn in ink
on heavy paper or on tracing cloth eight by twelve and one-half (8 x
12 1/2) inches or sixteen by twelve (16 x 12) inches in size.
B. One vertical drawing is sufficient for a building when it can be made to
show all of the work; if not, others may be substituted.
C. Where buildings are together on one street and the plumbing is the
same in each, the plan for one building in the block will be sufficient,
but the plumber must furnish a separate abstract for each building.
§ 200-4 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-8
184:277
Inspector shall signify such fact by endorsing his or her approval thereon
and the work may be begun immediately. If the plans and specifications
so filed are not in accordance with the general plans and specifications
aforesaid, the Plumbing Inspector shall present them to the Broome County
Department of Health at its next meeting, together with his or her
recommendations thereon for approval or rejection; or at the option of
the person filing such plans, they may be withdrawn for modification and
resubmission.
§ 200-9. Modification of plans and specifications.
No change or modification of plans or specifications will be permitted
unless such change or modification is submitted to the Plumbing Inspector,
approved and placed on file, as in the case of the original work, and no
alterations of the original plans will be allowed, except on the written
application of the owner of the property or his or her duly authorized agent.
§ 200-10. Inspection of work; approval or disapproval.
The Plumbing Inspector shall examine all work and ascertain whether such
work is in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter
and with the plans thereof on file. No part of the work shall be covered or
concealed in any way until after it has been examined by said Inspector.
The Inspector shall place a tag on all inspected work, stating "approval" or
"rejected."
§ 200-11. Issuance of certificate of approval.
If the Plumbing Inspector shall approve of work after inspection made
pursuant to § 200-10, he or she shall give a certificate thereof, signed by
him or her, to the person in charge of the work at the time of such approval.
§ 200-12. Permit to connect with sewers and water mains.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall not issue a permit to anyone to
connect with the sewers or with the water mains in the Village unless such
person has obtained and shall produce a certificate of competency from the
Plumbing Board.
§ 200-13. Manner of terminating water and sewer services.
Water or sewer services, or both, shall be terminated by cutting and
plugging the laterals at the main. No such termination shall be undertaken
unless a permit is first obtained in the same manner as a permit to connect
with water or sewer mains, including the approval of plans and
specifications.
§ 200-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-14
184:278
§ 200-14. Damage to catch basins, sewers, drains and gutters.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited into
any drain, catch basin, sewer or gutter in the Village any obstruction or
cause damage thereto or nuisance therein, nor shall any person divert or
stop the flow of any drain or sewer or gutter or catch basin in the Village.
§ 200-15. Notice of violation of chapter provisions. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
Whenever any plumbing inspector or other person reports a violation of
any of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter for plumbing and
drainage or a deviation from any officially approved plans or specifications
for plumbing and drainage filed with any board or department, the
Plumbing Inspector of the Village shall first serve a notice of the violation
thereof upon the master plumber doing the work, if a registered plumber.
Such notice may be served personally or by mail, and if by mail, it may be
addressed to such master plumber at the address registered by him or her
with the Village Clerk or designee, but the failure of a master plumber to
register will relieve the Plumbing Inspector from the requirement of giving
notice of violation.
§ 200-16. Removal of violation required; failure to remove.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter must be removed within three
days after service or mailing of the notice provided for in § 200-15. If such
violation is not removed, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed to
remove such violation, and the violator shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
§ 200-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II. The penalties herein provided are in addition to any and all other
penalties provided by existing law and as such law may be changed from
time to time hereafter. This section shall not apply to any officer, agent,
employee or servant of the Village when such person is acting in his or her
capacity as such official officer, agent, employee or servant of the Village.
§ 200-14 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-17
184:279

ARTICLE II
Examination, Licensing and Registration of Plumbers
§ 200-18. Plumbing Board; composition of Board; appointment and
qualifications of members. [Amended 2-2-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976;
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 200-19. Members' terms of office; filling of vacancies. [Amended
2-2-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; 4-16-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 200-20. Compensation of Board members. [Amended 2-2-1976 by
L.L. No. 1-1976; 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
The Plumbing Inspector shall be paid at a rate prescribed by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 200-21. Powers and duties of Board. [Amended 2-2-1976 by L.L.
No. 1-1976]
The Plumbing Board shall have the power and it shall be its duty:
A. There shall be a Board known as the "Plumbing Board" within the
Village of Johnson City. This Board shall consist of five persons
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the Board of
Trustees, two of whom shall be residents of the Village of Johnson City.
B. The Plumbing Board shall consist of the following: two employing or
master plumbers of not less than 10 years' experience in the business of
plumbing, one journeyman plumber of at least six years' experience in
the business of plumbing, one laymen; and one additional layman or
journeyman. [Amended 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
C. The Plumbing Inspector shall be an ex officio member of the Board. The
Plumbing Inspector or his/her designee shall be present at all meetings
of the Board.
A. The term of office of each member of the Plumbing Board shall be five
years from the first day of January following his or her appointment.
Vacancies occurring by expiration of a term shall be filled by the Mayor,
subject to the confirmation of the Board of Trustees, for a full term.
Vacancies by death, removal, inability to act, resignation or removal
from the Village of any member shall be filled by the Mayor for the
unexpired term. When the Plumbing Inspector shall cease to hold his
office, his successor shall act on the Plumbing Board in his stead.
B. Any member who misses three consecutive meetings without just cause
shall automatically be replaced by the Mayor.
A. Meetings. To meet at stated intervals in the Village; it should also meet
whenever the Board of Trustees or the Mayor shall request it to.
§ 200-18 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-21
184:281
§ 200-22. License required. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; 4-18-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
Except as provided in § 200-34, no person shall engage in the trade,
business or occupation of plumbing in the Village without first having
obtained a license therefor from the Plumbing Board.
§ 200-23. Application for license. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
Every person desiring to obtain a license to engage in the trade, business
or occupation of plumbing in the Village shall file in the office of the
Clerk of the Plumbing Board, which is hereby designated to be the Village
Clerk, written application, subscribed by the applicant and containing the
following information:
§ 200-24. Examination and certificate of competency required.
B. Examination of applicants. To have jurisdiction over and to examine all
persons desiring or intending to engage in the trade, business or calling
of a plumber as employing plumber in the Village with the power of
examining persons applying for certificates of competency as such
employing or master plumbers or as inspectors of plumbing, to
determine their fitness and qualifications for conducting the business of
master plumbers or sewer pipe laying or to act as inspector of plumbing
and to issue certificates of competency to all such persons who shall
have passed satisfactory examinations before such Board and shall be
by it determined to be qualified for conducting the business as
employing or master plumbers or competent to act as inspectors of
plumbing. Any layman member(s) of the Plumbing Board shall not
participate in the examination of applicants as plumbers and shall not
participate in any of the duties of this subsection. [Amended 5-1-2018
by L.L. No. 4-2018]
C. Formulation of rules. To formulate, in conjunction with the Village
Board of Trustees, rules regulating the work of plumbing and drainage
in the Village, including the materials, workmanship and manner of
executing such work and from time to time to add to, amend or alter the
same.
A. The applicant's true full name, place of residence and place of business.
B. The trade, business or occupation for which the applicant desires such
license and the true full name under which he or she intends to conduct
such trade, business or occupation.
C. A statement of facts showing to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Board
that the applicant is a practical and experienced plumber.
A. A person desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business or calling
of plumber or of plumbing in the Village as employing or master
§ 200-21 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-24
184:282
§ 200-25. Eligibility. [Added 11-28-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989]
§ 200-26. Fee for examination. [Amended 5-7-1985 by L.L. No.
9-1985; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
The Plumbing Board shall charge and collect from each person applying
for examination the sum of $50 for each examination made by such Board,
and all moneys so collected shall be paid over by the Board monthly to the
Treasurer of the Village.
plumber shall be required to submit to an examination before the
Plumbing Board as to his or her experience and qualifications for such
trade, business or calling, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct such trade, business or calling unless he or she shall have
first obtained a certificate of competency from such Plumbing Board.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
B. Such examination shall be given twice yearly (June and December). A
filing fee and application for examination must be filed with the Village
Clerk one month prior to the examination.44 [Added 1-26-1981 by L.L.
No. 2-1981; amended 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
A. Any person shall be eligible to take the examination for a certificate of
competency as a master or employing plumber who has submitted proof
of at least one year as a journeyman and five years' apprenticeship prior
experience in the installation, repair and maintenance of plumbing
systems in the United States, its territories and possessions under the
supervision of a person or persons licensed or qualified by experience
to be licensed as a licensed master plumbing contractor under the
provisions of this article where no such license is required; or who has
received a degree in mechanical or sanitary engineering from a college
or university accredited by the State Department of Education, holds a
license as a professional engineer in the state and has had at least three
years' prior experience in the installation, repair and maintenance of
plumbing systems in the United States, its territories and possessions
under the supervision of a person or persons licensed or qualified by
experience to be licensed as a master plumbing contractor under the
provisions of this article.
B. Applicants who were engaged in plumbing work, as above provided,
prior to entering the Armed Services of the United States shall be
permitted to credit their time in the service as experience in the
plumbing business, but such credit shall not exceed two years.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding issuing a certificate without an
examination, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-1-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018.
§ 200-24 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-27
184:283
§ 200-27. Limitation on number of times examination may be taken.
No applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall be
permitted to take the examination required by § 200-24 more than once in
six months.
§ 200-28. Issuance of license; restrictions. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 200-29. Expiration and renewal of licenses and certificates.
A. All licenses for plumbers shall be signed by a majority of the Plumbing
Board members. No license shall be issued to any plumber during the
time in which he or she shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of
the regulations adopted by the Plumbing Board relating to plumbing,
drainage or ventilation or to remedy any defective work performed by
him or her or under his or her direction in said Village after receiving
written notice from the Plumbing Board that he or she has been held
responsible therefor under said regulations.
B. The following insurance is required for all new and renewal licenses:
comprehensive general liability, issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of New York, including products and
completed operations liability with a limit of $500,000 per occurrence,
bodily and property damage and $500,000 annual aggregate. The
Village of Johnson City shall be included as a named insured or
additional insured for liability arising from work performed under this
license.
C. Certificate of insurance showing the required coverage will be provided
to the Village with 30 days notice of cancellation or nonrenewal.
A. All certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article
and all licenses authorizing connections with street sewers or water
mains shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year following the
year in which they shall be issued and may be renewed within 30 days
preceding such expiration. Such renewals to be for one year from the
first day of January of each year.
B. The fee for renewal shall be $50. Failure to renew the preceding year(s)
license(s) requires full payment of the previous license fee(s). Failure to
renew a license for five consecutive years will be considered as
retirement from the plumbing business, and the license will be
terminated. To reestablish a plumbing license, the retired master
plumber must retake the plumbing test and receive a passing grade.
[Added 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; amended 12-1-2009 by L.L.
No. 5-2009]
§ 200-27 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-30
184:284
§ 200-30. Revocation of license; notice; hearing. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
A license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the
Plumbing Board for a violation of the rules and regulations for plumbing and
drainage contained in this chapter after a hearing before such Plumbing
Board and upon prior notice of not less than 10 days. The notice stating
the ground of complaint shall be served on the person charged with the
violation.
§ 200-31. Registration of name and address with Village Clerk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the trade,
business or calling of employing or master plumber in the Village unless his
or her name and address shall have first been registered in the office of the
Village Clerk.
§ 200-32. Metal plates and signs. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
A. Required. No person otherwise qualified shall engage in the trade,
business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing in the Village as
employing or master plumber until he or she has first procured from the
Plumbing Board a plate or sign appropriately lettered or marked
"licensed plumber." [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
B. Display. Such plate or sign shall be conspicuously posted in the window
of the place where such business is conducted.
C. Surrender. Any person retiring, abandoning or not actually engaged in
such trade, business or calling hereinbefore mentioned shall surrender
to the Plumbing Board such plate or sign and shall not again engage in
such trade, business or calling until he or she has again procured a sign
as herein provided. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
D. Specifications; contents. The Plumbing Board shall prepare plates or
signs at least 14 inches wide and not less than 22 inches in length,
appropriately marked "licensed plumber," the lines of each letter to be
four inches long and 5/8 of an inch wide. Such plate or sign shall, on
some part thereof, contain an identification number, which number,
together with the names and location of the place of business of the
person to whom issued, shall be recorded in the office of the Plumbing
Board. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
E. Issuance; fee. Every person now actually engaged or about to engage in
the trade, business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing as an
employing or master plumber who has otherwise complied with the
provisions of law relating to the conduct of such business upon the
payment of $35 to the Plumbing Board shall have issued to him or her a
sign or plate hereinbefore described. [Amended 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
§ 200-30 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-32
184:285
§ 200-33. Applicability of provisions to domestic corporations.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 5-2-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
§ 200-34. Permit and inspection fees. [Added 3-21-1988 by L.L. No.
2-1988]
F. Transfer, etc.; violation of section. Any person to whom such plate or
sign has been issued who shall loan, rent, sell or transfer the same to
another person, whether such person is entitled to receive a similar
plate or sign or not, or otherwise willfully violates the provisions of this
section shall forfeit his or her license and certificate of qualification.
A. A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade,
business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing in the Village of Johnson
City as employing or master plumber may do so, provided that one or
more officers of such corporation separately or aggregately actually
hold and own at least 51% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of
said corporations, and provided that each of such officers holding such
percentage of the stock is the holder of a certificate of competency from
the Plumbing Board of the Village of Johnson City.
B. In case one or more officers of a corporation engaged in such business
shall die, being the holder of a certificate of competency, the
corporation may continue the business during the time necessarily
required to the administration of the estate of such deceased officer, not
exceeding two years from the granting of letters, provided that one or
more officers of the corporation is the holder of a certificate of
competency and, together with the legal representative of such
deceased officer or officers, actually owns and holds at least 51% of the
issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation.
C. Each and every member of said corporation holding a certificate of
competency shall comply will all the rules and regulations applicable to
employing or master plumbers in the Village of Johnson City. Such
corporation shall register as provided in § 200-23 of this article.
A. No plumbing or drainage work shall be connected or disconnected
without a permit therefor issued in the manner prescribed by the
Plumbing Code of the Village of Johnson City. [Amended 12-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 6-1999]
B. Fees shall be as follows: [Amended 11-28-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989;
4-18-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 7-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
(1) For commercial and industrial properties, issuance of plumbing
and drainage permits, including inspection and approval: the sum
of $25, plus $5 for each fixture.
§ 200-32 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-34
184:286
(2) For residential properties, issuance of plumbing and drainage
permits, including inspection and approval: the sum of $10, plus $2
for each fixture.
(3) For issuance of a permit for furnace and boiler installation,
including inspection and approval: the sum of $25. A licensed
plumber is not required for furnace and boiler installation.
(4) A licensed plumber is not required for the replacement of a water
heater or water softener.
§ 200-34 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-34
184:287

ARTICLE III
Installation Standards
§ 200-35. Compliance required; exceptions. [Amended 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
The provisions contained in this article constitute the general plans,
specifications and rules for plumbing and drainage within the Village and
must be followed in all cases, except where deviation of a sanitary nature is
specially permitted by the Broome County Department of Health.
§ 200-36. Persons authorized to perform work; compliance
required. [Amended 1-26-1981 by L.L. No. 2-1981]
§ 200-37. Plumbing work to be done on building site.
A. The plumbing and drainage of all buildings, both public and private,
shall be performed by persons authorized under Article II of this
chapter, and all plumbing and drainage work shall be performed in
compliance with the Plumbing Code. All repairs and alterations in the
plumbing or drainage of all buildings heretofore constructed shall also
be performed in accordance with this Plumbing Code.
B. The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
applicable to plumbing is hereby adopted in its entirety, and reference
to the provisions contained therein is hereby made with the same force
and effect as though such code were fully set forth herein. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
C. Copies of said New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code are available for review in the office of the Building Inspector of
the Village of Johnson City, New York. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
D. Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted by the Plumbing
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector or anyone
else designated by the Village Board. Such enforcement procedures
may be commenced by the issuance of an appearance ticket setting
forth the nature of the violation and such other information as to
reasonably apprise the homeowner and/or violator of the charges,
setting forth a date by which said violation must be corrected or
requiring the offender to appear in Village Court in answer to said
ticket.
E. Refer to Chapter 222, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, of the Code of the
Village of Johnson City, New York, for such further provisions.
F. Persons authorized to do plumbing are responsible to call for an
inspection of such work, and any violations found to be the fault of such
person are to be corrected and removed by him or her at no additional
cost to the employer.
§ 200-35 OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACES § 200-37
184:289
A. Generally. All plumbing work must be performed on the building site
within the confines of the Village.
B. Prefabricated buildings. All prefabricated buildings, both public and
private, shall not have any prefabricated plumbing installed outside of
the Village unless the manufacturer of the prefabricated building, in
advance of installation of such prefabricated plumbing, shall submit to
the Village Plumbing Inspector plans and specifications for said
plumbing pursuant to §§ 200-4 through 200-7 of the Code of Ordinances
of the Village of Johnson City; said plans are approved by the Village
Plumbing Inspector; and thereafter the manufacturer certifies to the
Village Plumbing Inspector that the installation of said prefabricated
plumbing was in accordance with said specifications and plans, the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and
applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Johnson City.45 [Amended 5-30-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
45.Editor’s Note: Former § 200-38 through § 200-81, as amended, which immediately followed
this section, were repealed 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018.
§ 200-37 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 200-37
184:290
Chapter 204
PORNOGRAPHY
§ 204-1. Sale to minors prohibited. [Amended 9-14-1981 by L.L. No.
9-198146]
Every person who shall willfully or knowingly engage in the business of
selling, lending, giving away, showing, advertising for sale or distributing
to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or who has in his
or her possession with intent to engage in said business or to otherwise
offer for sale or commercial distribution to any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years or who shall display at newsstands or any other
business establishment frequented by minors under the age of eighteen (18)
years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general
public any motion picture or live show or any still picture or photograph
or any book, pocket book, pamphlet or magazine, the cover of or contents
of which exploits, is devoted to or is principally made up of descriptions of
illicit sex or sexual immorality or which is lewd, lascivious or indecent or
which consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures, posed or
presented in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex,
lust or perversion for commercial gain, and which predominantly appeals to
the prurient, shameful or morbid interests of minors, is patently offensive
to prevailing standards of what is suitable for minors, is utterly without
redeeming social importance and which material is harmful to minors shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 204-3.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DESCRIPTION OR DEPICTION OF ILLICIT SEX OR SEXUAL IMMORALITY
—
KNOWINGLY — Having knowledge of the character and content of the
publication, or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection which
would disclose the content and character of the same.
NUDE OR PARTIALLY DENUDED FIGURE —
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals.
A.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 200-37 PORNOGRAPHY § 204-2
204:291
§ 204-3. Penalties for offenses.47
Any person violating the provisions of § 204-1 shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), or by imprisonment for not more than
one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The violation of this
provision shall be a misdemeanor.
Chapter 206
PROPERTY AND BUILDING NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 118.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 208.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
(2) Pubic regions.
(3) Buttocks.
Female breast, below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(4)
Human genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
B.
47.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 204-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 204-3
204:292
ARTICLE I
Purpose, Terminology and Presumptions
§ 206-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City finds that public
nuisances exist in the Village of Johnson City in the operation of certain
commercial establishments and in the use or alteration of residential and
commercial property in flagrant violation of the building code, zoning
regulations, health laws, penal laws regulating obscenity, prostitution and
related conduct, gambling, controlled substances and dangerous drugs,
possession of stolen property and of licensing laws. All of these interfere
with the interest of the public in property values, public health, safety and
welfare and the quality of life and the community environment. The Council
further finds that the continued occurrence of such activities and violations
is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village
of Johnson City and of the businesses thereof and visitors thereto. It is
the purpose of the Board of Trustees to create one standardized procedure
for securing legal and equitable remedies relating to the subject matter
encompassed by this chapter, without prejudice to the use of procedures
available under existing and subsequently enacted laws, and to strengthen
existing laws on the subject.
§ 206-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property and Building Nuisance Reform
Law."
§ 206-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERSE IMPACT — Includes, but is not limited to the following: any
search warrants served on the property where controlled substances and/or
weapons were seized; investigative purchases of controlled substances on
or near the property by law enforcement agencies or their agents; arrests
for violations of the controlled substance law and/or possession of weapons;
loitering for the purposes of engaging in illegal activity; an increase in
the volume of traffic associated with property; complaints made to law
enforcement officials of illegal activity associated with the property; finding
of illegal weapons, as defined in Article 265 of the Penal Law, or controlled
substances, as defined in Articles 220 and 221 of the Penal Law, on or near
property by law enforcement officials and their agents.
BUILDING — A structure where space is partially or wholly covered or
enclosed for the use, shelter, storage or protection of persons, animals,
chattel or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to the principal building
on the lot and used for purposes which are clearly related but incidental to
that of said principal building.
§ 206-1 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-3
204:293
BUSINESS — An activity, occupation, employment or enterprise which
requires time, attention, labor and material and wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold or services offered.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A building or portion thereof utilized to
accommodate the activities of a business.
CONVICTION — The entry of a plea of guilty to, or a verdict of guilty upon,
an accusatory instrument or to one or more counts of such instrument.
KNOWLEDGE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE — The presumption of knowledge
provided by Subdivision one of § 235.10 of the Penal Law shall be applicable
to the Property and Building Nuisance Reform Law. Notice, by mail or
personal service, of activities entailing a public nuisance, to the property
owner of record shall be evidence of knowledge of the public nuisance.
LOT — A parcel of land with or without buildings or structures, delineated
by lot lines and having access to a street as defined in this chapter.
PENAL LAW — New York State Penal Law.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Shall include but not be limited to:
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purpose of illegal drug use, possession, distribution and/or loitering
for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing controlled substances
as defined in Articles 220 and 221 and § 240.36 of the Penal Law.
A.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of prostitution as defined in § 230.00 of the Penal Law and
loitering for the purposes set forth in § 240.37 of the Penal Law.
B.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of loitering as defined in § 240.35 of the Penal Law.
C.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of obscene performance and/or the promotion of obscene
material as defined in Article 235 of the Penal Law.
D.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of a business, activity or enterprise which is not licensed
as required by federal, state or local law and/or ordinance.
E.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of unlawful activities described in § 123 of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law (unlawful sale, manufacture or consumption).
F.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purposes of gambling activities described in Article 225 of the Penal
Law.
G.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard wherein
there exists or is occurring a violation of the zoning ordinances of the
Village of Johnson City.
H.
§ 206-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-3
204:294
TESTIMONY — Oral, written or other documented evidence tending to
show or prove the truth of the matter asserted.
VIOLATION — Conduct, or evidence of conduct, prohibited under the
Property and Building Nuisance Reform Law. A violation does not require
criminal prosecution and conviction but only a preponderance of evidence
that the prohibited conduct occurred and may include, but is not limited to:
police reports, investigative reports, orders of remedy, execution of search
warrants, results of police surveillance, arrest and/or conviction of local,
state or federal laws, activities associated with trafficking of controlled
substances, a finding of weapons and/or controlled substances on or near
the property or increased volume of traffic associated with the property.
YARD — An open area on a lot which is open to the sky and that is
unoccupied by any land use or activity except as may otherwise be provided
in the Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Johnson City. 48
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard wherein
there is or has occurred a criminal nuisance as defined in §§ 240.45 and
240.46 of the Penal Law.
I.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard wherein
there is or has occurred a violation of the provisions of §§ 165.40,
164.45, 165.50 (Criminal possession of stolen property), 170.65
(Forgery of a vehicle identification number), 170.70 (Illegal possession
of a vehicle identification number) or 175.10 (Falsifying business
records) of the Penal Law or § 415-a (Vehicle dismantlers) of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
J.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purpose of, or to aid in, the commission of a violation of Article 265
of the Penal Law (Firearms and other Dangerous Weapons).
K.
Any building, structure or place which is in violation of the Code of the
Village of Johnson City, Chapter 166 (Housing Standards); Chapter 208
(Property Maintenance); Chapter 236 (Solid Waste); and Chapter 300
(Zoning). [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
L.
Any building, structure or place wherein there is occurring a violation
of Chapter 118 of the Village of Johnson City (Unsafe Buildings) or
failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to that chapter.
M.
Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard used for
the purpose of animal fighting as defined in § 351 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York.
N.
Any building, structure or place wherein there is occurring a violation
of the New York State Multiple Residence Law or failure to comply with
an order issued pursuant to that section.
O.
Any building, structure or place wherein there is occurring a violation
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or
failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to that section.
P.
§ 206-3 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-4
204:295
§ 206-4. Evidence and presumptions.
A. Evidence. In any action under this section, evidence of the common
fame and general reputation of the building, structure or place, of the
inhabitants or occupants thereof or of those resorting thereto, shall be
competent evidence to prove the existence of a property or building
nuisance.
B. Scienter. If evidence of the general reputation of the building, structure
or place or the inhabitants or occupants thereof, is sufficient to
establish the existence of the nuisance, it shall be prima facie evidence
of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and
responsibility for the nuisance on the part of the owners, lessors,
lessees and all those in possession of or having charge of, as agent or
otherwise, or having any interest in any form in the property, real or
personal, used in conducting or maintaining the property or building
nuisance.
C. Presumptions.
(1) Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard,
wherein within the period of one year prior to the commencement
of an action under this chapter, there have occurred two or more
convictions, as defined in § 206-3, on the part of the lessees,
owners, operators or occupants, of the provisions of the Property
and Building Nuisance Reform Law as defined in § 206-3 of this
article, shall be prima facie evidence that a public nuisance exists
at said location.
(2) Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard,
wherein within a one-year period prior to the commencement of an
action under this chapter, there have occurred three or more
violations on the part of the lessees, owners, operators or
occupants, of the provisions of the Property and Building Nuisance
Reform Law as defined in § 206-3 of this article, shall be prima facie
evidence that a public nuisance exists at said location.
(3) Any building, accessory building, business office, lot or yard,
wherein within the period of one year prior to the commencement
of an action under this chapter, there has been presented a
preponderance of evidence of repeated criminal activity which has
an adverse impact, as defined in § 206-3 of this article, on such
property or neighborhood, shall be prima facie evidence that a
public nuisance exists at said location.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 206-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-4
204:296
ARTICLE II
REMEDIES
§ 206-5. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the public nuisances defined in Article I of
this chapter.
§ 206-6. Remedies enumerated.
The Village Attorney shall bring and maintain a civil proceeding in the name
of the village for the following types of relief:
§ 206-7. Procedure; presumptions; penalties for offenses;
enforcement.
A. Permanent injunction.
B. Temporary closing order.
C. Temporary restraining order.
D. Temporary injunction.
E. Civil penalties.
A. The summons. The Village Attorney shall name as defendants the
building, structure or place wherein the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained or permitted, by describing it by Tax Map
number and/or street address, and at least one of the owners of some
part of an interest in the property.
B. The complaint.
(1) The Village Attorney shall bring and maintain a civil proceeding in
the name of the Village of Johnson City in the Supreme Court of
Broome County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to
permanently enjoin the public nuisance and the persons
conducting, maintaining or permitting the public nuisance, as
defined in Article I, § 206-3 of this chapter, from further
conducting, maintaining or permitting the public nuisance in the
manner provided in Article II of this chapter. The owner, operator
and/or lessee of a building, structure or place wherein the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted may be made
defendants in the action.
(2) The venue of such action shall be in the county where the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted.
(3) The civil action shall be commenced by the filing of a summons and
complaint alleging the facts constituting the nuisance.
§ 206-5 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-7
204:297
(4) The complaint shall name as defendants the building, structure or
place wherein the nuisance is being conducted, maintained or
permitted, by describing it by Tax Map number and/or street
address, and at least one of the owners who possesses some part of
an interest in the property.
(5) Any complaint filed under this chapter shall be verified or
accompanied by an affidavit(s) for the purpose of showing that the
owner or his/her agent has notice of the nuisance and has had an
opportunity to abate the nuisance.
(6) The complaint or affidavit shall contain a description of the
attempts by the applicant to serve notice on and to locate the
owner of the property and/or the owner's agent.
(7) The complaint or affidavit shall describe the adverse impact
associated with the property on the surrounding neighborhood.
C. In rem jurisdiction over building, structure or place. In rem jurisdiction
shall be complete over the building, structure or place wherein the
public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted by affixing
the summons to the door of the building, structure or place and by
mailing the summons by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to one of the owners who possesses some part of an interest
in the property. Proof of service shall be filed within two days thereafter
with the Clerk of the court designated in the summons. Service shall be
complete upon such filing.
D. Service of summons on other defendants. Defendants, other than the
building, structure or place wherein the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained or permitted, shall be served with the summons
as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. Notice of pendency. With respect to any action commenced or to be
commenced pursuant to this chapter, the Village Attorney may file a
notice of pendency pursuant to the provisions of Article 65 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
F. Presumption of ownership. The owner of the real estate affected by the
action shall be presumed to be the person in whose name the real estate
is recorded in the office of the Village of Johnson City Assessor and/or
the office of the Clerk of the County of Broome.
G. Presumption of employment or agency. Whenever there is testimony
that a person was the manager, operator, supervisor or in any other way
in charge of the premises at the time a public nuisance was being
conducted, maintained or permitted, such evidence shall be
presumptive that he or she was an agent or employee of the owner or
lessee of the building, structure or place considered to be a nuisance.
H. Penalty. If, upon the trial of an action under this chapter or upon a
motion for summary judgment in an action under this chapter, a finding
§ 206-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-7
204:298
§ 206-8. Judgment awarding permanent injunctions.
is made that the defendant has conducted, maintained or permitted a
public nuisance defined in this chapter, a penalty may be awarded in
an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each day on which it is found that
the defendant conducted, maintained or permitted the public nuisance
after notice to abate has been given by the village. Upon recovery, such
penalty shall be paid into the general fund of the village.
I. Enforcement. A judgment pursuant to this chapter shall be enforced by
the Village of Johnson City Police Department and the Village Attorney.
A. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this chapter,
may direct the Sheriff to seize and remove from the building, structure
or place all material, equipment and instrumentalities used in the
creation and maintenance of the public nuisance and shall direct the
sale by the Sheriff of such property in the manner provided for the sale
of personal property under execution pursuant to the provisions of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules. The net proceeds of any such sale, after
deduction of the lawful expenses involved, shall be paid into the general
fund of the village.
B. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this chapter,
may authorize agents of the village to forthwith remove and correct
construction and structural alterations in violation of the Village
Housing Code. Any and all costs associated with these repairs or
alterations shall become a lien against said property and shall have
priority before any mortgage or other lien that exists prior to such
filing, except tax and assessment liens and any nuisance abatement
lien.
C. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this chapter,
may direct the closing of the building, structure or place to the extent
necessary to abate the nuisance and shall direct the Village of Johnson
City Police Department to post a copy of the judgment and a printed
notice of such closing conforming to the requirements of § 206-9H of
Article II of this chapter. Mutilation or removal of such a posted
judgment or notice while it remains in force, in addition to any other
punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable on conviction by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days,
or by both, provided that such judgment contains therein a notice of
such penalty.
D. The closing directed by the judgment shall be for such period as the
court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of
more than one year from the posting of the judgment provided for in
this section.
E. If the owner shall file a bond in the value of the property ordered to be
closed and shall submit proof to the court that the nuisance has been
abated and will not be created, maintained or permitted for such period
§ 206-7 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-8
204:299
§ 206-9. Preliminary injunctions, temporary closing orders and
temporary restraining orders.
of time as the building, structure or place has been directed to be
closed in the judgment, the court may vacate the provisions of the
judgment that direct the closing of the building, structure or place.
F. A closing by the Village of Johnson City Police Department pursuant to
this section shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or
control by the Village of Johnson City Police Department of the closed
premises.
G. Intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of a judgment
awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter, in addition
to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months,
or by both.
H. Upon the request of the Village Attorney, or the Mayor, the Village of
Johnson City Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of a
judgment awarding a permanent injunction entered in an action
brought pursuant to this chapter.
I. A judgment rendered awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this
chapter shall be and become a lien upon the building, structure or place
named in the complaint in such action, such lien to date from the time of
filing of a notice of lis pendens in the office of the Clerk of the county
wherein the building, structure or place is located. Every such nuisance
abatement lien shall have priority before any mortgage or other lien
that exists prior to such filing, except tax and assessment liens.
J. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter
shall provide, in addition to the costs and disbursements allowed by the
Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon satisfactory proof by affidavit or
such other evidence as may be submitted, the actual costs, expenses
and disbursements of the village in investigating, bringing and
maintaining the action.
A. In general.
(1) Pending an action for a permanent injunction as provided for in this
article, the court may grant a preliminary injunction enjoining a
public nuisance within the scope of this chapter and enjoining the
person or persons conducting, maintaining or permitting the public
nuisance from further conducting, maintaining or permitting the
public nuisance. An order granting the preliminary injunction shall
direct a trial of the issues at the earliest possible time. Where a
preliminary injunction has been granted, the court shall render a
decision with respect to a permanent injunction at its earliest
convenience after the conclusion of the trial.
§ 206-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-9
204:300
(a) A temporary closing order may be granted pending a hearing
for a preliminary injunction where it appears by clear and
convincing evidence that a nuisance within the scope of this
chapter is being conducted, maintained or permitted and that
the public health, safety or welfare immediately requires the
granting of a temporary closing order.
(b) A temporary restraining order may be granted pending a
hearing for a preliminary injunction where it appears by clear
and convincing evidence that a nuisance within the scope of
this chapter is being conducted, maintained or permitted.
(2) Enforcement of preliminary injunction. A preliminary injunction
shall be enforced by the Mayor and the Village of Johnson City
Police Department.
(3) If the court grants a preliminary injunction, the provisions of this
article regarding preliminary injunctions, inventory, the closing of
premises, the posting of orders and notices and offenses shall be
applicable.
B. Motion papers for preliminary injunction. The Mayor, or other village
representative, shall show, by affidavit and such other evidence as may
be submitted, that there is a cause of action for a permanent injunction
abating a nuisance within the scope of this chapter.
C. Temporary closing orders.
(1) If, on a motion for a preliminary injunction pursuant to § 206-9 of
this article, the Mayor, or other village representative, shall show
by clear and convincing evidence that a nuisance within the scope
of this chapter is being conducted, maintained or permitted and
that the public health, safety or welfare immediately requires a
temporary closing order, a temporary order closing such part of the
building, structure or place wherein the nuisance is being
conducted, maintained or permitted may be granted without
notice, pending an order of the court granting or refusing the
preliminary injunction and until further order of the court. Upon
granting a temporary closing order, the court shall direct the
holding of a hearing for the preliminary injunction at the earliest
possible time. A decision on the motion for a preliminary injunction
shall be rendered by the court at the earliest possible time.
(2) Service of a temporary closing order. Unless the court orders
otherwise, a temporary closing order, together with the papers
upon which it was based and a notice of hearing for the preliminary
injunction, shall be personally served, in the same manner as a
summons as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. Temporary restraining orders.
§ 206-9 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-9
204:301
(1) A temporary restraining order may be granted pending a hearing
for preliminary injunction where it appears by clear and convincing
evidence that a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter is
being conducted, maintained or permitted and that the public
health, safety or welfare immediately requires the granting of a
temporary restraining order. This order shall restrain the
defendants and all persons from removing or transferring off the
property or in any manner interfering with the fixtures and
movable property used in conducting, maintaining or permitting
the public nuisance and from further conducting, maintaining or
permitting the public nuisance. A temporary restraining order may
be granted without notice, pending order of the court granting or
refusing the preliminary injunction and until further order of the
court. Upon granting a temporary restraining order, the court shall
direct the holding of a hearing for the preliminary injunction.
(2) Service of temporary restraining order. Unless the court orders
otherwise, a temporary restraining order, together with the papers
upon which it was based and a notice of hearing for the preliminary
injunction, shall be personally served in the same manner as a
summons as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. Granting of temporary closing and temporary restraining
orders;enforcement.
(1) If, on motion for a preliminary injunction, the Mayor, or other
village representative, submits evidence warranting both a
temporary closing order and a temporary restraining order, the
court shall grant both orders.
(2) Enforcement of temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders. Temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders shall be enforced by the Mayor and the Village of
Johnson City Police Department.
F. Inventory upon service of temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders. The officers serving a temporary restraining order
shall forthwith make and return to the court, an inventory of personal
property situated in and used in conducting, maintaining or permitting
a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter and shall enter upon
the building, structure or place for such purpose. Such inventory shall
be taken in any manner which is deemed likely to evidence a true and
accurate representation of the personal property subject to such
inventory, including but not limited to photographing such personal
property.
G. Closing of premises pursuant to temporary closing orders and
temporary restraining orders. The officers serving a temporary closing
order or a temporary restraining order shall, upon service of the order,
command all persons present in the building, structure or place to
vacate the premises forthwith. Upon the building, structure or place
§ 206-9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-9
204:302
being vacated, the premises shall be securely locked and all keys
delivered to the officers serving the order who thereafter shall deliver
the keys to the fee owner, lessor or lessee of the building, structure or
place involved. If the fee owner, lessor or lessee is not at the building,
structure or place when the order is being executed, the officers shall
securely padlock the premises and retain the keys until the fee owner,
lessor or lessee of the building is ascertained, at which time the officers
shall deliver the keys to such owner, lessor or lessee, if such individual
resides within Broome County.
H. Posting of temporary closing orders and temporary restraining orders.
Upon service of a temporary closing order or a temporary restraining
order, the officer shall post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or
upon one or more of the principal doors at entrances of such premises
where the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted.
In addition, where a temporary restraining order has been granted, the
officers shall affix, in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the
principal doors at entrances of such premises, a printed notice that
shall state that certain described activity is prohibited by court order
and that removal of property is prohibited by court order. If the
temporary restraining order directs that the premises are to be closed
by court order, the notice shall contain the legend "Closed by Court
Order" in block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone
intending or likely to enter the premises, the date of the order, the court
from which the order issued and the name of the office or agency
posting the notice. Mutilation or removal of such a posted order or such
a posted notice while it remains in force, in addition to any other
punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on conviction, by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days,
or by both, provided that such order or notice contains therein a notice
of such penalty. The Police Department shall, upon the request of the
Village Attorney, or upon the direction of the Mayor, assist in the
enforcement of this subsection.
I. Intentional disobedience of or resistance to a temporary restraining
order. Intentional disobedience of, or resistance to, a temporary
restraining order, in addition to any other punishment prescribed by
law, shall be punishable, on conviction, by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both.
J. Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction bond required. A
temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction shall not issue
under this chapter, except upon the giving of a bond or security by the
applicant, in the amount of $1,000, for the payment of such costs and
damages as may be incurred or suffered by any party who is found to be
wrongfully restrained or enjoined. A bond or security shall not be
required of the State of New York, municipal corporations or political
subdivisions of the State of New York.
§ 206-9 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-10
204:303
§ 206-10. Vacation of temporary restraining orders and preliminary
injunctions.
§ 206-11. Preliminary injunction of bulk transfer.
A. A temporary restraining order shall be vacated, upon notice to the
Village Attorney, if the defendant shows by affidavit and such other
proof as may be submitted that the public nuisance within the scope of
this chapter has been abated. An order vacating a temporary closing
order, or a temporary restraining order, shall include a provision
authorizing agencies of the village to inspect the building, structure or
place which is the subject of an action pursuant to this chapter,
periodically without notice, during the pendency of the action, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether or not the public nuisance has been
resumed. Intentional disobedience of, or resistance to, an inspection
provision of an order vacating a temporary restraining order, in
addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be
punishable, on conviction, by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both. The Police
Department shall, upon the request of the Village Attorney, or upon the
direction of the Mayor, assist in the enforcement of an inspection
provision of an order vacating a temporary restraining order.
B. A temporary restraining order may be vacated by the court, upon notice
to the Village Attorney, when the defendant gives an undertaking and
the court is satisfied that the public health, safety or welfare will be
protected adequately during the pendency of the action. The
undertaking shall be in an amount equal to the assessed valuation of the
building, structure or place where the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained or permitted or in such other amount as may be
fixed by the court. The defendant shall pay to the village, in the event
that a judgment of permanent injunction is obtained, its actual costs,
expenses and disbursements in investigating, bringing and maintaining
the action.
C. Vacating a temporary injunction or a temporary restraining order. When
the defendent gives an undertaking in the amount of the civil penalty
demanded in the complaint, together with costs, disbursements and the
projected annual costs of the prosecution of the action to be determined
by the court, upon a motion on notice to the Village Attorney, a
temporary injunction or a temporary restraining order shall be vacated
by the court. The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
governing undertakings shall be applicable to this chapter.
A. Generally, pending an action pursuant to this chapter, the court may
grant a preliminary injunction enjoining a defendant from making a
bulk transfer, as defined in this section.
B. If, on a motion for a preliminary injunction of a bulk transfer, the Village
Attorney shall show by clear and convincing evidence that a public
nuisance within the scope of this chapter is being conducted,
§ 206-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-11
204:304
§ 206-12. Temporary receiver.
maintained or permitted, a temporary restraining order may be
granted, without notice, restraining the defendants and all persons
from making or permitting a bulk transfer, as defined in this article,
pending an order of the court granting or refusing the preliminary
injunction and until further order of the court. Application for a
temporary restraining order shall be made pursuant to § 206-9 of this
article.
C. Bulk transfer defined. A "bulk transfer" is any transfer of a major part of
the materials, supplies, merchandise or other inventory or equipment of
the transferor in the building, structure or place where the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted that is not in the
ordinary course of the transferor's business.
D. Enforcement of a preliminary injunction. A preliminary injunction shall
be enforced by the Village Attorney, the Mayor or by the Village of
Johnson City Police Department.
E. If the court grants a preliminary injunction, the provisions of § 206-9 of
this article regarding inventory shall be applicable.
A. Appointment, duration and removal. In any action wherein the
complaint alleges that the nuisance is being conducted or maintained in
the residential portions of any building or structure, or a portion
thereof, which are occupied, in whole or in part, as the home, residence
or sleeping place of one or more human beings, the court may, upon
motion on notice by the plaintiff, appoint a temporary receiver to
manage and operate the property during the pendency of the action, in
lieu of a temporary closing order. A temporary receivership shall not
continue after final judgment unless otherwise directed by the court.
Upon the motion of any party, including the temporary receiver, or on
its own initiative, the appointing court may remove a temporary
receiver at any time.
B. Powers and duties. The temporary receiver shall have such powers and
duties as the court shall direct, including but not limited to collecting
and holding all rents due from all tenants, leasing or renting portions of
the building or structure, making or authorizing other persons to make
necessary repairs or to maintain the property, hiring security or other
personnel necessary for the safe and proper operation of a dwelling,
prosecuting or defending suits flowing from his or her management of
the property and retaining counsel therefor, and expending funds from
the collected rents in furtherance of the foregoing powers.
C. Oath. A temporary receiver, before entering upon his or her duties,
shall be sworn or shall affirm faithfully and fairly to discharge the trust
committed to such receiver. The oath or affirmation may be waived
upon consent of all parties.
§ 206-11 PORNOGRAPHY § 206-12
204:305
§ 206-13. No exclusive remedy.
This chapter shall not be construed to exclude any other remedy provided
by law for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people of
the Village of Johnson City.
D. Undertaking. A temporary receiver shall give an undertaking, in an
amount to be fixed by the court making the appointment, that such
receiver will faithfully discharge his or her duties.
E. Accounts. A temporary receiver shall keep written accounts, itemizing
receipts and expenditures, describing the property and naming the
depository of receivership funds, which shall be open to inspection by
any person having an apparent interest in the property. Upon a motion
of the temporary receiver, or of any person having an apparent interest
in the property, the court may require the keeping of particular records,
direct or limit inspection or require the presentation of a temporary
receiver's accounts. Notice of a motion for the presentation of a
temporary receiver's accounts shall be served upon the sureties on the
temporary receiver's undertaking as well as upon each party.
§ 206-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 206-13
204:306
Chapter 208
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 208-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 208-2. Word usage.
Wherever used herein, "person" shall include a natural person or persons,
firm, corporation, partnership, association or any other combination of two
or more persons who is or are the owners or owners' mortgagee, assignee
of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, administrator, lessee or agent directly
or indirectly in control of a building or other structure or premises within
the Village of Johnson City.
§ 208-3. Regulations. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. In order to prevent blight and the spread thereof, it is hereby declared
that all structures, including but not limited to one- and two-family and
multiple-family dwellings, whether or not used for residential purposes,
garden apartments, all other apartment complexes, all shopping
centers, supermarkets, retail stores, discount houses, warehouses,
storage plants, factories, gasoline service stations, public garages or
buildings used for other business purposes and accessory structures of
all of the foregoing, whether occupied or vacant, shall be maintained in
conformity with the standards set out in this chapter so as to assure
that none of these structures or properties will adversely affect its
neighborhood or the Village community.
B. It is found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration certain structures and properties have the
future effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and
that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions
will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of
large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same. By
reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the
growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and
property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of
residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and
the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
A. Yards, lots, and open areas.
(1) No shopping baskets, crates or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing and such baskets, carts or wagons shall be collected as
often as necessary and removed to the interior of the building or
buildings or in a secure location from which they will be taken by
the person responsible for said building.
(2) All garbage and recyclable containers shall be removed from their
regular collection points within 24 hours after said garbage has
§ 206-13 PORNOGRAPHY § 208-3
204:307
been collected, and no garbage containers shall be placed upon the
curb area 24 hours before the due time for the collection of the
same; this duty must be taken care of by the person responsible for
such containers. Other than when placed at the curb for collection
in accordance with the preceding provision, all rubbish, garbage,
and garbage cans and containers shall be kept reasonably out of
view from the street or roadway and shall not be stored in the front
yard nor on the front porch of any building or structure.
(3) All landscaping shall be maintained so that the lawns, hedges,
bushes and trees shall be kept neat and free from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where
the same may constitute a blighting factor having a tendency to
depreciate adjoining property. Such maintenance shall include but
not be limited to the removal of trees and shrubs which may die and
or otherwise be destroyed.
(4) All fences shall be maintained by the person responsible for the
property. Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to
painting, as needed, and the replacement, removal or repair of
fences which may become in disrepair.
(5) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use
and weather conditions.
(6) Yards, courts, and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of
physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, animal feces,
and shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent rubbish from
being blown about them.
(7) All signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in good repair.
Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put into
good repair. Any nonoperative or broken electric or other signs
shall be repaired or removed.
(8) No lights, floodlights or spotlights shall be so situated that light
from such lamp is directly cast upon the nearby residences.
B. Buildings and structures. All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently
resistant to deterioration shall be repaired, coated, treated or sealed to
protect them from deterioration. Exterior porch floors, walls, ceilings
and stairs shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
Such areas which have been damaged or show evidence of rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner.
C. Runoff. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately directed or
drained so as to have a minimum impact upon adjacent buildings and
properties and so as not to create ponding situations. This includes, but
is not limited to, not directing down spouts or leaders directly onto
adjoining property or into ditches.
§ 208-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 208-3
204:308
§ 208-3.1. Junked vehicles. [Added 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
D. Swimming pools. All in-ground swimming pools and aboveground
swimming pools, as those terms are defined in § 274-4 of this Code, if
open for use, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. If not
open for use, all aboveground and in-ground swimming pools shall be
covered with a weatherproof cover. Said weatherproof cover shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, including, among other
things, keeping said cover free of stagnant water and other debris.
A. No unlicensed, unregistered or inoperative vehicle shall be parked,
stored or left in the open in any district of the Village of Johnson City,
except as follows:
(1) The vehicle is in a fully enclosed structure.
(2) Vehicle storage permits. [Amended 1-2-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
(a) One vehicle may be stored on any parcel of land for a period
not to exceed six months, if it is suitably covered with a
weatherproof vehicle cover such that only the wheels or
extreme lower part of the vehicle is exposed. A vehicle storage
permit must be obtained from the Village Code Enforcement
Officer. The cost of said permit shall be $25. Only one
extension may be obtained for any one vehicle; and:
[1] The vehicle shall be owned by one of the inhabitants of the
property;
[2] The vehicle shall not be parked within the required side or
rear setback of the premises, and may not be stored in the
required street setback except if stored in a driveway
where it shall maintain a minimum street setback of 10
feet and shall comply with § 300-53.14, Visibility at
intersections.
(b) One vehicle may be located on a parcel of land where the seller
of the vehicle resides, for a period not to exceed 30 days, if it is
for sale, so long as said vehicle is not located on the lawn of the
parcel. No more than two such vehicles shall be sold per
calendar year. A vehicle sale permit may be obtained from the
Village Code Enforcement Officer for 30 days. The cost of said
permit shall be $25. Only two extensions within a calendar
year may be obtained for any one vehicle.
(3) The vehicle is stored or deposited on premises legally used and
operated as a junkyard;
(4) The vehicle is temporarily on the premises of a public garage, or
automobile repair station awaiting repair or servicing.
§ 208-3 PORNOGRAPHY § 208-3.1
204:309
§ 208-4. Enforcement. [Amended 3-24-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980;
1-12-1981; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993, 6-23-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
(5) A copy of the permit shall be affixed to the interior of the
windshield in order that the permit information is visible from the
street. [Added 1-2-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" shall include, but is
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, snowmobiles
and trailers.
C. The exceptions listed in Subsection A above shall not be available in a
required parking space for a two-family or multifamily dwelling as
listed in § 300-51.3 of this Code. [Amended 1-2-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
D. If the permit expires and the applicant fails to renew the permit prior to
expiration, the lapsed time of the permit shall be included as to the time
allowed for the permit extension. [Added 1-2-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee shall
determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he or she shall give notice of the
alleged violation to the person or persons responsible.
(1) The notice shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a specific statement of the reasons why it is being
issued and list the sections of this chapter deemed to be
violated.
(c) Direct removal or correction of such violation within the
following time frames:
[1] In cases of emergency, the responsible party shall have 24
hours to commence work to correct, alleviate or eliminate
the emergency, and 72 hours to reasonably complete such
work.
[2] For the provisions listed under § 208-3, Regulations,
Subsection A(1) and (2), removal and correction shall be
immediate upon notification by the enforcement officer.
[3] All other violations shall be corrected within 10 days after
the service of such notice, except when, for good cause
shown, the Code Enforcement Officer grants an extension
of time in writing.
§ 208-3.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 208-4
204:310
§ 208-4.1. Inspection of dwellings. [Added 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
Chapter 214
(d) Be served upon, or sent by registered or certified mail, to the
owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, or both, as the case
may require. Where the notice is sent by registered or certified
mail, a copy of said notice shall also be posted on the property.
(2) A copy shall be maintained on file in the Code Enforcement Office
for inspection by the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant or
the general public.
(3) Notices may also contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. If the violation is not corrected within the appropriate time frame, the
owner, occupant or person having control of said premises shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter, and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be authorized to issue an appearance ticket for such violation
returnable in Village Court.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee is authorized and
directed to enter and inspect at all reasonable times, or at such times as
may be necessary in an emergency, all buildings, lots and property
within the Village of Johnson City, both to determine if such buildings,
lots and property are in compliance with this chapter and to safeguard
the health and safety of the occupants and the general public.
B. Either upon request to, and at the convenience of the lawful owner, or
upon the complaint and/or invitation of an occupant, or by order of a
judge of competent jurisdiction directing that the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have access for the purpose of making an inspection, the
Enforcement Officer of the Village of Johnson City shall enter and
inspect all buildings, lots and property.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to make application to the
Johnson City Village Court for the issuance of a search warrant in order
to conduct an inspection of any premises covered by this chapter, where
the owner, tenant or occupant refuses or fails to allow an inspection of
his or her rental premises and where there is reasonable cause to
believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred. The application for
a search warrant shall in all respects comply with the laws of the State
of New York.
D. Nothing in this section, except for provisions concerning emergency
inspections, shall be deemed to authorize the Code Enforcement Officer
to conduct an inspection of any premises subject to this chapter without
the consent of the owner, tenant, or occupant of the premises, or
without a warrant duly issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 208-4 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 208-4.1
214:311
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 208-4.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 208-4.1
214:312
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-27-1978]
§ 214-1. Statutory authority.
This Village Board hereby promulgates this set of rules and regulations in
accordance with Article 6, § 89, Subdivision 1(b)iii, of the Public Officers
Law, Chapter 933, Laws of 1977.
§ 214-2. Designation of Records Access Officer.
The Village Clerk is hereby designated as the Records Access Officer whose
business address is Municipal Building, Johnson City, New York 13790. Said
Clerk in turn may refer all applications for access to appropriate persons
within each Village department or agency from whom said records may be
obtained.
§ 214-3. Application.
Persons seeking public records shall make application to the Records
Access Officer upon the application form supplied by said officer.
§ 214-4. Fees.
The fees for copies of records shall be in the sum of twenty-five cents
($0.25) per photocopy not in excess of nine by fourteen (9 x 14) inches or
the actual cost of reproducing any other record except when a different fee
is otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 214-5. Delivery of records; denial.
The Records Access Officer is hereby directed to make available to persons
requesting records those public records which, by law, are required to be
made available for public inspection and copying. Such officer and his or
her designees may deny access to records or portions thereof which are
specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal statute or other
provisions of the Freedom of Information Law.
§ 214-6. Removal prohibited.
No records shall be removed from the lawful custody of any public office
charged with the duty of making, keeping and maintaining such records.
§ 214-7. Time limit for making records available.
In the event that the request for public records interferes with the operation
of the office of the Village Clerk or any other department or agency of said
Village and makes it difficult or impossible for members of the public to
receive the regular services of the Village Clerk or his or her designees, the
Records Access Officer is hereby authorized to make such records available
§ 214-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 214-7
214:313
at such other times as may not interfere with the orderly operation of
Village government and the administration thereof. In the event that proper
application is made for a public record which is the proper subject of access
to the public, such records, if available, shall be made available within five
(5) business days of receipt of the request.
§ 214-8. Hours of availability.
The records shall be available Monday through Friday except holidays
during all hours the Village offices are regularly opened for business.
§ 214-9. Subject matter list; certification of copies of records.
The Records Access Officer or his or her designees in each Village
department will maintain an up-to-date subject matter list and assist the
requester in identifying requested records, if necessary. Upon locating the
records, said officer shall make the records available for inspection or deny
access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in writing, the reasons
therefor. Upon request, the Records Access Officer or his or her designees
will certify that a record is a true copy thereof.
§ 214-10. Failure to locate requested records.
Upon failure to locate records requested, the Records Access Officer or his
or her designees will certify that the Village or one (1) of its departments is
not the custodian of such records or that the records which are requested
cannot be found after diligent search.
§ 214-11. Denial of access; appeal. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
In the event that there is a denial of access to records, such denial must be
in writing, state the reason for the denial, and advise the applicant of his
or her right to appeal. An applicant has 30 days to appeal a denial. Upon
receipt of an appeal, the agency head, governing body or appeals officer has
10 days to fully explain in writing the reasons for further denial of access or
to provide access to the records.
§ 214-12. Purpose; applicability.
The purpose of this article is to comply with the spirit and intent of the
Freedom of Information Law, and any provisions of this article which are
inconsistent with said statute shall not affect or impair the validity of
the other provisions of this resolution or the application thereof to other
persons and circumstances.
§ 214-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 214-12
214:314
ARTICLE II
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule
[Adopted 1-21-1992]
§ 214-13. Adoption of Schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed therein.
§ 214-14. Disposal of certain records.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
§ 214-15. Policy statement.
The governing body and the chief executive official shall promote and
support a program for the orderly and efficient management of records,
including the identification and appropriate administration of records with
enduring value for historical or other research.
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 214-13 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 214-15
214:315
Chapter 222
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 200.
Solid waste — See Ch. 236.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 237.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 238.
Water — See Ch. 270.
§ 214-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 214-15
214:316
Part 1
[Adopted 8-20-1973 As SSuebwpaerrt R Le Ontfs Part I Of The 1973 Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 222-1. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Includes any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste
substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of
any natural resources.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage collection
system (including sewer service connections) from the ground through such
means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connection, or manholes. Infiltration
does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.[Added 8-7-2012 by
L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I) — The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow, without distinguishing the source.[Added 8-7-2012
by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFLOW — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage collection
system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof
leaders, cellar drains, sump pumps, missing or defective cleanout caps,
swimming pools, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between
stonnwater sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers,
stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does
not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. [Added 8-7-2012 by
L.L. No. 6-2012]
OTHER WASTES — Includes garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dyestuffs, acids,
chemicals and all other discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste.
PART — As used in relation to the term "sewer system," includes all lateral
sewers or all branch sewers or all interceptor sewers or all trunk sewers
and any sewage treatment and disposal works, each "part" with necessary
appurtenances, including sewage pumping stations.
SEWAGE — The water-carried domestic human or animal waste, together
with industrial and commercial waste, from residences, buildings,
industrial, and commercial establishments or other places. Neither
infiltration or inflow are components of "sewage."[Amended 8-7-2012 by
L.L. No. 6-2012]
SEWER SYSTEM — Includes all sewer pipes and other appurtenances
which are used or useful in whole or part in connection with the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and
§ 222-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-1
214:317
which are owned, operated or maintained by the village individually or
jointly with the City of Binghamton, New York, or other additional
municipalities, including sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment
and disposal works.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The Village Engineer of the Village of Johnson City.
VILLAGE TREASURER — The Village Treasurer of the Village of Johnson
City.
WASTEWATER — The composite of all flow constituents conveyed in a
sewer including sewage and infiltration and inflow.[Added 8-7-2012 by
L.L. No. 6-2012]
§ 222-2. Sewer rents imposed; computation; installation of meters;
extension of installation deadline.
A. Pursuant to Article 14-F, § 452, of the General Municipal Law, the
Village hereby establishes and imposes sewer rents in the Village for
the use of the sewer system or any part or parts thereof and establishes
and imposes such sewer rents as an annual charge on the real property
within the Village using such sewer system.
B. Such sewer rents shall be computed in the following manner: the first
1,000 cubic feet or less, minimum $50; all over 1,000 cubic feet, $5.25
per 100 cubic feet of water supplied; provided, however, that in the case
of consumers of water who discharge into the sewer system an amount
of sewage substantially less than or substantially greater than the
amount of water supplied to such consumer, the amounts of the sewage
discharged into the sewer system shall be determined by meters,
gauges or other suitable measuring devices acceptable to the Village
designee and installed by such consumer at the consumer's expense
and at no cost or expense to the Village of Johnson City, and the sewer
rent thereon shall be computed as follows: the first 1,000 cubic feet or
less, minimum $50; all over 1,000 cubic feet, $5.25 per 100 cubic feet of
sewage discharged into the sewer system. The Village designee may
require the owner of any real property in the Village to install a meter,
gauge or other suitable measuring device which is acceptable to the
Village designee and installed at the consumer's expense and at no cost
or expense to the Village of Johnson City; provided, however, that any
determination of the Village designee is subject to review and
modification by a court of competent jurisdiction. [Amended
1-18-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971; 5-5-1975 by L.L. No. 10-1975;
3-22-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983; 12-29-1986 by L.L. No. 13-1986;
5-18-1991 by L.L. No, 4-1991; 6-2-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992; 5
-27-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 5-24-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005;
7-21-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009; 7-19-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011;
5-22-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012; 4-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014;
5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
§ 222-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-2
214:318
C. Any owner of real property in the Village who claims to be unable to
install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device may submit to
the Board of Trustees a written application requesting that the Board of
Trustees grant to said owner a specified extension of time within which
to install such meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device. In the
event that the Board of Trustees shall grant such specified extension of
time, such owner shall install a meter, gauge or other suitable
measuring device on or before the date fixed and prescribed therefore
by the Board of Trustees. Prior to such installation, the Village designee
shall estimate the amount of sewage discharged by such owner into the
sewer system. Such estimate by the Village designee shall be submitted
to the Board of Trustees for its approval or modification, and the
decision of the Board of Trustees with respect thereto shall be binding
and final unless modified by a court of competent jurisdiction following
any review thereof permitted by law. Such owner shall thereupon, prior
to the aforementioned installation of a meter, gauge or other suitable
measuring device, pay sewer rents computed at the rate of the first
1,000 cubic feet or less, minimum $50; all over 1,000 cubic feet, $5.25
per 100 cubic feet of estimated sewage discharged into the sewer
system, and the decision of the Board of Trustees with respect to the
amount thereof shall be binding and final unless modified by a court of
competent jurisdiction following any review thereof permitted by law.
Such sewer rents computed at the rate of the first 1,000 cubic feet or
less, minimum $50; all over 1,000 cubic feet, $5.25 per 100 cubic feet of
estimated sewage discharged into the sewer system, shall be due and
payable at such time as the Board of Trustees shall fix and prescribe
therefore. In the case of real property in which water is used exclusively
for residential purposes, however, the owner of such real property shall,
prior to the installation of a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring
device, pay sewer rents in the amount of $200 per year for each
dwelling unit. [Amended 1-18-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971; 5-5-1975
by L.L. No. 10-1975; 10-18-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976; 3-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 2-1983; 12-29-1986 by L.L. No. 13-1986; 5-18-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991; 6-2-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992; 5-27-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997; 5-24-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005; 7-21-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009; 7-19-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011; 5-22-2012 by L.L. No.
3-2012; 4-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014; 5-15-2018 by L.L. No.
8-2018]
D. Any owner of real property in the village who fails to submit to the
Board of Trustees a written application requesting that the Board of
Trustees grant to such owner a specified extension of time within which
to install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device and any
owner of real property in the village whose written application is denied
by the Board of Trustees shall pay sewer rents computed in the manner
set forth in Subsection B of this section.49
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding a minimum sewer rent, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 222-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-2
214:319
§ 222-3. Sewer rents; when due and payable; delinquent payments.
[Amended 3-16-1970 by L.L. No. 1-1970; 2-23-1981 by L.L. No.
5-1981; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ 222-4. Lien for sewer rents.
Sewer rents shall constitute a lien upon the real property served by the
sewer system to the extent set forth in Article 14-F, § 452, of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 222-5. Collection of delinquent sewer rents.
The Village may enforce the collection of delinquent sewer rents pursuant
to Article 14-F, § 452, of the General Municipal Law.
§ 222-6. Correction of errors. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
If any owner of real property on which a sewer rent has been imposed
deems himself or herself aggrieved because such real property is not served
by the sewer system or an error has been made in computing such sewer
rent, he or she may file an application for a refund of all or part of such
sewer rent. Such application shall be verified by him or her and shall
set forth the amount of refund sought and the grounds therefor. Such
application shall be presented to the Village Treasurer, and he or she
E. All fees in this section shall remain in effect until June 30, 2019.
Thereafter the fees can be increased or decreased by action of the
Village Board from time to time. [Added 12-4-2018 by L.L. No.
18-2018]
A. Sewer rents shall be due and payable on the second day of January in
each year and on the first day of April, July and October in each year
and may be paid to the Village Treasurer within a period of 30 days
after they are due and payable without any penalty. Such sewer rents
due and payable on the second day of January shall be for and relate to
the three-month period immediately preceding such second day of
January, and such sewer rents due and payable on the first day of April,
July and October shall be for and relate to the three-month period
immediately following the second day of January which immediately
precedes such first day of April, July and October.
B. Any sewer rent which is not paid within the grace period set forth
therefor in Subsection A of this section shall be deemed delinquent, and
12% additional fee shall be added and collected. Such sewer rent
together with the additional fee shall be payable on or before the 30th
day of April in any year. On and after the 30th day of April in any year,
all unpaid sewer rents together with penalties shall be certified by the
collecting officer to the Village Clerk and levied against the real estate
as a part of the annual Village tax levy, in accordance with General
Municipal Law § 452.
§ 222-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-6
214:320
shall forward such application to the Board of Trustees with his or her
recommendations in relation thereto. The Board of Trustees may refund all
or part of such sewer rent.
§ 222-6 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-6
214:321

Part 2
[12-18-1984 As L.LJo. iNnot .S 1e1w-a1g9e8 4T r(eSautbmpeanrtt TP lOanf tPart I Of The 1973
Code)]
ARTICLE II
Title; Policy; Purpose; Applicability
§ 222-7. Short title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage
Treatment Plant Law."
§ 222-8. Policy and purpose.
§ 222-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall apply to all users of the Binghamton-
Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant. Municipal users shall be
governed by the provisions of their individual contract with the owners and
by the rules and regulations of the Joint Sewage Board and shall, except as
specifically provided hereinafter, be exempt from the coverage of this Part
2.
A. It is the policy of the City of Binghamton and the Village of Johnson City,
as co-owners of the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment
Plant, to protect and preserve the Joint Sewage Treatment Plant by
preventing the introduction of substances into the plant which impair
the strength and/or durability of the plant; which pass through the plant
inadequately treated; or which are otherwise incompatible with the
plant or the treatment processes utilized by the plant. It is the further
policy of the owners to protect the public health and the environment
by promoting the use and operation of the plant in a manner which
complies with the terms and conditions of the SPDES permit issued for
the plant by the DEC and in a manner which is consistent with the letter
and spirit of the industrial waste pretreatment program developed for
the plant and approved by the DEC and the EPA. It is the further policy
of the owners to foster the fiscal self-sufficiency of the sewage
treatment plant through the imposition of user charges which equitably
distribute the cost of operating and maintaining the plant among all
users in an economically sound manner.
B. The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide for the management, operation
and use of the joint sewage treatment plant and its appurtenant
structures and facilities so as to achieve maximum adherence to the
policies stated above.
§ 222-7 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-9
214:323

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 222-10. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein, technical terms shall be as defined in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation. Whenever used in this Part 2, unless otherwise expressly
stated or required by subject matter of context, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD or JOINT SEWAGE BOARD — The Binghamton-Johnson City
Joint Sewage Board, established under the contract between the City of
Binghamton and the Village of Johnson City for the operation of a joint
wastewater treatment facility. The term includes any duly authorized
designee, agent or representative of the Board.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20º C.), expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY — The City of Binghamton, New York.
COOLING WATER — The water discharges from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or
suspended solids each in excess of ten (10) milligrams per liter.
CPLR — The New York Civil Practice Law and Rules.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DISCHARGE DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY INTO THE JOINT SEWAGE
TREATMENT PLANT — To contribute wastewater or cause or permit
the contribution of wastewater into the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint
Sewage Treatment Plant or into any public sewer which conveys
wastewater to the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment
Plant.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FEDERAL ACT or ACT — The 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments, Public Law 92-500, and the 1977 Clean Water Act,
Public Law 95-217,50 and any amendments thereto; as well as any
guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
50.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 222-10 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-10
214:325
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain
period of time.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation,
cooking and disposing of food and from handling, processing, storage
and sale of food products and produce.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any sanitary waste from holding tanks such
as marine vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and
vacuum pump tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential user of the joint sewage
treatment plant which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as
amended and supplemented under one (1) of the following divisions:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any discarded matter including any liquid,
gaseous or solid substance, or a combination thereof, resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from
development or recovery of natural resources. The term does not
include garbage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater in which industrial wastes
are carried.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit, issued
by the Joint Sewage Board, authorizing the permittee to deposit or
discharge industrial wastewater into any public sewer served by the
joint sewage treatment plant.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage
collection system (including sewer service connections) from the
ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connection,
or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from,
inflow.[Added 8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I) — The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow, without distinguishing the source.[Added
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFLOW — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage collection
system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof
leaders, cellar drains, sump pumps, missing or defective cleanout caps,
swimming pools, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
(1) Division A — Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B — Mining.
(3) Division D — Manufacturing.
Division E — Transportation, Communication, Electrical, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I — Services.
§ 222-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-10
214:326
between stormwater sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. [Added
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the treatment plant
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal. The
term includes any action which is a cause of or significantly contributes
to a violation of any requirement of the Joint Sewage Board's SPDES
permit or which results in the prevention of sewage sludge reuse,
reclamation or disposal by the treatment plant in accordance with § 405
of the Act (33 USC § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act and the Toxic
Substances Control Act or any more stringent state criteria applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the treatment plant.
JOINT SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
or TREATMENT PLANT — The Binghamton-Johnson City joint sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and appurtenances which are jointly owned by the City of
Binghamton, New York, and the Village of Johnson City, New York, and
which are used in the storage, treatment, cycling and reclamation of
municipal wastewater.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY — All significant industrial users
and all other industries having a wet process discharge to the public
sewer system.
MUNICIPAL USER — A municipal corporation which owns or has
jurisdiction over any public sewer which conveys wastewater to the
Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant.
OWNERS — The City of Binghamton and the Village of Johnson City,
joint owners of the sewage treatment plant.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, association,
private or public corporation, political subdivision, governmental
agency, municipality, industry trust, estate or any other legal entity
whatsoever.
POLLUTANTS — As may be defined now or hereafter by appropriate
local, state or federal authorities or by the Board, substances which
may be present in wastewater, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, the
amount which may contain soluble or insoluble solids of organic or
inorganic nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of
natural waters, contribute solids, contain oil, grease or floating solids
which may cause unsightly appearance on the surface of such waters
or contain materials detrimental to aquatic life.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land, improvements
or appurtenances or buildings, grounds, etc.
§ 222-10 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-10
214:327
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer owned or controlled by a governmental
agency. The term includes any devices, structures or systems used by
the governmental agency in the storage, transmission, treatment or
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes.
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD — The "Rules and
Regulations Regulating to the Use of the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint
Sewage Treatment Plant," promulgated by the Binghamton-Johnson
City Joint Sewage Board.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewater from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes, the liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter, flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution.
SEWAGE — The water-carried domestic human or animal waste,
together with industrial and commercial waste, from residences,
buildings, industrial, and commercial establishments or other places.
Neither infiltration or inflow are components of "sewage."[Amended
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater; the term includes
sanitary sewers and combined sewers.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle having any dimension
greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any direction.
SPDES PERMIT — A wastewater discharge permit issued by the DEC
under the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter in wastewater, as
determined by standard methods.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or
solid, which when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient amounts
may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage
treatment plant, pose a hazard to sewer maintenance personnel or
constitute a hazard to fish or animal life or inhibit aquatic life. This
definition includes but is not limited to EPA priority pollutants.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such
water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the joint sewage treatment plant or into
§ 222-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-10
214:328
any public sewer which conveys wastewater to the sewage treatment
plant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City, New York.
WASTEWATER — The composite of all flow constituents conveyed in
a sewer including sewage and infiltration and inflow.[Amended
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological
parameters, including volume, flow rate and such other parameters
that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity
and strength of wastewater.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 222-10 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-10
214:329

ARTICLE IV
Joint Sewage Board
§ 222-11. Board continued.
The Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Board, which was established
by the municipal cooperation agreement between the City of Binghamton
and the Village of Johnson City dated July 14, 1965, is hereby continued;
and all of the powers, functions and obligations possessed by the Board
pursuant to such agreement immediately preceding the effective date of
this Part 2 are hereby continued.
§ 222-12. Composition; terms; vacancies.
The composition of the Joint Sewage Board, the terms of its members and
the manner of filling vacancies shall be as governed by the provisions of the
agreement which created the Board, and any amendments thereto.
§ 222-13. Additional powers, duties and functions.
A. In addition to any other powers, duties and responsibilities previously
conferred upon it, the Joint Sewage Board shall have administrative
responsibility for implementing, effectuating and enforcing on behalf of
the city (village) all requirements necessary to ensure compliance with
this Part 2, with the terms and conditions of the SPDES permit issued
for the sewage treatment plant and with the industrial waste
pretreatment program developed and approved for the sewage
treatment plant.
B. To carry out its responsibilities under this Part 2, the Joint Sewage
Board may:
(1) From time to time, adopt, amend or cancel administrative rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 2,
governing the use of the sewage treatment plant and the procedure
to be followed with respect to hearings, filing of reports, the
issuance of permits and all other procedural matters relating to the
use of the plant and any public sewer served by the plant. Such
rules and regulations, before becoming effective, shall be approved
by the Common Council (Village Board of Trustees).
(2) Appoint officers and employees and delegate to and allocate among
them administrative functions, powers and duties; and retain and
employ private consultants for professional and technical
assistance and advice.
(3) Hold hearings, receive pertinent and relevant proof from any party
in interest who appears at such hearing, compel the attendance of
witnesses, make findings of fact and determinations and assess
such penalties therefor as are hereinafter prescribed in Article IX,
§ 222-11 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-13
214:331
all with respect to any aspect or matter involving the
administration of this Part 2.
(4) Make, modify or cancel orders requiring the discontinuance of the
discharge of wastewater into any public sewer served by the
sewage treatment plant and specifying the conditions and time
within which such discontinuance must be accomplished.
(5) With the advice and consent of the City (Village) Attorney, institute
or cause to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction
proceedings to compel compliance with the provisions of this Part 2
or the determinations and orders of the Board.
(6) Issue or deny permits under such conditions as may be prescribed
for the prevention and abatement of pollution, for the discharge of
industrial wastewater into any public sewer served by the
Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant; and fix
reasonable charges and fees for such permits.
(7) Revoke, suspend or modify any wastewater discharge permit
issued under the provisions of this Part 2 whenever, after hearing
thereon, the Board determines that such revocation, suspension or
modification is necessary or desirable to comply with the intent and
purpose of this Part 2; provided, however, that the hearing required
under this subsection may be waived, in writing, by the applicant or
permittee.
(8) On its own motion, investigate or make inquiry in a manner to be
determined by it, as to any condition affecting the joint sewage
treatment plant and as to any alleged act or omission or failure to
comply with any provision of this Part 2, with the Board's rules and
regulations or with any permit, order or determination issued
thereunder.
(9) Make contracts and leases upon such terms as the Board shall
deem appropriate; and execute all instruments necessary and
convenient, including applications for permits from state and
federal agencies having jurisdiction over the sewage treatment
plant or its receiving waters.
(10) Settle or compromise, with the approval of the City (Village)
Attorney, any action or cause of action for the recovery of a penalty
under the provisions of this Part 2 as it may deem advantageous to
the city (village).
(11) Accept and assume from participating municipalities such powers
and functions as are necessary, convenient and proper for
enforcing its rules and regulations within such municipalities.
(12) Promote, develop, encourage and assist in the formulation of
appropriate sewer use laws by municipalities which directly or
indirectly discharge municipal wastewater into the sewage
§ 222-13 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-13
214:332
treatment plant; and cooperate with the appropriate agencies of
such municipalities with respect to matters having impact on the
sewage treatment plant.
(13) Perform such other and further acts as may be necessary, proper or
desirable to carry out effectively the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 222-13 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-13
214:333

ARTICLE V
Administrative Procedures
§ 222-14. Proceedings before the Board.
§ 222-15. Hearings; notice; procedure.
A. Whenever it shall appear to the Board, after investigation, that there
has been a violation of any of the provisions of this Part 2 or of the
Board's rules and regulations or of any permit, order or determination
issued thereunder, it shall give written notice to the alleged violator or
violators setting forth any thing or act done or omitted to be done or
claimed to be in violation of any such provisions and requiring that the
matters complained of be corrected and/or that the alleged violator
appear in person or by attorney before the Board or its duly designated
representative at the time and place in said notice specified and answer
the charges complained of.
B. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of such hearing shall be given.
C. Upon the return day of such notice, the person so notified shall file with
the Board a written statement setting forth the position of the person so
notified, the answer, if any, to the charges made against him or her, the
methods, practices and procedures, if any, which are being taken to
correct each alleged violation and any other defenses or information
pertinent to the case. Pertinent and relevant testimony of witnesses
shall be received in support of or opposition to said statement. Failure
to file a statement shall be treated as a default in appearance.
D. Following a hearing and after due consideration of the written and oral
statements and testimony and arguments filed pursuant to Subsection
C above or on default in appearance in said return day, the Board may
issue and enter such final order or make such final determination as it
deems appropriate under the circumstances and shall notify such
person or persons thereof, in writing, personally or by registered mail
within twenty (20) days after completion of the hearing. Where a person
appears by attorney, service by mail on the attorney shall be sufficient if
made in accordance with Civil Practice Law and Rules § 321.
A. The Board may issue subpoenas and administer oaths in connection
with any hearing or investigation under or pursuant to the provisions of
this Article, and it shall be the duty of the Board to issue subpoenas at
the request of and upon behalf of the respondent.
B. The Board shall not be bound by laws of evidence in the conduct of
hearing proceedings, but the determination shall be founded upon the
sufficient legal evidence to sustain it.
C. Notice of hearing shall be served at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing, provided that whenever, because of danger to the
public health, safety or welfare, it appears prejudicial to the public
§ 222-14 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-15
214:335
§ 222-16. Declaratory rulings.
Any interested person may petition the Board for a declaratory ruling
relating to any rule, regulation, order, policy or interpretation used by the
interest to delay action for fifteen (15) days, the Board may proceed in
accordance with § 222-59.
D. Service of notice of hearing or order shall be made by personal service
or by registered or certified mail. Where service, whether by personal
service or by registered or certified mail, is made upon an infant,
incompetent, partnership, corporation, governmental subdivision,
board or commission, it shall be made upon the person or persons
designated to receive personal service by Article 3 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules.
E. The Board's Attorney may prefer charges, attend hearings, present the
facts and take any and all proceedings in connection therewith.
F. At a hearing, the respondent may appear personally, shall have the right
of counsel and may cross-examine witnesses against him or her and
produce evidence and witnesses in his or her behalf.
G. A record or summary thereof of the proceedings of said hearings shall
be made and filed with the Board. If requested to do so by any party, full
stenographic notes of the testimony presented at said hearing shall be
taken and filed. The stenographer shall, upon the payment of his or her
fees allowed by law therefor, furnish a certified transcript of the whole
or any part of his or her notes to any party requesting the same.
H. Unless precluded by law, disposition may be made of any hearing by
stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, default or other informal
method. Within ten (10) days of the notice specified in § 222-14A, the
user may request a prehearing conference with the Board's
representative for an informal disposition of any or all charges.51
I. At any time prior to the expiration of the time limited for
commencement of judicial review of any decision or determination of
the Board, a party may request that the Board furnish him or her with a
copy of the record and transcript of the proceeding or any part thereof.
The Board shall prepare the record together with any portion of the
transcript requested and shall furnish a copy of the requested materials
to the party. Except when any law provides otherwise, the Board is
authorized to charge not more than its cost for the preparation and
furnishings of such record or transcript or the rate specified in the
contract between the Board and a contractor if prepared by a private
contractor.
J. Upon application of any affected user, the Board may modify or amend
any determination after a hearing.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 222-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-16
214:336
Board in the discharge of its functions under this Part 2. A petition to the
Board for a declaratory ruling shall be in writing and shall be in such form
as the Board prescribes. No later than thirty (30) days after its receipt of
a petition, the Board shall state its opinion of the petitioner's position and
the policy to be followed by the Board. This statement shall constitute a
declaratory ruling which shall be served by mail on the petitioner. When the
Board deems appropriate, it may schedule an adjudicatory hearing to be
held in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 222-15 above, prior to
its issuing a declaratory ruling.
§ 222-17. Appeals to the Board.
§ 222-18. Judicial review.
Any final order issued by the Joint Sewage Board (including civil penalties
assessed pursuant to § 222-54 of this Part 2), shall be reviewable in a
proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
Application for such review must be within thirty (30) days after service, in
person or by mail, of a copy of the determination or order upon the attorney
of record for the applicant and for each person who has filed a notice of
appearance or the applicant in person if such applicant is not represented
by an attorney.
§ 222-19. Adoption and amendment of rules and regulations.
The Joint Sewage Board prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any
rule or regulation shall:
A. Any person aggrieved by any determination or order made by any
delegate, deputy or representative of the Board may appeal such order
or determination to the Board by filing with the Board a request for
Board review. Requests for Board review shall be in writing and shall be
made within fifteen (15) days of the date of the determination or order
complained of. The request shall contain a short and plain statement of
the matters asserted and the relief being sought. No later than thirty
(30) days after receipt of a request for review, the Board shall schedule
an adjudicatory hearing to be held in accordance with the procedures
set forth in § 222-15 above. A special meeting of the Board may be
called by the Chairperson upon the filing of the request for review, and
the Board may, in its discretion, suspend the operation of the order or
determination being reviewed until such time as the Board has acted
upon the appeal.
B. The Board shall review and evaluate all appeals, and in making any
decisions, it shall give due consideration to such factors as it deems
appropriate for effectuating the policy and purpose of this Part 2. For
appeals taken pursuant to § 222-34B of this Part 2, the Board shall also
take into consideration cost effectiveness and the economic impact
upon the user of the proposed Board action.
§ 222-16 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-19
214:337
§ 222-20. Compilation of Joint Sewage Board rulings.
The Board shall compile, index and make available for public inspection
all rules and regulations, declaratory rulings and decisions on appeal
promulgated by the Board. The compilation shall be supplemented as
frequently as the Board deems appropriate.
A. Publish notice at least ten (10) days prior to the intended action. Notice
shall include a statement of either the terms or substance of the
intended action or a description of subjects and issues involved, the
time and place of the hearing and the manner in which interested
persons may present their views.
B. Afford all interested parties reasonable opportunity to submit data,
views or arguments, orally or in writing. Reasons for adoption and
refusal of proposed rule as well as the decision of the Joint Sewage
Board shall be recorded and available for public inspection.
C. File a certified copy of each rule and regulation with the Clerk of the
Common Council of Binghamton and the Clerk of the Village Board of
Johnson City. The Clerk shall keep a permanent file which may be
inspected upon request.
§ 222-19 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-20
214:338
ARTICLE VI
Restrictions and Limitations on Use of the Joint Sewage Treatment
Plant
§ 222-21. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge directly or indirectly into the joint sewage
treatment plant any substances, materials, waters or wastes in such
qualities or concentrations which cause or are capable of causing, either
alone or by interaction with other substances, interference with the
operation or performance of the plant or which pass through the plant
inadequately treated. The Joint Sewage Board shall by rule and regulation
develop specific limits and restrictions to implement the general
prohibitions of this section. These general prohibitions and the specific
prohibitions developed by the Board shall apply to all users, whether or not
a user is subject to any other local, state or federal requirements governing
use of the joint sewage treatment plant.
§ 222-22. Compliance required.
No person shall discharge directly or indirectly into the joint sewage
treatment plant or otherwise use the sewage treatment plant unless such
discharge or use is in compliance with this Part 2, with the rules and
regulations of the Joint Sewage Board, with any applicable order or
determination of the Board promulgated thereunder and with the terms and
conditions of any applicable permit issued by the Board.
§ 222-23. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or recklessly break,
damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
equipment or other property which is under the jurisdiction, ownership or
control of the Joint Sewage Board.
§ 222-24. Tampering with measuring devices prohibited.
No person shall tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any measuring
device or mechanism installed pursuant to any requirement under this Part
2 or the rules and regulations of the Board.
§ 222-25. False statements prohibited.
No person shall knowingly make any false statement in any application,
report or other document required to be filed pursuant to any provision of
this Part 2 or the rules and regulations of the Board.
§ 222-21 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-25
214:339

ARTICLE VII
Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program
§ 222-26. Administration.
The Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Board, having jurisdiction over
the indirect discharges to and the discharges from the joint sewage
treatment plant, shall serve as the municipal agency responsible for the
implementation and administration of industrial wastewater pretreatment
program approved for the joint sewage treatment plant in accordance
with the requirements prescribed in the USEPA General Pretreatment
Regulations (Part 403 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations).
§ 222-27. Authority of the Joint Sewage Board.
A. The admission of industrial waste into the joint sewage treatment plant
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Joint Sewage Board.
B. For any user discharging or proposing to discharge industrial
wastewater directly or indirectly into the joint sewage treatment plant,
the Board may:
(1) Require pretreatment of the user's wastewater to a condition
acceptable for discharge to the treatment plant.
(2) Require the user to apply for and obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit as a means of controlling the quantities and rates
of discharge.
(3) Require payment by the user to cover added costs of handling and
treating the wastewater not covered by existing fees or charges.
(4) Require the development of compliance schedules by the user to
meet any applicable pretreatment requirements or any other
applicable requirements prescribed by the Board's rules and
regulations.
(5) Require the submission of reports necessary to assure compliance
with applicable pretreatment requirements and with any other
applicable requirements prescribed by the Board's rules and
regulations.
(6) Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring necessary to
ascertain the user`s compliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements and any other requirements prescribed by the
Board's rules and regulations.
(7) Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user as specified in
Article IX of this Part 2.
(8) Reject the user's wastewater, where the Board determines that the
wastewater contains substances or possesses characteristics which
have a deleterious effect on the joint sewage treatment plant or its
§ 222-26 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-27
214:341
§ 222-28. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this Part 2, with the Board's
SPDES permit conditions and applicable state and federal law, the Board
may require that any user discharging or proposing to discharge
wastewater directly or indirectly into the joint sewage treatment plant
file a wastewater discharge report. The wastewater discharge report may
include but not be limited to nature of process, volume, rates of flow,
mass emission rate or other information which relates to the generation of
waste. The report may also require disclosure of the chemical constituents
and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site, notwithstanding
that such materials are not normally discharged. Such information shall be
provided by completion of a questionnaire supplied by the Board and by
such supplements thereto as the Board determines necessary.
§ 222-29. Industrial wastewater discharge permits.
Each major contributing industry is hereby required to obtain an industrial
wastewater discharge permit as a condition for discharging or continuing
to discharge wastewater to the joint sewage treatment plant. New major
contributing industries must obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit from the Board prior to discharging wastewater into the public
sewage systems. Major contributing industries currently connected must
obtain a permit from the Board within one hundred and eighty (180) days
after the effective date of this Part 2.
§ 222-30. Permit application.
appurtenant structures and facilities or the processes, equipment
or receiving waters of the plant or which constitute a public
nuisance or hazard.
(9) Take such other measures as are necessary and proper to ensure
compliance with this Part 2, with applicable state and federal law
and with the rules and regulations of the Board.
A. Users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Board an application in the form
prescribed by the Board. The applicant may be required to submit the
following information:
(1) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(2) Name and phone number of person to contact concerning
industrial waste.
(3) Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and
seasonal variations, if any.
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics of the sewage,
industrial waste or other wastes discharged to the sewer system,
§ 222-27 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-30
214:342
§ 222-31. Permit conditions.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this Part 2 and all other rules and regulations, charges and
fees established by the Joint Sewage Board. The conditions of the industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall be uniformly enforced by the Board in
accordance with this Part 2 and with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. The permits may contain the following:
including but not limited to pH, chemical composition,
temperature, BOD5, etc.
(5) Time and duration of discharge.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials, processes and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
(8) Description of each product made, manufactured or produced and
type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed.
(10) Number and type of employees and hours of work.
(11)Water consumption and uses.
(12) Any other information in such form and at such times as the Joint
Sewage Board deems appropriate to carry out the intent and
purpose of this Part 2.
B. The Joint Sewage Board shall evaluate the application and any
additional information it requires. After such evaluation, the Joint
Sewage Board may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit
subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
A. Effluent limitations or other appropriate limitations when toxic
substances are present in the user's wastewater discharge.
B. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency and method of sampling, number types and
standards for analytical tests and reporting schedule.
C. Requirements for submission of reports for conditions of
noncompliance.
D. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
E. Pretreatment requirements.
§ 222-30 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-31
214:343
§ 222-32. Duration of permits.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified
period of time not to exceed three (3) years and shall be renewable.
§ 222-33. Transfer of permit prohibited.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued to a specific user
for a specific operation and shall be nontransferable.
§ 222-34. Modification, suspension or revocation of permits.
F. Requirements for the submission of information concerning the
disposal of waste materials separated from the authorized discharge.
G. Requirements for the installation of inspection and sampling manholes.
H. Schedule of compliance allowing reasonable time to conform with the
effluent limitations of this Part 2.
I. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents, flow
rates and time of discharge.
J. Requirements for maintaining records relating to wastewater discharge
as specified by the Joint Sewage Board and affording access thereto by
authorized Joint Sewage Board personnel.
K. The computation and requirement for payment of an industrial waste
surcharge.
L. Other conditions which the Joint Sewage Board deems appropriate to
ensure compliance with this Part 2, with applicable state and federal
law and with the rules and regulations of the Board.
A. Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be modified, suspended
or revoked whenever the Joint Sewage Board finds, after a hearing held
in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article V, that:
(1) The user has violated any term of the permit; or
(2) The user obtained the permit by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts.
B. Permits may additionally be modified, suspended or revoked whenever
the Board determines that a change in conditions or the existence of a
condition at the joint sewage treatment plant requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge. Affected users shall be informed of any proposed changes in
their permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance. Any user aggrieved by a
proposed modification, suspension or revocation of the user's
wastewater discharge permit under this subsection may appeal to the
§ 222-31 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-34
214:344
§ 222-35. Protection of reserve capacity.
The Joint Sewage Board shall not issue a wastewater discharge permit to
any industrial user unless there is sufficient capacity, not legally committed
to other users, in the wastewater sewers and treatment facilities to convey
and adequately treat the quantity of wastewater which the requested
discharge will add to the system.
§ 222-36. Monitoring, surveillance and sampling.
§ 222-37. Monitoring facilities.
The Board may require that a monitoring facility be installed by any user
who discharges, who proposes to discharge or who, in the Board's
judgment, might reasonably discharge wastewater with constituents and
characteristics different from that produced by a domestic premises. The
purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of wastewaters produced by the user. Monitoring facilities
shall be designed in accordance with Joint Sewage Board requirements and
shall be constructed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. If
sampling and metering equipment is also required by the Board, it shall
be provided, installed, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
When, in the judgment of the Board, there is a significant difference in
the wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different
Board for relief in accordance with the provisions of § 222-17 of this
Part 2.
C. If the Board finds that the public health, safety or welfare requires
emergency action and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order,
summary suspension or modification of a permit may be ordered
pending proceedings for modification, suspension, revocation or other
action. As soon as possible thereafter, but not to exceed fifteen (15)
days, the Board shall provide the affected user an opportunity to be
heard in accordance with the hearing provisions of Article V.
A. The Board shall maintain a continuous program of monitoring,
surveillance and sampling of industrial wastes discharged directly or
indirectly into the joint sewage treatment plant. The Board shall have
the power to obtain samples and to make tests necessary to determine
the nature and concentration of such wastes and shall have the right to
reaccess its determination by taking samples and tests at any time or by
periodic rechecks without notice to the user discharging such wastes.
B. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made at the monitoring
station or stations which are specifically identified with the user.
C. In the event that a monitoring station has not been required, the
samples shall be taken at a suitable and accessible point or points to be
selected by the Board and which are specifically identified with the
user.
§ 222-34 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-37
214:345
operations of a single user, the Board may require that separate monitoring
facilities be installed for each discharge.
§ 222-38. Pretreatment.
Where necessary, in the opinion of the Board, users shall make wastewater
acceptable under the limitations established by this Part 2 and by Section
307 of the Act before discharging directly or indirectly into the joint sewage
treatment plant. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Board shall be provided and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Board for review and must be
approved by the Board prior to commencement of construction of the
facility. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions of
this Part 2 and with any applicable local, state or federal requirements. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported to and be approved by the Board. When pretreatment
regulations are adopted by the EPA or DEC for any industry, then users
in that industry must immediately conform to the EPA or DEC timetable
for adherence to federal or state pretreatment requirements and any other
applicable requirements promulgated by the EPA or DEC. Additionally, such
users shall comply with any more stringent standards necessitated by local
conditions as determined by the Board.
§ 222-39. Federal effluent limitations.
Effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply in any
instance where they are more stringent than limitations in this Part 2. Users
in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued under Section
304 of the Federal Act shall achieve the level of treatment established by
federal regulations. Nothing in this Part 2 shall be construed to relieve
any industrial user from its obligation to comply with the pretreatment
standards established pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Act.
§ 222-40. Accidental discharge.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes regulated by this Part 2. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Board for review and shall be approved by the Board before construction
of the facility. Users shall give immediate notification to the Board upon
discharging wastes in violation of this Part 2 due to breakdown of
pretreatment equipment, accidents caused by human effort or negligence
or mechanical failure or other causes, such as acts of nature, to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the Board to minimize any resulting
interference or pass-through. In addition to the notice provided above,
§ 222-37 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-40
214:346
users shall notify the Board, in writing, within five (5) days of the date of
occurrence by a detailed statement describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such
notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage
to the sewer system, treatment facility or treatment process or for any fines
imposed on the owners and/or the Joint Sewage Board on account thereof
under Section 309 of the Act or any liability for civil penalties assessed
against the user under § 222-54 of this Part 2.
§ 222-41. Confidential information.
Information and data concerning a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board at the time the information
is submitted that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related
to these rules and regulations, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Information accepted by the
Board as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency
or the general public by the Board until and unless a ten-day notification is
given to the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
§ 222-42. Inspections.
A. The Joint Sewage Board, its authorized representatives and
representatives of the EPA and DEC, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties at all
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling,
flow measurement and testing to ascertain a user's compliance with
this Part 2, with applicable provisions of federal, state and local law
governing use of the joint sewage treatment plant and with the
provisions of the rules and regulations of the Board. The Board shall
have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling or flow measurement. The Board shall
additionally have access to and may copy any records the user is
required to maintain under this Part 2 or under the rules and
regulations of the Board. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, inspecting personnel will
§ 222-40 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-42
214:347
§ 222-43. Special agreements.
No statement in this Part 2 shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement between the Joint Sewage Board and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual constituents or characteristics may
be accepted by the Board for treatment subject to the proper payment by
the industrial user. The Board shall not accept any discharge prohibited by
state or federal law.
§ 222-44. Notification to industrial users.
The Joint Sewage Board shall, from time to time, notify each industrial
user of pretreatment standards and of other applicable requirements under
§§ 204(b) and 405 of the Clean Water Act52 and Subtitles C and D of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).53
§ 222-45. Public notification.
The Board shall at least annually provide public notification, in the largest
daily newspaper circulated in Broome County, of all industrial users which,
in the previous twelve (12) months, were significantly violating applicable
pretreatment standards or other requirements. The notification shall also
summarize the enforcement action taken by the Joint Sewage Board. For the
purposes of this section, a "significant violation" shall be a violation which:
be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their
specific responsibilities.
B. Joint Sewage Board representatives, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private premises through
which the owners hold an easement for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater treatment system lying within the easement.
All entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private
premises involved.
C. During the performance on private premises of inspections, sampling or
other similar operations referred to in Subsections A and B above,
Board personnel shall observe all applicable safety rules established by
the owner or occupant of the premises. The owner and/or occupant
shall be held harmless for personal injury or death of Board personnel
and the loss of or damage to Joint Sewage Board supplies or equipment
arising from inspection and sampling operations, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain
safe conditions.
52.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
§ 222-42 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-45
214:348
§ 222-46. Analytical procedures.
All measurements, tests and analysis of the constituents and characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Part 2 shall be
determined in accordance with the latest editions of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and the Methods for Chemical
Analysis of Water and Waste and the latest version of 40 CFR Part 136,
Analysis of Pollutants, or similar methods approved by the Board.
A. Remains uncorrected forty-five (45) days after notification or
noncompliance;
B. Is a part of a pattern of noncompliance over a twelve-month period;
C. Involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
D. Resulted in the Board exercising its emergency authority to halt or
prevent any discharge which presents an imminent danger to persons
or property.
§ 222-45 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-46
214:349

ARTICLE VIII
Industrial Wastewater Surcharge
§ 222-47. Imposition of surcharge.
In addition to any other fees, charges, sewer rents or sanitary district
taxes provided by law, the owner or tenant of any parcel of real property
connected with the sewer system by any means may be required to pay an
industrial wastewater surcharge for use of the wastewater treatment works
for discharging industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for admission
into the system other than normal sewage. The industrial wastewater
surcharge shall consist of but not be limited to the following charges:
§ 222-48. Basis for determination.
The industrial wastewater surcharge shall be based upon the measured or
estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge of
the user, which may include but are not limited to flow rate, biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS), total phosphorous
(TP), total nitrogen (TKN) and total organic carbon (TOC). The wastewater
constituents and characteristics used to calculate the industrial waste
surcharge will be those determined by the Board. Any data provided by the
user may be used in addition to the data obtained by the Board.
§ 222-49. Computation of industrial wastewater surcharge.
A. Debt service charges.
B. Operation and maintenance charges.
A. The industrial wastewater surcharge shall be computed by the Manager
using the following surcharge formulas and shall apply to all industrial
users, as defined in § 222-10.
Surcharge = 8.34 Q (Cx - Cx STP) $x + ...
Where:
Q = Flow of user's discharge in millions of gallons per day.
Cx = Concentration of parameter x in user's discharge in
parts per million.
Cx STP = Sewage treatment plant design concentration of
parameter x in parts per million.
$x = Unit charge for treatment of parameter x in dollars per
pound.
B. The unit charge for treatment of any parameter subject to surcharge
will be based on the sum of charges attributable to the capital cost of
the treatment facilities and the operation and maintenance budget for
that given year. "Capital cost" is defined as the total annual debt service
cost for the sewage treatment plant. The "operation and maintenance
§ 222-47 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-49
214:351
§ 222-50. Volume determination.
In applying the surcharge formula, the Board may represent flow
discharged into the sewer system by:
§ 222-51. Determination of pollutant concentration.
The pollutant concentration of any wastewater shall be determined from the
analysis of representative samples taken prior to discharge into the sewers,
taken by representatives of the Board at sampling stations as described in
§ 222-37 of this Part 2, at any period or time or of such duration and in
such a manner as the Board may elect or at any place or manner mutually
agreed upon between the user and the Board. The intent of any sampling
procedure is to establish the pollutant concentration in the wastewater
cost" is defined as the net annual cost of operating and maintaining the
sewage treatment plant after crediting all operating cost grants and
aid.
C. The unit charge for any parameter will include only that portion of the
capital and operation and maintenance costs which are directly
attributable to the treatment of that parameter. This unit charge will be
determined by the Board on an annual basis reflecting current debt
retirement and operation and maintenance costs.
D. The unit charge ($x) for any parameter (x) subject to surcharge will be
determined as follows:
$x = [Pcx (Capital Cost) + Pox (Operation and Maintenance
Cost)] ÷ 365 ÷ Lx
Where:
Pcx = Percentage of annual capital cost debt retirement
attributable to treatment of parameter x.
Pox = Percentage of annual operation and maintenance cost
attributable to treatment of parameter x.
Lx = Average sewage treatment plant influent loading of
parameter x in pounds per day.
A. The volume of wastewater discharged into the sewer system as
determined by the measurements and samples taken at a monitoring
facility installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer
system;
B. The amount of water supplied to the premises as shown on the water
meter, or water records if the premises are metered. Allowances for
water not discharged to the sewer system will be made at the discretion
of the Board; or
C. A figure determined by the Board by any combination of the foregoing
or by any other equitable method.
§ 222-49 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-51
214:352
discharge during an average or typical working day. This concentration may
be derived according to the best judgment of the Board. The analysis of
samples taken shall be performed in a laboratory of the treatment plant or
a laboratory designated by the Board. The industrial waste surcharge and/
or the acceptability of the wastes shall be determined from said analysis.
All surcharges shall be based on the analysis of the wastes from any plant
or premises related to total volume of wastes determined under § 222-50
above. The average value of the concentration of pollutants measured
during a calendar year shall be used in calculating the industrial waste
surcharge. Whenever the wastes discharged from a premises to a public
sewer might be expected to show appreciable periodic variation during the
year due to manufacturing process or production variation due to seasonal
changes, the Board may average the results of the two (2) or more series of
analysis taken to reflect these variations and thereby determine an average
pollutant concentration.
§ 222-52. Pollutant concentration disputed by a user.
In the event that a user disputes the pollutant concentration of his or her
wastewater discharge determined in accordance with § 222-51 above, a
program of resampling and flow measurement with subsequent analytical
determination may be instituted as follows:
§ 222-53. Payment of industrial waste surcharge.
Payment of the industrial waste surcharge within the time period allotted
by the Joint Sewage Board shall be made to the Board by the industrial
A. The user must submit a request for resampling of the wastes and flow
measurement to the Board.
B. An independent consultant or agency of recognized professional
standing in the employ of the user must confer with representatives of
the Board in order that an agreement may be reached as to the various
factors which must be considered on a new sampling and flow
measurement program.
C. The consultant or agency of recognized professional standing employed
by the user shall conduct a resampling and reanalysis program, under
the direction of the Board, for at least two (2) twenty-four-hour periods.
D. The results of the resampling and the reanalysis shall be considered to
be the current analysis of the wastes discharged to the sewer system
and shall be used for determining the acceptability of the sampling and
analysis results in question. The new results may be used in place of the
results in question or in addition to other data collected by the Board
for determining the industrial waste surcharge and/or compliance with
the Board's rules and regulations.
E. All costs of sampling, analysis and flow measurements are to be paid by
the user.
§ 222-51 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-53
214:353
user after receiving the industrial wastewater surcharge bill unless other
arrangements for payment have been made and approved by the Board.
A user's failure to submit timely payment of any industrial wastewater
surcharge will subject the user to the penalties and fines prescribed under
Article IX of this Part 2.
§ 222-53 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-53
214:354
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 222-54. Civil penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform any
duty imposed by this Part 2 or the rules and regulations of the Joint Sewage
Board or any order or determination of the Board promulgated under this
Part 2 or the terms of any permit issued thereunder shall be liable to the
owners for a civil penalty not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each violation, to be assessed
after a hearing held in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article
V of this Part 2. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation and
in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall
be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be recovered
in an action brought by the Board's attorney in the name of the owners in
any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or
compromised by the Board only with the consent of the owners.
§ 222-55. Judicial enforcement.
In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in § 222-54 above,
the Joint Sewage Board shall have the power, following a hearing held
in conformance with the procedures set forth in § 222-15, to issue an
order suspending, revoking or modifying the violator's permit, enjoining the
violator from continuing the violation. Any such order of the Board shall be
enforceable in an action brought by the Board's attorney in the name of the
owners in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 222-56. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Part 2 or the rules
and regulations of the Board or any final determination or order of the
Board made in accordance with Article V shall, in addition, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than three hundred dollars ($300.) or not more than one thousand
dollars ($1000.) or by imprisonment of not more than six months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct
offense, and in the case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance
thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 222-57. Civil liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 or the rules and
regulations of the Board shall, in addition, be liable to the owners for
any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the owners by reason of such
violation and any expense incurred in correcting the violation.
§ 222-54 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-58
214:355
§ 222-58. Injunction.
The Board's attorney, at the request of the Joint Sewage Board, shall have
the right to seek equitable relief in the name of the owners to restrain the
violation of or to compel compliance with this Part 2, with the rules and
regulations of the Board or with any determination issued thereunder by the
Board.
§ 222-59. Summary abatement.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the Board
finds, after investigation, that any user is causing, engaging in or
maintaining a condition or activity which, in its judgment, presents an
imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare or to the
environment or is likely to result in irreversible or irreparable damage to
the public sewer system and it therefore appears to be prejudicial to the
public interest to delay action until notice and an opportunity for a hearing
can be provided, the Board may, without prior hearing, order such user
by notice, in writing wherever practicable or in such other form as in the
Board's judgment will reasonably notify such person whose practices are
intended to be proscribed, to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition
or activity, and thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate
or alleviate such condition or activity. In the event of a user's failure to
comply voluntarily with such emergency order or where the giving of notice
is impracticable, the Board may take all appropriate action to abate the
violating condition. As promptly as possible thereafter, not to exceed fifteen
(15) days, the Board shall provide the affected user an opportunity to be
heard in accordance with the provisions of §§ 222-14 and 222-15 of this Part
2.
§ 222-58 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-59
214:356
Part 3
[ 5-21-1985 As L.L.S Newo.e r1 0U-s1e9 8R5e g(Culha.t 1io4n Os f The 1973 Code)]
ARTICLE X
Title; Definitions
§ 222-60. Short title.
This Part 3 shall be known as the "Village of Johnson City Sewer Use Law."
§ 222-61. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein, technical terms shall be as defined in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation. Whenever used in this Part 3, unless otherwise expressly
stated or required by subject matter or context, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD or JOINT SEWAGE BOARD — The Binghamton-Johnson City
Joint Sewage Board, established under the agreement between the
City of Binghamton and the Village of Johnson City for the operation
of a joint wastewater treatment facility. The term includes any duly
authorized designee, agent or representative of the Board.
BOD5 (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at two degrees Celsius
(2º C.), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer which begins five (5) feet [one and five-tenths (1.5)
meters] outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive storm and surface
water as well as wastewater.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD5 or
suspended solids each in excess of ten (10) milligrams per liter.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DIRECTOR OF SERVICES or DIRECTOR — The Director of Services of
the Village of Johnson City, New York, and his or her duly authorized
deputies, agents and representatives.
§ 222-60 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-61
214:357
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FEDERAL ACT or ACT — The 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments, Public Law 92-500, and the 1977 Clean Water Act, Public
Law 95-217, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines,
limitations and standards promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain
period of time.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation,
cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, processing,
storage and sale of food products and produce.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any sanitary waste from holding tanks such
as marine vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and
vacuum pump tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential user of the village public
sewer system, which user is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as
amended and supplemented under one (1) of the following divisions:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any discarded matter including any liquid,
gaseous or solid substance, or a combination thereof, resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from
development or recovery of natural resources. The term shall not
include garbage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued
by the Board, authorizing the permittee to deposit or discharge
industrial wastewater into the village public sewer system.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage
collection system (including sewer service connections) from the
ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connection,
or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from,
inflow.[Added 8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
(1) Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B - Mining.
(3) Division D - Manufacturing.
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electrical, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I - Services.
§ 222-61 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-61
214:358
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I) — The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow, without distinguishing the source.[Added
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFLOW — Water, other than sewage, that enters a sewage collection
system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof
leaders, cellar drains, sump pumps, missing or defective cleanout caps,
swimming pools, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
between stormwater sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. [Added
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
INFLUENT — Wastewater, raw or partly treated, flowing into any
sewage treatment device or sewage treatment facilities.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the treatment plant
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal. The
term includes any action which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the Joint Sewage Board's SPDES permit or which
results in the prevention of sewage sludge reuse, reclamation or
disposal by the treatment plant in accordance with Section 405 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act or any more stringent state criteria
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the treatment
plant.
JOINT SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — The
Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant. The term
includes all devices or systems used in the storage, treatment, cycling
or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature by the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes having
pollutant concentrations which do not exceed two hundred forty (240)
milligrams per liter of BOD5, three hundred (300) milligrams per liter
of total suspended solids or fifty (50) milligrams per liter of oil and
grease and which is otherwise acceptable for discharge into the
treatment plant under the terms of this Part 3. The numbers and values
of characteristics are subject to revision by the Joint Sewage Board
when, in the opinion of the Board, a revision is necessary in order to
maintain the physical integrity of the treatment plant or to maintain the
treatment plant's capability of providing treatment in compliance with
federal, state and local standards.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, association,
private or public corporation, political subdivision, governmental
agency, municipality, industry, trust, estate or any other legal entity
whatsoever.
§ 222-61 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-61
214:359
POLLUTANTS — As may be defined now or hereafter by appropriate
local, state or federal authorities or by the Board, substances which
may be present in wastewater, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, the
amount of which may contain soluble or insoluble solids of organic or
inorganic nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of
natural waters, contribute solids, contain oil, grease or floating solids
which may cause unsightly appearance on the surface of such waters
or contain materials detrimental to aquatic life.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land, improvements
or appurtenances or buildings, grounds, etc.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer which is not owned or controlled by a
public agency.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned or controlled by a
governmental agency. This term includes any devices or systems used
by the governmental agency in the storage, transmission, treatment or
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes.
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD — The Rules and
Regulations Relating to the Use of the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint
Sewage Treatment Plant, promulgated by the Binghamton-Johnson City
Joint Sewage Board.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewater from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes, the liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter, flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution.
SEWAGE — The water-carried domestic human or animal waste,
together with industrial and commercial waste, from residences,
buildings, industrial, and commercial establishments or other places.
Neither infiltration or inflow are components of "sewage."[Amended
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater; the term includes
sanitary sewers and combined sewers.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle having any dimension
greater than one-half (1/2) inch.
SPDES PERMIT — A wastewater discharge permit issued by the DEC
under the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
STORM SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only stormwaters, surface
runoff, street wash waters and/or drainage, exclusive of sanitary
wastes.
§ 222-61 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-61
214:360
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter in water or
wastewater, as determined by standard methods.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient amounts
may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage
treatment plant, pose a hazard to sewer maintenance personnel or
constitute a hazard to animal life or inhibit aquatic life. This definition
includes but is not limited to EPA priority pollutants.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such
water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the village public sewer system.
VILLAGE — The Village of Johnson City, New York.
VILLAGE PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — All village-owned pipelines or
conduits, pumping stations and force mains and all other constructions,
devices and appliances appurtenant thereto used for conveying
wastewater to a point of ultimate disposal.
WASTEWATER — The composite of all flow constituents conveyed in
a sewer including sewage and infiltration and inflow.[Amended
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological
parameters, including volume, flow rate and such other parameters
that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality and/or
strength of wastewater.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 222-61 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-61
214:361

ARTICLE XI
General Provisions
§ 222-62. Purpose.
The purposes of this Part 3 are as follows:
A. To control discharges into the Village of Johnson City public sewer
system or tributaries thereto, including the Binghamton-Johnson City
Joint Sewage Treatment Plant.
B. To prohibit the discharge of:
(1) Excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow into the Village of
Johnson City public sewer system.
(2) Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which may in any way:
(a) Create a poisonous, hazardous, explosive, flammable or toxic
condition in the village public sewer system or otherwise
impair the strength and/or durability of the system or the
structures appurtenant to the system (including the
Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant);
(b) Interfere with the normal treatment processes, including
proper disposal of sludge;
(c) Pass through the joint sewage treatment plant into the
receiving waters inadequately treated; or
(d) Contain substances in such concentrations as may exceed
established discharge limits.
C. To prohibit and/or regulate the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes
or other wastes which require greater expenditures for treatment than
those required for equal volumes of normal sewage; to surcharge users
for permitted contributions requiring treatment costs greater than
normal sewage charges.
D. To provide the authority for the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage
Board to exercise regulatory control over users discharging industrial
wastes into the village public sewer system.
E. To provide cooperation with the Broome County Department of Health,
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, New York
State Department of Health, United States Environmental Protection
Agency and any other agencies which have requirements or jurisdiction
for the protection of the physical, chemical and biological quality of
watercourses within or bounding the village.
F. To protect the public health and to prevent nuisances.
§ 222-62 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-62
214:363
§ 222-63. Construal of provisions in relation to Health Department
requirements.
Nothing contained in this Part 3 shall be construed to interfere with or
modify any requirements of design, inspection and approval which are
imposed by the New York State Department of Health or the Broome County
Health Department.
§ 222-64. Compliance with plumbing code.
Nothing contained in this Part 3 shall be deemed to relieve any person of
the duty and responsibility of complying with the village plumbing code.54
§ 222-65. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Services shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Part 3.
§ 222-66. Fees and charges.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all fees and charges payable under the
provisions of this Part 3 shall be paid to the village in accordance with the
Village Sewer Rent Law.55 Such fees and charges are due and payable upon
the receipt of notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent
and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges and collection as
provided for in the Village Sewer Rent Law.
§ 222-67. Inspections.
G. To enforce promulgated final standards and/or procedures set by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
A. The Director of Services, the Joint Sewage Board and other authorized
representatives of the village and representatives of the EPA and the
DEC bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties at all reasonable times for the purpose of
inspection, observation, sampling, flow measurement and testing to
ascertain a user's compliance with applicable provisions of federal,
state and local law governing use of the village public sewer system and
with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the Board. Such
representatives shall have the right to set up on the user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or flow
measurement. Such representatives shall additionally have access to
and may copy any records the user is required to maintain under
applicable law or the rules and regulations of the Board. Where a user
has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Plumbing.
55.Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 222-62 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-67
214:364
§ 222-68. Vandalism; tampering with measuring devices; penalties
for offenses.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the village public sewer
system. No person shall tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
measuring device or mechanism installed pursuant to any requirement
under this Part 3. Any person violating this provision shall be be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.) or imprisonment not exceeding one hundred and fifty days,
or to both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 222-69. False statements.
No person shall knowingly make any false statement in any application,
report or other document required to be filed pursuant to any provision of
this Part 3.
shall make necessary arrangements so that upon presentation of
suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities. Inspections will be accomplished during hours of
operations or at periods of sewer use with or without notice to the user.
B. The Director of Services, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all private premises through which the
village holds an easement for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
village's public sewer system lying within the easement. All entry and
subsequent work on the easement shall be done in accordance with the
terms of the easement pertaining to the private premises involved.
C. During the performance on private premises of inspections, sampling or
other similar operations referred to in Subsections A and B above, the
Director of Services shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises as established by the owner or occupant of the premises.
§ 222-67 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-69
214:365

ARTICLE XII
Use of Public Sewers
§ 222-70. Disposal of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be placed
or deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property
within the village or in any other area under the jurisdiction of the village
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 222-71. Discharge into natural watercourse.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any sewage or other polluted waters
into any natural watercourse within the village or within any area under
jurisdiction of the village except where such discharge is in accordance with
requirements of regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater
discharges into the watercourse.
§ 222-72. Connection to sewer system required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the village and
abutting on any street or public right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer within one hundred
(100) feet [thirty and five-tenths (30.5) meters] of the property line is hereby
required to install, at his or her expense, suitable toilet facilities therein
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sanitary sewer line,
in accordance with the provisions of this Part 3 and with any applicable
requirements of the village plumbing code.56
§ 222-73. Connection for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, with the exception that when one (1) building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available nor can be
constructed to the rear building, the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building. The whole shall be considered as one
(1) building sewer. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found by the Director of Services to meet all
other requirements of this Part 3.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Plumbing.
§ 222-70 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-73
214:367

ARTICLE XIII
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 222-74. Sewer permit required; fee. [Amended 2-17-1987 by L.L.
No. 3-1987]
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into or use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written sewer permit in accordance with the regulations as
established by the village, including the plumbing code57 of the village, as
amended. The fee for said sewer permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.).
§ 222-75. New connections.
No new connections shall be made to the sewer system of the village
without a written permit issued by the Director of Services. Applications
shall be made on a form supplied by the Village Clerk. No connection from
a residential structure shall be granted without the approval of the Director
of Services. No connection from any building or structure discharging
other than sanitary waste shall be granted without the approval of the
Director of Services and the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Board.
All connections to a sewer shall be made under the direction of and be
subject to the approval of the Director of Services and shall conform in all
respects with applicable requirements of the village plumbing code.58
§ 222-76. Cost of connections.
All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of any
building to the sewer system shall be borne by the property owner. The
property owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that
may directly be occasioned by the installation of a connection to the sewer
system.
§ 222-77. Excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Services. All
necessary permits for the opening of village and county streets shall be
obtained from the Director prior to the issuance of any building sewer
permit.
§ 222-78. Service and repair of building sewers.
Building sewers shall be serviced and repaired by the owner of the premises
being served to a point within one (1) foot of the pavement edge. Service
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Plumbing.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Plumbing.
§ 222-74 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-78
214:369
and repair of building sewers within the paved areas of public rights-of-way
shall be made by the village.
§ 222-78 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-78
214:370
ARTICLE XIV
Private Disposal Systems
§ 222-79. When permitted.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article XII, § 222-72, a building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system in accordance with the subsequent provisions of
this Article XIV and in accordance with applicable requirements of the
New York State Department of Health and the Broome County Health
Department.
§ 222-80. Type of connection.
Before the commencement of the construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall obtain from the Director of Services a written
permit allowing such construction, which permit shall be given upon
application in such form and content as may be required by the Director
and the Department of Health. The type, location and layout of the private
sewage disposal system shall comply with the specifications established by
the Director and the Department of Health. The Director shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of the construction, and the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Director when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions thereof are covered.
§ 222-81. Conversion to sanitary sewers.
The private sewage disposal facilities shall be operated and maintained
in a sanitary manner at all times. When a public sanitary sewer becomes
available under the provisions of Article XII, § 222-72, the building sewer
shall be connected to said sanitary sewer within sixty (60) days, and the
private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material satisfactory to the Director of Services.
§ 222-79 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-81
214:371

ARTICLE XV
Restrictions and Limitations on Use of Public Sewers
§ 222-82. Stormwater and other unpolluted water prohibited.
§ 222-83. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
swimming pool water, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary or combined sewer, unless specifically authorized by the
Director of Services. All stormwater, surface water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water shall be discharged to storm sewers or to any
natural watercourse approved by the Director. All existing connections
to a sanitary or combined sewer of any stormwater, swimming pool
water, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters shall be removed
from the sewer within sixty (60) days from the service of a written
notice by the Director to disconnect from the sewer.
B. If the owner of any property receiving a notice to disconnect from the
sanitary or combined sewer, pursuant to § 222-82A hereof, does not
disconnect within sixty (60) days from the receipt of such notice, the
village shall have the right and power and shall cause the same to be
removed at the expense of the property owner and shall charge the
total expense of such disconnection to the property so affected. The
total expense incurred by the village to perform such work shall be paid
by a special assessment upon the real estate so affected, which expense
shall be a lien thereon, and which lien shall be superior and have
priority to any mortgage, judgment or other lien of any nature affecting
said premises. The village shall also have the power to collect, by a civil
action brought in the name of the village, any expense it may incur for
making such removal; but any civil action so brought shall not impair or
affect the lien created under this Part 3 for such expense or be held to
constitute a bar to any proceedings for the sale of lands under which
said lien exists.
A. No person shall discharge directly or indirectly in the village public
sewer system or into any private sewer emptying into the village public
sewer system any substances, materials, waters or wastes in such
quantities or concentrations which cause or are capable of causing,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, interference with
the operation or performance of the village public sewer system or the
joint sewage treatment plant or which pass through the joint sewage
treatment plant inadequately treated. These general prohibitions and
the specific prohibitions of Subsection B of this section apply to all
users of the village public sewer system, whether or not the user is
subject to any other local, state or federal requirements governing use
of the village public sewer system.
§ 222-82 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-83
214:373
B. No person shall discharge the following into the village public sewer
system:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, to create a fire or explosion hazard in or be
injurious in any other way to the village public sewer system or the
joint sewage treatment plant. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five
percent (5%), nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials
include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil,
benzene and any other substances which the Director of Services,
the Joint Sewage Board the DEC or the EPA has notified the user
constitute a fire or explosion hazard to the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the treatment
plant, such as but not limited to grease, shredded garbage with
particles greater than one-half (1/2)inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepapers, wood,
plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing
of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes,
snow, ice, any other solid objects, materials, refuse and debris not
normally contained in sanitary waste.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than six point zero (6.0) or higher
than ten point zero (10.0) or wastewater having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and/or personnel of the village's treatment works.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, to create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters of the treatment plant or to exceed the limitation
set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant
shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant
to Section 307(a) of the Federal Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which will cause the village to violate any State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit issued to
the village; or to violate the receiving water quality standards.
§ 222-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-83
214:374
§ 222-84. Limitation on point of discharge.
No person shall discharge substances directly into a manhole or other
opening in a public sewer other than through an approved building sewer.
§ 222-85. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Director of Services, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excessive amounts, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private residences. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Director of Services and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall
be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes of temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
watertight and equipped with removable covers which, when mounted in
place, shall be gastight and watertight.
§ 222-86. Dilution prohibited.
No discharger into the village sewer system shall augment his or her use
of process water or otherwise intentionally dilute his or her discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with this Part 3.
(7) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process.
(8) Any wastewater having a temperature at the point of introduction
into the village public sewer system in excess of one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150º F.) [sixty-five and five-tenths degrees
Celsius (65.5º C.)] or in such quantities that cause the temperature
of the wastewater at the joint sewage treatment plant to exceed
one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104º F.) [forty degrees
Celsius (40º C.)].
(9) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the treatment plant.
(10) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(11) Any radioactive wastes.
(12) Any holding tank wastes.
(13) Any substance, materials, waters or wastes of such nature or in
such quantities or concentrations as are prohibited by the rules and
regulations of the Joint Sewage Board.
§ 222-83 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-86
214:375

ARTICLE XVI
Industrial Wastewater Discharges
§ 222-87. Authority of Joint Sewage Board.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the admission into the
village public sewers of any industrial wastes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Sewage Board. The Board is hereby
granted authority, concurrent with that of the village, to enforce against
any user within the village all requirements necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Board. Nothing contained herein, however, shall be construed as
precluding the village from seeking against any user such remedial
action as it deems appropriate for correcting any violation of its local
laws, ordinances or regulations governing use of the village public
sewer system.
B. In exercising its authority over users discharging industrial wastes into
the village public sewer system, the Board may:
(1) Require pretreatment of the user's wastewater to a condition
acceptable for discharge to the public sewer.
(2) Require the user to apply for and obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit as a means of controlling the quantities and rates
of discharge.
(3) Require payment by the user to cover any added cost of handling
and treating the wastewater not covered by existing fees or
charges.
(4) Require the development of compliance schedules by the user to
meet any applicable requirements prescribed by the Board's rules
and regulations.
(5) Require the user to submit such reports and supplemental
information which the Board deems necessary to assure
compliance with any applicable requirements prescribed by the
Board's rules and regulations.
(6) Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring necessary to
ascertain the user's compliance with any applicable requirements
prescribed by the Board's rules and regulations.
(7) Investigate or make inquiry in a manner to be determined by it as
to any condition within the village affecting the operation of the
joint sewage treatment plant and as to any alleged act or omission
resulting in a user's failure to comply with the Board's rules and
regulations.
(8) Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user as specified in
§ 222-92 of this Part 3.59
§ 222-87 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-87
214:377
§ 222-88. Prohibited acts.
§ 222-89. Industrial waste surcharge.
In addition to any other fees, charges, sewer rents or sanitary district
taxes provided by law, industrial users shall pay to the Joint Sewage Board
an industrial waste surcharge for the privilege of using the joint sewage
treatment plant for treating industrial wastes or other special wastes
accepted for discharge into the village public sewer system. The industrial
waste surcharge shall be computed and collected by the Board in
accordance with its rules and regulations.
§ 222-90. Cooperation of village officials.
Village officers and employees shall cooperate fully with the Board in the
Board's enforcement and administration of its rules and regulations within
the village.
(9) Reject the user's wastewater, where the Board determines that the
wastewater contains substances or possesses characteristics which
have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment plant and its
appurtenant structures and facilities or the processes, equipment
or receiving waters of the treatment plant or which constitute a
public nuisance or hazard.
(10) Take such other measures as it deems necessary and proper to
ensure compliance with this Part 3, with applicable state and
federal law and with the rules and regulations of the Board.
A. No user discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater into the
village public sewer system shall violate any of the provisions of or fail
to perform any duty imposed by the rules and regulations of the Board
or any order or determination of the Board promulgated thereunder or
the terms and conditions of any permit issued by the Board.
B. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is under the jurisdiction, ownership
or control of the Joint Sewage Board.
C. No person shall tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
measuring device or mechanism installed pursuant to any requirement
under the rules and regulations of the Joint Sewage Board.
D. No person shall knowingly make any false statement in any application,
report or other document required to be filed pursuant to any provision
of the rules and regulations of the Joint Sewage Board.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 222-87 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-90
214:378
ARTICLE XVII
Enforcement; Penalties for Offenses
§ 222-91. Enforcement by Director of Services; penalties for
offenses.
A. Whenever it shall appear to the Director of Services, after investigation,
that any person has violated any provision of this Part 3 (other than a
provision of § 222-88), the Director shall give written notice to the
alleged violator or violators setting forth the nature of the violation and
directing that the matters complained of be corrected within such
reasonable time limit as may be set by the Director of Services. Any
such notice shall be served on the violator by personal service or by
registered or certified mail sent to the last address of the violator
known to the Director. Where the address is unknown, service may be
made upon the owner of record of the property involved. If satisfactory
action is not taken within the time allotted by the notice, the violator
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Subsection B
below, in addition to any village code enforcement procedures
otherwise authorized by law.
B. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Part 3 (other than
a provision of § 222-88) or any order of the Director of Services issued
pursuant to Subsection A above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and in the case of
a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 3 shall, in
addition, be liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned to the village by reason of such violations and any expense
incurred in correcting the violation.
D. The Village Attorney, on his or her own initiative or at the request of the
Director of Services, shall have the right to seek equitable relief in the
name of the village to restrain the violation of or to compel compliance
with this Part 3 or any order or determination issued thereunder by the
Director.
E. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the
Director of Services finds, after investigation, that any user is causing,
engaging in or maintaining a condition or activity which in his or her
judgment presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or
welfare or to the environment or is likely to result in irreversible or
irreparable damage to the public sewer system and it therefore appears
to be prejudicial to the public interest to delay action until notice and an
opportunity for a hearing can be provided, the Director may, without
prior hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever
practicable or in such other form as in his or her judgment will
§ 222-91 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-91
214:379
§ 222-92. Enforcement by Joint Sewage Board; penalties for
offenses.
reasonably notify such person whose practices are intended to be
proscribed, to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity,
and thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate or
alleviate such condition or activity. In the event of a user's failure to
comply voluntarily with such emergency order or where the giving of
notice is impracticable, the Director may take all appropriate action
to abate the violating condition, including disconnecting the user's
premises from the village public sewer system. As promptly as possible
thereafter, not to exceed fifteen (15) days, the Director shall provide the
user with the written notice required by Subsection A of this section.
A. Any person who violates any provision of § 222-88 of this Part 3 shall be
liable to the Board for a civil penalty of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each
violation, to be assessed by the Board after a hearing or opportunity to
be heard in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Board's
rules and regulations. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct
violation, and in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Such penalty may be recovered in an action brought by the Board's
attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in Subsection A
above, the Board is hereby empowered, following a hearing or
opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of its rules
and regulations, to issue an order in the name of the Board and of the
village enjoining the violator from continuing the violation. Any such
order of the Board shall be enforceable in an action brought by the
Board's attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Any civil penalty or final order issued by the Board pursuant to
Subsection B may be reviewed in a proceeding brought pursuant to
Article 78 of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules. Application for
such review must be made within thirty (30) days after service in
person or by mail of a copy of the determination or order upon the
attorney of record for the applicant or upon the applicant in person if
not represented by an attorney.
D. Any person who willfully violates any provision of § 222-88 above shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or by imprisonment for a term
of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and in the case of
a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 222-91 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 222-92
214:380
E. Any person violating any provision of § 222-88 above shall, in addition,
be liable to the Joint Sewage Board for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned to the Board by reason of such violation and any expense
incurred in correcting the violation.
F. The Board's attorney, or the Village Attorney at the request of the Joint
Sewage Board, shall have the right to seek equitable relief in the name
of the village to restrain the violation of or to compel compliance with
any provision of § 222-88 of this Part 3.
G. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the
Board finds after investigation that any user within the village is
causing, engaging in or maintaining a condition or activity which, in its
judgment, presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or
welfare or to the environment or is likely to result in irrevocable or
irreparable damage to the joint sewage treatment plant and it therefore
appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to delay action until
notice and an opportunity for a hearing can be provided, the Board may,
without prior hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever
practicable or in such other form as in the Board's judgment will
reasonably notify such person whose practices are intended to be
proscribed, to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity,
and thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate or
alleviate such condition or activity. In the event of a user's failure to
comply voluntarily with such emergency order or where the giving of a
notice is impracticable, the Board may take all appropriate action to
abate the violating condition, including disconnecting the user's
premises from the village public sewer system. As promptly as possible
thereafter, not to exceed fifteen (15) days, the Board shall provide the
user an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of its
rules and regulations.
§ 222-92 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 222-92
214:381
Chapter 223
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 138.
§ 223-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Law Regulating the Movement of
Certain Convicted Sex Offenders in Certain Sections of the Village of
Johnson City."
§ 223-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is hereby adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority
conferred by the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law, which enables
local governments to adopt local laws relating to their property, affairs, or
government, so long as the local laws are not inconsistent with the New
York State Constitution or any general law of New York State. The New
York State Municipal Home Rule Law also authorizes local governments to
adopt local laws regulating the protection, order, conduct, safety, health
and welfare of the persons within the local municipality. This chapter is
adopted in recognition of the recently enacted Chapter 544 of the Laws
of 2005 of the State of New York, which prohibits certain sex offenders
placed on conditional release or parole or probation from entering upon
school grounds or other facilities where children are cared for. The Village
of Johnson City Board of Trustees has determined that this chapter is not
inconsistent with said Chapter 544 of the Laws of 2005.
§ 223-3. Purpose.
In order to safeguard and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
children of the Village of Johnson City, and in particular to protect the
children of the Village of Johnson City from access by convicted sex
offenders who may be present in the Village, it is hereby declared that the
movement of certain convicted sex offenders must be regulated, consistent
with recently enacted state law, particularly in the areas of school grounds
and facilities where children are cared for.
§ 223-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FACILITY or INSTITUTION PRIMARILY USED FOR THE CARE OR
TREATMENT OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 — Any facility or
institution primarily used for the care or treatment of persons under the
§ 222-92 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 223-4
223:382
age of 18 while one or more of such persons under the age of 18 are
present, including, but not limited to, day-care centers licensed, certified or
otherwise sanctioned by the State of New York and/or a political subdivision
of the State of New York.
LEVEL TWO SEX OFFENDER — A person who:
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Any area in or on or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground or land contained within the real property
boundary line of a public or private elementary, parochial, intermediate,
junior high, vocational, or high school; or any area accessible to the public
located within 1,000 feet of the real property boundary line comprising
any such school or any parked automobile or other parked vehicle located
within 1,000 feet of the real property boundary line comprising any such
school. For the purposes of this chapter, an "area accessible to the public"
shall mean sidewalks, streets, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, stores and
restaurants.
§ 223-5. Prohibited conduct.
Level two sex offenders are hereby prohibited from knowingly entering into
or upon any school grounds or any facility or institution primarily used for
the care or treatment of persons under the age of 18; provided, however,
that if such level two sex offender is a registered student or participant
or an employee of such school grounds or facility or institution primarily
used for the care or treatment of persons under the age of 18, or an entity
contracting therewith, or has a family member enrolled in such school
grounds or facility or institution primarily used for the care or treatment of
persons under the age of 18, said level two sex offender may enter upon
such facility only if a written authorization of his or her probation officer
or the court and the superintendent or chief administrator of such school
grounds or facility or institution primarily used for the care or treatment
of persons under the age of 18 is obtained, and for the limited purposes
authorized by the probation officer or the court and superintendent or chief
Is convicted of an offense defined in Article 130, 235 or 263 of the New
York State Penal Law and the victim of the offense was a person under
the age of 18 at the time of the offense; or is designated as a "level two
sex offender" pursuant to Subdivision 6 of § 168-l of the New York State
Correction Law; and
A.
By reason of his or her conviction for the offense, the person:
Receives a sentence of probation or conditional discharge on or
after September 1, 2005; or
(1)
Is released on parole or a conditional release pursuant to
Subdivision 1 or 2 of Subdivision 14 of § 259-c of the New York
State Executive Law on or after September 1, 2005; or
(2)
Is conditionally released pursuant to § 70.40 of the New York State
Penal Law on or after September 1, 2005.
(3)
B.
§ 223-4 SEX OFFENDERS § 223-5
223:383
officer of such school grounds or facility. In addition to the foregoing, such
level two sex offender may also lawfully enter into or upon a school grounds
or facility or institution primarily used for the care or treatment of persons
under the age of 18 if he or she: a) has a medical emergency requiring
immediate attention at a health care provider; or b) has lawful business at a
federal, state or local court or governmental agency; or c) is traveling on an
interstate roadway within the proximity of a school grounds or a facility or
institution primarily used for the care or treatment of persons under the age
of 18. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting any lawful
condition of supervision that may be imposed on a sentenced level two sex
offender.
§ 223-6. Penalties for offenses.
A violation under this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty
and/or fine as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
of this Code of the Village of Johnson City, for each offense.
§ 223-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the New York State Secretary of State.
Chapter 225
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 225-1. Legislative findings and considerations.
The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City hereby finds and declares
that abandoned shopping carts pose a serious problem for its residents
and merchants. The unabated proliferation of abandoned shopping carts is
a physical hazard and blight upon the landscape of our Village and costs
taxpayers, merchants and homeowners substantial monies to avoid and
remove. Shopping cart abandonment is harmful to the public and violates
the welfare and general good of the citizens and residents of the Village.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The act of leaving, deserting or giving up control and/
or possession of a shopping cart in a public place.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, highway, sidewalk or other publicly owned
property to which the public or a substantial number of persons have
access.
SHOPPING CART — Any device, vehicle or wheeled container of the kind
customarily provided by merchants to customers for the purpose of carrying
merchandise.
§ 223-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 225-3
223:384
§ 225-3. Shopping carts to be marked.
Every supermarket or business establishment operating within the Village,
or whose operations touch, border, concern or otherwise involve the Village
and/or its residents, that makes shopping carts available to the public shall
permanently mark said carts with the name and address of the owner.
§ 225-4. Removal of shopping carts from establishments; penalties
for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart or permit
the removal of a shopping cart from the property of the establishment or
business that makes said cart available, except that such a cart may be
removed to a parking area adjoining the property of said establishment or
business. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a shopping cart, or
his/her duly authorized agent, may remove his/her shopping cart from the
property of the establishment or business, so long as such removal does not
result in the abandonment of a shopping cart within the Village. Violation
of this section shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15 of this
Code.
§ 225-5. Redemption of carts found in public places.
Chapter 226
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
A. The Director of the Public Services, or his or her designee, is hereby
authorized to remove or cause to be removed any shopping carts found
in any public area he/she determines is abandoned and to store said
cart until it is either disposed of or redeemed.
B. Within 30 days after said removal, the Public Works Department shall
mail a notice, by first-class mail, to the owner of the cart, stating that
each cart may be redeemed by the owner at no cost within five business
days from the date of the notice or thereafter upon payment to the
Village Clerk of $30 per cart.
C. Any carts remaining unredeemed after 30 days from the date that
notice was provided under Subsection B may be destroyed or otherwise
disposed of by the Village.
§ 225-3 SEX OFFENDERS § 226-1
223:385
§ 226-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words "sign," "directional sign," and
"wall sign" shall be defined as provided in § 300-70.2. The words
"enforcement official" shall be defined as such person as may be designated
by the Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 226-2. Permits and applications.
No sign shall be erected or altered in physical structure until the permit
required by § 300-52.4 has been obtained and the information required by
said section has been submitted.
§ 226-3. Permit and license fees.
§ 226-4. Bond required.
In the event that a permit is issued by the enforcement official for the
erection or alteration of a sign, the applicant shall, for protective purposes
and at the discretion of the enforcement official, be required to file a
suitable public liability bond with the Village, approved as to its form by the
Village Attorney, to indemnify and save harmless the Village from any and
all damages, judgments, costs and expenses which such Village may incur
or suffer from or by reason of the granting of such a permit, during the
erection thereof.
§ 226-5. Disposition of fees; records of permits.
A. The permit for the erection of a sign shall be as follows:
(1) Signs with an area of 100 square feet or less: $40.
(2) Signs with an area greater than 100 square feet but less than 150
square feet: $60.
(3) Signs with an area greater than 150 square feet: $100.
B. The method of calculating areas shall be as specified in § 300-52.7A(2).
C. An annual license fee for the maintenance and continued operation of a
sign shall be $30 for an illuminated sign and $20 for nonilluminated
signs.
D. The license fees in Subsection C shall be paid annually during the
month of January, and in the event that they are not paid by April 30 of
that year, an additional penalty of $10 will be added; the fees may be
added to the owner's Village property tax bill under whose property the
sign is located and be collected as any other Village tax.
E. Any modifications of the above fee rates shall be permitted by
resolution of the Village Board.
§ 226-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 226-5
223:386
§ 226-6. Expiration of permits.
All sign permits pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
the 31st day of December next after date of issuance.
§ 226-7. Revocation of permits.
The enforcement official may at any time for a violation of this chapter or
Chapter 300, Article 52, of this Code revoke any sign permit upon notice to
the person named in the application and after a hearing at a time specified
in such notice. The determination of said enforcement official shall be final,
and he or she shall thereafter and within three days file a copy of his or her
determination of such hearing with the Village Clerk.
Chapter 230
SMOKING
A. The Village Clerk shall designate upon both the original and copy of the
sign permit application the payment of the fee required, and all fees
received by the Clerk shall be paid into the general fund of the Village.
B. All sign permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
numbered consecutively and shall contain a brief description of the sign
authorized to be erected, altered, relocated, reconstructed or
maintained; the name and address of the applicant; the street and
number where said sign shall be maintained; the amount of the permit
fee; the date of its issuance; and the expiration date thereof.
C. A duplicate of all permits issued hereunder shall be kept on file with
each application in the office of the enforcement official.
§ 226-5 SEX OFFENDERS § 226-7
223:387

ARTICLE I
Smoking Policy
[Adopted 1-2-1990]
§ 230-1. Smoking prohibited except in designated areas. [Amended
12-18-2012 by L.L. No. 13-2012]
§ 230-2. (Reserved)60
§ 230-3. Complaints.
Conflicts should be brought to the attention of the appropriate supervisory
personnel. Employees may also file a formal complaint with the Broome
County Commissioner of Health.
§ 230-4. Penalties for offenses.
Employees found smoking outside of designated smoking areas will be
considered in violation of this policy and may be subject to penalties.
A. In accordance with the New York State Clean Indoor Air Act, smoking is
prohibited indoor throughout all Village facilities and properties. The
term "facilities" includes Village-owned vehicles.
B. Smoking is permitted in certain designated outdoor areas identified by
SMOKING PERMITTED signs.
60.Editor’s Note: Former § 230-2, Designation of smoking areas, was repealed 12-18-2012 by
L.L. No. 13-2012.
§ 230-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 230-4
223:389

ARTICLE II
Parks and Recreation Areas
[Adopted 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010]
§ 230-5. Use of tobacco products prohibited.
Use of tobacco products within all publicly owned or leased swimming pools
and pool grounds, public parks, playgrounds, ball fields, spectator areas
and all other recreational areas leased or owned by the Village shall be
prohibited within the Village of Johnson City.
§ 230-6. Definitions.
“Publicly owned or leased swimming pools and pool grounds, public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, and all other recreational areas leased or owned by
the Village” shall mean any place or area within the Village upon which the
public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where children
gather for recreational activities.
§ 230-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who has been found to have violated this article shall be subject
to the following:
§ 230-8. Signage.
The Village will attach permanent signage indicating “Tobacco-Free Zone”
at all such publicly owned or leased playgrounds, athletic fields and
spectator areas, swimming pools and pool grounds, and all other public
parks and recreation areas leased or owned by the Village.
A. For an offense by any, a fine of no less than $50 and a maximum of
$1,000 per offense will be issued; or
B. At the judge’s discretion, the judge may suspend the fine in lieu of
attendance by the offender, at his or her own expense, in a smoking
cessation program recommended by the local health department
including the dangers of smoking, tobacco use and secondhand smoke.
§ 230-5 SEX OFFENDERS § 230-8
223:391
Chapter 236
SOLID WASTE
§ 230-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 230-8
223:392
ARTICLE I
Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. II of Ch. 9 of the 1973 Code]
§ 236-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food. "Garbage" shall not, however,
include those items designated by ordinance, rule or regulation as
recyclables.
RECYCLABLES — Those items designated by the county as recyclable.
RUBBISH — Solid or liquid waste material, including but not limited to,
paper and paper products; rags; cans; crockery; plastics; cartons; cloth;
leather and other inorganic waste materials that ordinarily accumulate
around a home or business. "Rubbish" shall not, however, include those
items designated as recyclables. Prohibited materials include, among other
things, flammable or explosive substances; paint or paint thinners or
solvents; pesticides; acids; oil; batteries; medical waste.
TRASH — Discarded household furniture and appliances, bedding and
mattresses, and other bulky household materials not specifically prohibited
by this chapter, too large to place in standard refuse containers. "Trash"
shall not, however, include those items designated as recyclables.
YARD WASTE — All grass clippings, garden materials, leaves and brush
trimmings.
§ 236-2. Village to provide for collection and removal. [Amended
7-16-1991 by L.L. No. 5-1991; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993;
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
A. All garbage, rubbish, recyclables, trash and yard waste, when lawfully
placed at the curb, shall be picked up and taken away either by the
Village employees charged with the collection thereof or by the
contractor hired by the Village for that purpose. No other person shall
pick up, remove or in any way take any garbage, rubbish, recyclables,
trash or yard waste so placed at the curb without written consent of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
B. It shall be prohibited for any person to transport garbage, rubbish,
recyclables, trash and yard waste from outside of the Village of Johnson
City into the Village limits, or to transport garbage, rubbish,
recyclables, trash and yard waste that are generated from one Village
property to another Village property, for purposes of collection or
deposit. [Amended 6-18-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
§ 236-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 236-2
223:393
§ 236-3. Garbage receptacles. [Amended 12-2-1974 by L.L. No.
6-1974; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
All garbage and rubbish shall be placed in watertight and weatherproof
containers which shall not exceed 32 gallons in capacity nor weigh more
than 50 pounds when full. Such containers shall be equipped with covers
which shall be securely fastened at all times.
§ 236-4. (Reserved)61
§ 236-5. Disposal. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, rubbish or trash anywhere
in the Village excepting in an incinerator or disposal device properly
constructed and operated in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any recyclables or yard waste except in a
manner dictated by the Superintendent of Public Works. Such material not
so properly disposed of shall be placed in containers for collection by the
Village as hereinbefore and hereinafter prescribed.
§ 236-6. Disposal of yard waste for collection. [Amended 4-16-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002]
All yard waste shall be placed in suitable receptacles or placed in bundles
which shall not exceed 50 pounds nor more than six feet in length. Any bag
or sack used for the disposal of yard waste shall not be tied or otherwise
fastened at the top.
§ 236-7. Placement of receptacles for collection. [Amended
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Receptacles containing garbage, rubbish, yard waste, recyclables and trash
shall be so placed for collection at the curb with the exception of those
buildings which are located on the south side of Main Street in the Village
between the west line of Willow Street and the east line of Arch Street
and the north side thereof between the west line of Avenue C and the east
line of Isabelle Place. All containers shall be removed in accordance with
§ 208-3A(2) of this Code.
§ 236-8. Use of filthy, leaky, defective receptacles prohibited.
[Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Neither garbage, rubbish, nor yard waste shall be placed in receptacles
which are in a filthy, leaky or defective condition.
C. Any violation of the aforesaid provision shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 236-4, Specifications for ash receptacles, was repealed 4-16-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002.
§ 236-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 236-9
223:394
§ 236-9. Mixing of materials. [Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
Neither garbage nor rubbish shall be placed or allowed to be together in
the same receptacle, as yard waste, trash or recyclables.
§ 236-10. Garbage to be drained and wrapped.
All garbage shall be thoroughly drained of moisture and wrapped in paper
before being deposited in a garbage receptacle.
§ 236-11. Grass, brush, rubbish and weeds; removal required.
[Amended 6-23-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
§ 236-12. Failure to remove; removal by Village. [Amended
6-23-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002;
8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
A. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the Village shall be
and is hereby required to cut, trim and remove brush, grass or weeds
upon all portions of such lot or parcel, including any brush, grass or
weeds located between the sidewalk and street boundary, or where no
sidewalk is present, between the property line and street boundary,
when the height of the grass and/or weeds reaches 10 inches as
measured from ground level and at such other time or times as may be
necessary and as the Superintendent of Public Works or designee or
Code Enforcement Officer may require. [Amended 8-16-2011 by L.L.
No. 9-2011]
B. Notwithstanding the above, the owner or occupant of any vacant lot or
parcel of land two acres or more in the Village shall be and hereby is
required to cut, trim and remove brush, grass and weeds upon such lot
or parcel when the height of the grass and/or weeds reaches 10 inches
as measured from ground level in all areas of said lot or parcel located
within 10 feet of any property line.
C. Notwithstanding the above, the owner or occupant of any vacant lot or
parcel of land under two acres located in the Village, 50% of whose
gross area is covered by trees, shall be and hereby is required to cut,
trim and remove brush, grass and weeds upon such lot or parcel when
the height of the grass and/or weeds reaches 10 inches as measured
from ground level in all areas of said lot or parcel located within 10 feet
of any property line.
D. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land located in the Village
shall be and hereby is required to remove all rubbish, garbage,
recyclables and trash upon such lot or parcel on a weekly basis and at
such other time or times as may be necessary and as the
Superintendent of Public Works or designee or Code Enforcement
Officer may require. [Amended 8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
§ 236-9 SEX OFFENDERS § 236-12
223:395
§ 236-12.1. Excessive accumulation of solid waste. [Added
4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002; amended 8-16-2011 by L.L. No.
9-2011]
Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, recyclables or yard waste,
in excess of ordinary accumulation associated with the land use thereof,
resulting from the failure of any tenant, person or property owner to comply
with any provision of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the
Department of Public Works, or from his or her failure to take advantage of
the regular collection service, shall be removed by such person or property
owner at his or her expense. Whenever the responsible person or property
owner fails to comply with a notice from any department official of the
Village to remove the same, the Village shall have the power to direct that
said accumulation be removed by the Department of Public Works or private
contractor at the person's or property owner's expense.
§ 236-12.2. Removal due to hazard. [Added 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
A. Removal by Village; costs. Whenever the owner or occupant of any lot
or parcel of land shall fail to cut, trim or remove the brush, grass or
weeds upon said land, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of
Public Works or designee or Code Enforcement Officer of the Village to
have the same cut by municipal employees or private contractors, and
the expense thereof shall be a lien upon such lot or parcel of land and
shall be charged and assessed against the same. Whenever the owner
or occupant of any lot or parcel of land shall fail to remove garbage,
rubbish, trash or recyclables from said land, it shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of Public Works or designee or Code Enforcement
Officer to have the same removed by municipal employees or private
contractors, and the expense thereof shall be a lien upon such lot or
parcel of land and shall be charged and assessed against the same.
B. Filing of statement of costs. Before such charge or assessment shall be
made, however, the Superintendent of Public Works or designee or
Code Enforcement Officer shall file with the Village Clerk a certificate
containing a detailed statement of the cost and expense incurred.
A. Whenever garbage, rubbish, trash, recyclables or yard waste is left on
the sidewalk or at the curb area in a manner or amount in violation of
this chapter and is deemed to be a health or safety hazard or nuisance,
the Superintendent of Public Works or designee or Code Enforcement
Officer shall order such to be removed immediately by the Department
of Public Works or private contractor. Prior to removal, the
accumulation will be documented by photography. [Amended
8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
B. If deemed possible, the Superintendent or Code Enforcement Officer
shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the property owner by
§ 236-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 236-12.2
223:396
§ 236-13. Additional rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall, with the approval of the Board
of Trustees, have the power and authority to formulate and promulgate
from time to time such additional rules, regulations and directions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, as he or she may deem
necessary.
§ 236-14. Fees. [Amended 2-6-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990; 5-18-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991; 4-21-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992; 6-2-1992 by L.L.
No. 6-1992; 8-18-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998; 4-16-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
telephone prior to the removal. Such attempt shall in no way delay the
removal of the hazard.
C. After removal of the hazard, a bill for all expenses incurred shall be sent
to the property owner. Any bill which is not paid within 30 days shall be
deemed delinquent, and an additional fee of 12% will be added and
collected. After April 30 of each year, all unpaid bills will be added to
the Village property taxes.
D. In addition to such billing, the Village is authorized to issue an
appearance ticket, returnable to the Village Court, for a violation of any
provision(s) of this chapter.
A. The fee for the collection of garbage, rubbish, recyclables, trash and
yard waste, as defined in § 236-1, shall be a minimum of $70 quarterly
for each dwelling and $119 quarterly for each commercial use, due and
payable on the second day of January in each year and on the first day of
April, July and October in each year and may be paid within a period of
30 days after it is due and payable without penalty. Any refuse bill
which is not paid within such 30 days shall be deemed delinquent, and
an additional fee of 12% will be added and collected. [Amended
5-24-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 7-21-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009;
4-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014; 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 6-2018]
B. The fee for garbage collection according to the above schedule shall be
levied and assessed against and collected from the owner(s) of all
parcels identified on the Broome County Tax Map for the Village of
Johnson City, provided that if the parcel consists of unimproved land or
land principally improved by a residential dwelling or commercial
building which had been abandoned and from which the Village water
service has been disconnected, there shall be no charge for garbage
collection for so long as the parcel remains unimproved or the
residential dwelling or commercial structure remains abandoned and
disconnected from the Village water liens. In addition, if the parcel is
improved by a multiple-residence dwelling or commercial structure and
the owner, with the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works,
provides private removal of all garbage, refuse, trash, recyclables, yard
§ 236-12.2 SEX OFFENDERS § 236-14
223:397
§ 236-15. Bills due and payable when rendered; failure to receive
bill. [Amended 2-6-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
All bills are due and payable when rendered. The property owner shall
be held responsible for all bills. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse
payment. No partial payments will be accepted. Any payment not made
when due will be rolled over onto real property taxes.
§ 236-16. Collection following holiday. [Added 9-17-1991]
Garbage and recyclables will be collected on the next scheduled workday
following a holiday for the route affected by the holiday, and the normal
route will also be collected on the same day.
§ 236-17. Disposal of tires. [Added 6-2-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992;
amended 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
It shall be unlawful to dispose of tires anywhere within the Village of
Johnson City, provided that at such times as the Director of Public Services
may designate and in accordance with rules and regulations to be
promulgated by the Director of Public Services, residents of the Village,
upon payment of a fee of $5 per tire, which fee may be modified from time to
time by resolution of the Board, may bring tires to the Department of Public
Works garage for disposal.
§ 236-18. (Reserved)
§ 236-19. (Reserved)
§ 236-20. Dumpsters. [Added 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
waste and tires as approved, the fee assessed and levied shall be the
minimum residential collection fee.
C. All fees in this section shall remain in effect until June 30, 2019.
Thereafter the fees can be increased or decreased by action of the
Village Board from time to time. [Added 12-4-2018 by L.L. No.
16-2018]
A. No dumpsters shall be located in front of a business or residence nor
within 25 feet of a residentially zoned property. Notwithstanding the
preceding, roll-off dumpsters located on a property for the sole purpose
of collecting construction and other building debris during remodeling
and/or other construction of a property are permitted during the
construction period. Said construction period shall not exceed 60 days.
If said construction period shall last more than 60 days, a special permit
shall be obtained from the Village Code Enforcement Officer.
B. All dumpsters shall be kept in a place easily accessible to private
collection contractors, shall be clean, neat, painted and kept in good
repair; any spilled materials are the responsibility of the property
§ 236-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 236-20
223:398
§ 236-21. Inspection fees for repeat offenders. [Added 5-7-2013 by
L.L. No. 5-2013]
owner or occupant and shall be cleaned immediately. No garbage,
rubbish, trash, yard waste or other items of refuse shall be located
outside of a dumpster. All dumpsters located on a property for reasons
other than temporary construction shall be fully enclosed and all doors
and lids must be in working order and lids must be securely closed at
all times. Dumpsters not in use must be removed within 30 days.
C. No dumpsters shall be located on public streets without first obtaining
a permit from the Superintendent of Public Works.
D. The collection of garbage or other material from dumpsters shall not
commence on any day prior to the hour of 6:00 a.m. nor past the hour of
9:00 p.m. Any party found in violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of an offense, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-15 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, of this Code. [Added
8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010]
A. This section applies to any person, firm or corporation receiving
multiple notices of violation or orders to remedy in a twelve-month
period for a violation of this chapter.
B. Any person, firm or corporation receiving multiple notices of violation
or orders to remedy within a twelve-month period shall be subject to an
inspection fee as set forth in the fee schedule below:
(1) First notice of violation or order to remedy received: no charge.
(2) Second notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection
fee of $100.
(3) Third notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection fee
of $150.
(4) Fourth notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection
fee of $200.
(5) Fifth notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection fee
of $500.
C. The inspection fees prescribed above shall be billed directly to the
tenant or owner, as the case may be, and a copy mailed to the owner
and/or contact person/agent of the property. Inspection fees shall be
increased 25% when not paid within 30 days after initial billing, to
cover administrative costs. This subsection shall not be considered the
exclusive method of collecting inspection fees and shall not preclude
collection by other lawful methods. If unpaid after 30 days, the costs
may be added to and collected in the same manner as real property
taxes.
§ 236-20 SEX OFFENDERS § 236-21
223:399
D. Every notice of violation or order to remedy shall contain a clear and
conspicuous explanation of the policy in this section requiring fees for
inspections or a copy of this section.
E. The Code Enforcement Official or the Village Treasurer may waive an
inspection fee in case of error, mistake, injustice or other good cause.
§ 236-21 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 236-21
223:400
Chapter 237
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration — See Ch. 114.
Drainage and watercourses — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 238.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
Wellhead, aquifer recharge and watershed
protection zones — See Ch. 272.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 236-21 STORM SEWERS § 236-21
237:401

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
[Adopted 8-14-2007 by L.L. No. 5-200762]
§ 237-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Johnson City through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES
General Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The
objectives of this article are:
§ 237-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
62.Editor's Note: This local law was originally designated to be added as Chapter 233 but was
renumbered to maintain the organization of the Code.
§ 237-1 STORM SEWERS § 237-2
237:403
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges From Construction Activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional engineer
or licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 237-5 of this article.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Permit for
Discharges From Industrial Activities Except Construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 237-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-2
237:404
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Johnson City.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water; which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Johnson City;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under his or her MS4 permit may have caused
or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation
of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water
body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge
from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior
C.
§ 237-2 STORM SEWERS § 237-2
237:405
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village of
Johnson City to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated by the
municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 237-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 237-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted
to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges: Under this condition, the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 237-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-4
237:406
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 237-5. Discharge prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A(1). The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that, such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
§ 237-4 STORM SEWERS § 237-5
237:407
§ 237-6. Failing individual sewage treatment systems prohibited.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system
in areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 237-7. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4 or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in, § 237-2, Definitions, of this article.
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 237-6, improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
§ 237-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-8
237:408
§ 237-8. Prevention control and reduction of stormwater pollutants.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 237-2 or activities contaminating stormwater
as defined in § 237-8, the municipality may require implementation of
best management practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges
and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 237-2 or an
activity contaminating stormwater as defined in § 237-7, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the municipality's being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 237-2 of this article, the owner or operator of
such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals; and
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(2) Most tanks should be pumped out every two to three years.
However, pumping may be more or less frequent, depending on
§ 237-8 STORM SEWERS § 237-8
237:409
§ 237-9. Suspension of access to MS4.
use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks and blockages should
be done by the septage hauler at the time of pumping of the tank
contents.
(3) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR, Appendix 75-A to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) A design professional licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that
involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the municipality at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this article may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
§ 237-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-10
237:410
§ 237-10. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 237-11. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
§ 237-10 STORM SEWERS § 237-11
237:411
§ 237-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 237-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When the municipality's SMO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he/she
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine; and
§ 237-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-13
237:412
§ 237-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Village Board of Trustees within 15 days of its issuance,
which shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal,
and within five days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of
the municipal clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the
discharger.
§ 237-15. Corrective measures after appeal.
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
§ 237-13 STORM SEWERS § 237-15
237:413
§ 237-16. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 237-17. Alternative remedies.
§ 237-18. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 237-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 237-15 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 237-19
237:414
Chapter 238
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration — See Ch. 114.
Drainage and watercourses — See Ch. 136.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 237.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
Wellhead, aquifer recharge and watershed
protection zones — See Ch. 272.
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 237-19 STORM SEWERS § 237-19
237:415

ARTICLE I
Findings of Fact; Purpose; Statutory Authority; Applicability;
Exemptions
§ 238-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 238-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 238-1 STORM SEWERS § 238-2
237:417
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 238-1 hereof. This
chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 238-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City has
the authority to enact local laws and amend local laws and for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the Village of Johnson
City and for the protection and enhancement of its physical environment.
The Village Board of Trustees of Johnson City may include in any such local
law provisions for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or
independent contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 238-4. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of Minimum Measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in this chapter.
B. The municipality shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The
Stormwater Management Officer may:
§ 238-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-4
237:418
§ 238-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Johnson City, engage the services of a registered professional
engineer to review the plans, specifications and related documents
at a cost to the applicant not to exceed a fee as set forth in a
schedule established by The Village Board of Trustees; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Planning Department, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or
Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City under
subdivision, zoning, site plan, and/or special permit regulations shall be
reviewed subject to the standards contained in this chapter.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C section 4.3 shall be required to submit a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management
Officer who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for a subdivision that has been
approved by the Village of Johnson City and construction activities have
started on or before the effective date of this chapter.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
§ 238-4 STORM SEWERS § 238-5
237:419
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 238-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-5
237:420
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
§ 238-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Design Manual, most
recent version including applicable updates that serves as the official guide
for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the, resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating water into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
§ 238-6 STORM SEWERS § 238-6
237:421
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Developing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the development of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Coldwater fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species, Critical Environmental
Area designated by the municipality.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
§ 238-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-6
237:422
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operated for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs trees,
brush, grass, or any other kind of vegetation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
§ 238-6 STORM SEWERS § 238-6
237:423
SWALE — A natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to route or filter
runoff.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERSHED — A region or area contributing stormwater ultimately to a
particular watercourse or body of water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 238-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharges(s); site map should be at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP.
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
§ 238-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-7
237:424
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project closeout;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 238-6 of this article and
meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity
and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff
controls) as set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activity(ies) discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
§ 238-7 STORM SEWERS § 238-7
237:425
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activity(ies) disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development
activity(ies) disturbing between one and five acres of land
during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction
of single-family residences and construction activities at
agricultural properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1);
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the onsite stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 238-9 of this
chapter;
(j) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who
shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meets the requirements in this chapter.
§ 238-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-7
237:426
§ 238-8. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor who will be involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
shall sign and date a copy of the following certification statement
before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify under
penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I
also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or
contribute to a violation of water quality standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
E. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual");
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
§ 238-7 STORM SEWERS § 238-8
237:427
§ 238-9. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in Subsection A and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed
professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 238-6 of this article
and meeting Condition A, B or C in § 238-7B, the applicant shall
have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event
producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Johnson City to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded
by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the
counsel for the Village of Johnson City.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes,
as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
§ 238-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-9
237:428
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 238-8C.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Johnson City shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of Schedule A of this chapter entitled "Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."63 The Village of
Johnson City, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion,
may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
63.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 238-9 STORM SEWERS § 238-9
237:429

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 238-10. Construction inspection.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The Village of Johnson City Stormwater Management Officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the Village of Johnson City enforcement
official at least 48 hours before any of the following as required by
the Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction;
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(c) Completion of site clearing;
(d) Completion of rough grading;
(e) Completion of final grading;
(f) Close of the construction season;
(g) Completion of final landscaping;
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Village of Johnson
City Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management
practices located on site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of Stormwater Facilities After Project Completion Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
§ 238-10 STORM SEWERS § 238-10
237:431
§ 238-11. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Village of Johnson City Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public storm water system, the
landowner shall grant to the Village of Johnson City the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection as specified in Subsection C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Johnson City in
its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Village of
Johnson City may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village
of Johnson City as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to
be determined by the Village of Johnson City based on submission of
final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force
until the surety is released from liability by the Village of Johnson City,
provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the date
of final acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and that a one-year inspection has been conducted and
the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the Village of Johnson
City. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in
the account until the surety is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
§ 238-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-11
237:432
§ 238-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village of Johnson City with an irrevocable letter of
credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of Johnson City may
draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Village of Johnson City may require entities subject
to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Notice of Violation. When the Village of Johnson City determines that a
land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15
calendar days of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Village of Johnson City may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order
shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the Village of Johnson City
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
§ 238-11 STORM SEWERS § 238-12
237:433
§ 238-13. Fees for services.
The Village of Johnson City may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village of Johnson City or performed by a third party for
the Village of Johnson City.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of Johnson City may
take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien
upon the property until paid.
§ 238-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 238-13
237:434
Chapter 240
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of defects — See Ch. 180. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 238-13 STORM SEWERS § 238-13
237:435

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Art. I of Ch. 16 of the 1973 Code]
§ 240-1. Games in streets and sidewalks.
No person shall fly a kite or play football, baseball or any other game on
any public street, avenue or sidewalk in the village except on such streets
or avenues or parts thereof as may be designated by the Board of Trustees
as play streets.
§ 240-2. Coasting upon streets and sidewalks.
§ 240-3. Vehicles and animals on sidewalks.
No person shall operate, drive, propel, place or leave any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, wagon, truck, sleigh or similar vehicle, or lead, drive, ride
or leave any horse or other animal upon or along any public sidewalk
or footpath in the village, or so near to such public sidewalk or footpath
as to interfere with or obstruct travel thereon. Provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to any person necessarily driving a vehicle or
animal across such public sidewalk, or footpath to or from an adjoining
premises, or to any person drawing or pushing a small carriage, cart or
sleigh commonly used for the carrying of children, or to any person riding
A. Designation of coasting streets. No person shall coast with any
handsled, bob, cart or other vehicle on runners or wheels on any
sidewalk or footpath in the village, nor shall any person coast with any
handsled, bob, cart or other vehicle on runners or wheels on any public
street or avenue in the village except upon such streets or avenues or
parts thereof as may be designated for such purpose by the Board of
Trustees.
B. Posting of signs. The Police Department shall properly post signs
designating those streets or portions of streets on which coasting is
permitted during the coasting season.
C. Effect. When signs are posted pursuant to Subsection B of this section,
drivers or operators of vehicles having business or residences within
such closed or protected coasting areas may drive upon said streets
with extreme caution and care to reach a residence situated therein and
park therein to complete said business, but no other motorcycle, motor
vehicle or vehicles shall park in said coasting areas during coasting
hours.
D. Hours for coasting. Coasting shall be permitted on the streets
designated pursuant to this section from 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m. during
the winter season, excepting during public school hours.64
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Vehicles and traffic.
§ 240-1 STORM SEWERS § 240-3
237:437
in, operating or pushing a wheel chair commonly used by persons who are
sick, crippled or infirm.
§ 240-4. Blockading streets at fires.
The fire chief or any assistant chief of the fire department in charge of
any fire may, when deemed necessary by him or her to insure the efficient
working of the men or apparatus under his or her control, blockade any
street, avenue, lane, alley or part thereof or other place in the village, and
no person shall break through or attempt to break through such blockade.
§ 240-5. Depositing building materials on streets and sidewalks.
§ 240-6. Injurious substances on streets prohibited.
No person shall willfully throw, drop or place or shall cause or procure to
be thrown, dropped or placed in or upon any street, avenue, cycle path or
public way or place any glass, tacks, nails, pieces of metal, briar, thorn or
other substances which might injure any animal or puncture any tire used
on a vehicle and which might wound or injure any person using such street,
avenue or path.
§ 240-7. Deposit of materials; mixing of concrete; conducting water
over streets and sidewalks.
No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited any
material or substance of any kind or nature whatsoever on any public
A. Permission required. No person shall place or cause to be placed any
lumber, wood, lime, brick or other building material of any nature on
any public street, avenue or sidewalk or in any public place in the
village without first obtaining permission from the Superintendent of
Public Works, such permission to be given for such length of time and
upon such conditions as, in the Director's discretion, shall be deemed
advisable.
B. Materials not to constitute obstruction. In the event that such
permission is given, said building materials shall not occupy more than
one-third (1/3) of the width of the street nearest the building under
construction, and under no circumstances shall such material be so
placed as to prevent free access to any fire hydrant or in no instance be
placed so as to obstruct proper draining of such street or the gutters
thereon.
C. Materials to be guarded at night. Such building materials shall not be
permitted to remain in or upon any public street, avenue or sidewalk at
night unless the same shall be provided with a lamp or lanterns
provided with red globes or flares to be continuously lighted during
each night upon or near such materials so as to distinctly cast light
thereon to warn users of such street, avenue or sidewalk of the
presence thereof.
§ 240-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-7
237:438
sidewalk, footpath, public street or in any public place in the village except
when necessary for immediate removal, nor shall any person cause to be
placed on any sidewalk, footpath, public street or in any public place any
concrete, mortar or substance of a similar nature nor cause the same to be
mixed or prepared thereon in said village, nor permit water to be conducted
upon, over or across any public sidewalk or footpath in said village.
§ 240-8. Articles upon windowsills.
No person shall place any box, flower pot or other article upon any
windowsill or projection of any building fronting on any public street or
avenue or sidewalk and within ten (10) feet of the line thereof in the village
unless such article shall be suitably secured so as to prevent the same from
falling.
§ 240-9. Spilling loads.
§ 240-10. Depositing snow on streets and sidewalks.
A. Prohibited. No person while transporting by truck or other means of
transportation any garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes, stone, gravel or any
other substance, matter or material upon and along any public street,
avenue or in any public place in the village, shall allow or permit the
same or any part thereof to fall and remain upon the surface of any such
public street, avenue or public place in said village.
B. Coverings required. Any person transporting any of the substances
enumerated in Subsection A through any public street, avenue or any
other public place within the village shall be required to completely
cover any load or portion thereof of such substance by canvas or other
means; in addition, it shall be required that the canvas or other
covering be secured or fastened in such a manner so as to prevent the
discharge of any of said substances into the public streets.
A. Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, including gasoline filling
stations and the owners of private properties, to willfully deposit within
the limits of any street or in the gutters thereof or upon any sidewalk or
in any public place any snow by piling, gathering or in any manner
accumulating the same from any place whatsoever, nor shall any transit
or transportation corporation cause snow to be piled in or upon any of
the streets, avenues, gutters, sidewalks or public places of the village
by the use of plows or otherwise.
B. Removal; costs. In case any person shall violate the provisions
hereinabove set forth and shall fail to remove any snow piled or plowed
up within five hours after demand so to do by either the Superintendent
of Public Works, Code Enforcement Officer of the Village, or his, her or
their designee, the same may be removed under the supervisions of said
Superintendent of Public Works, Code Enforcement Officer of the
Village, or his, her or their designee, and such person or owner or
§ 240-7 STORM SEWERS § 240-10
237:439
§ 240-11. Removal of snow, ice and other substances on sidewalks.
§ 240-12. Accumulation of snow and ice on buildings.
The owners of buildings adjacent to public streets and sidewalks shall
prevent the accumulation of snow, ice or water thereon and shall prevent
the falling of snow, ice or water from such buildings or appurtenances
thereto upon such streets or sidewalks.
§ 240-13. Encroachments.
occupant of such premises shall be responsible for the entire cost of
removal. [Amended 4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. Duty of owner. All snow, ice or other substances upon any public
sidewalk in the village shall be removed by the owner or occupant of the
premises adjoining such sidewalk immediately after the same shall fall
or is deposited thereon.
B. Failure to remove. In the event that the owner or occupant of such
adjoining premises fails to remove such snow, ice or other substance
within five hours from the time when said snow, ice or other substance
shall have been deposited or within one hour after the giving of notice
by either the Superintendent of Public Works, Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village, or his, her or their designee, such owner or
occupant shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. Such notice shall be
deemed given upon affixing a notice to any building located on the
property or, in the case of vacant land, upon the nearest utility pole. In
addition, in the case of vacant land, the Village officer or designee
giving notice shall make a good faith effort to notify the owner of vacant
land by telephone or by affixing the notice to the residence of the owner.
Each twenty-four-hour period that the accumulation of snow and/or ice
shall exist shall be a separate violation of this article. [Amended
4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
C. Authority of Village. It is further provided that whenever any owner or
occupant of adjoining land shall fail to comply with the provisions of
Subsection A, it shall be the duty of the Village officer or designee
directing removal to cause said sidewalk to be cleaned, and the expense
thereof shall become a lien upon said adjoining premises and shall be
assessed against the same. [Amended 4-18-2017 by L.L. No.
4-2017]
D. The owner or occupant of lands fronting or abutting any street,
highway, traveled road, public lane, alley or square shall maintain the
sidewalk, including curb-cut areas providing handicapped access,
adjoining his or her land free and clear of and from snow, ice and all
other obstructions. Such owners or occupants and each of them shall be
liable for any injury or damage by reason of omission, failure or
negligence to so maintain said sidewalk and handicapped curb-cut area.
[Added 1-21-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 240-10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-13
237:440
§ 240-14. Cellarways; trapdoors.
No person shall construct or use or permit to be constructed or used any
cellarway leading from any public street, avenue or sidewalk in the village
unless the same shall have trapdoors so constructed as to be on a level with
the sidewalk or with the platform, if any, in front of the building where such
cellarway is located so that it will be entirely safe for persons to pass over
the same, nor shall any person keep open or permit to be kept open any
trapdoor or grate in any sidewalk in the village, except while the same is
necessarily and actually in use for the receipt or delivery of goods or fuel or
other property and while the same is properly guarded to prevent persons
walking or falling into the same.
§ 240-15. Gates and doors.
§ 240-16. Barbed-wire fences.
No person shall install, erect, use or maintain any barbed wire or similar
fence within six (6) feet of the boundary line of any public street, sidewalk
or other public place in the village, except that fences erected, used and
maintained for the protection of property along the boundary line of public
A. Prohibited. No person shall erect or cause to be erected any building,
porch, steps, fence or other structure or part thereof so as to encroach
upon any public street, avenue or sidewalk in the village.
B. Exception. This section shall not apply to a marquee which extends over
a sidewalk in a commercial district, provided that:
(1) The lowest part of such marquee is at least ten (10) feet above the
sidewalk.
(2) The marquee does not cover more than sixty-five percent (65%) of
the area between the curbline and the building.
(3) All drainage is collected and conveyed to a point within the
property line.
(4) No part of the marquee extends beyond the side lines of the
building front.
(5) The construction features of the marquee are approved in advance
by the Village Engineer.
A. No person shall make or hang any gates, storm door or door of any kind
whereby the same will open and swing over any public sidewalk or
street in the village without first obtaining an authorization from the
Board of Trustees.
B. Any person who shall neglect or refuse to remove any such gate, storm
door or door of any kind after being requested so to do by the
Superintendent of Public Works shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 240-13 STORM SEWERS § 240-16
237:441
streets, highways or other public places may have barbed or similar wire
along the top thereof, but not less than six (6) feet from the ground,
sidewalk or street level.
§ 240-17. Erection of booths and stands.
No person shall, without first obtaining the permission of the Board of
Trustees therefor, evidenced by a resolution adopted at a meeting thereof
and entered in its minutes, erect any booth, stand, platform or grandstand
for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale or advertising any goods,
wares or merchandise upon or over any public street, avenue, sidewalk or
public place in the village.
§ 240-18. Awnings; clearance prescribed.
No person shall hang, place, erect or maintain any awning over any public
street, avenue or sidewalk or any part thereof or in any public place in the
village unless the same shall be hung or placed so as to be at least seven (7)
feet in the clear above the surface of such street, avenue, sidewalk or place.
§ 240-19. Erection of poles and wires.
No person shall erect any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other
pole or string any wire in, over or upon any public street, sidewalk or
public grounds or erect any post on any public street or avenue or in any
public place in the village without first having obtained permission from the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 240-20. Banners across streets.
No person shall, without first having obtained the permission of the Board
of Trustees therefor, evidenced by a resolution adopted at a meeting thereof
and entered in its minutes, hang or cause to be hung any banner or
advertising device of any kind upon, across or over any public street, avenue
or sidewalk or in any public place in the village.
§ 240-21. Trimming trees.
A. Duty. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of premises upon
which trees shall stand to trim such trees as provided in this section.
B. Clearance. All ornamental and shade trees standing within or whose
branches or any part thereof extend over any public street, avenue or
sidewalk in the village shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches
shall not be less than ten (10) feet from the ground.
C. Effect of failure to trim. In the event of failure on the part of any person
to trim any tree as herein provided after having been requested to do so
by either the Superintendent of Public Works, Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village, or his, her or their designee, said Official shall
cause such tree to be trimmed and the cost thereof shall be assessed in
§ 240-16 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-21
237:442
§ 240-22. Cutting, removing and uprooting trees.
§ 240-23. Construction and repair; assessment of expenses.
[Amended 9-16-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974]
The Board of Trustees may construct and repair crosswalks upon the streets
within the village. It may also construct and repair sidewalks, curbs and
gutters upon such a street wholly at the expense of the village or the owner
or occupants of the adjoining land, or partly at the expense of each, and may
prescribe the manner of doing such work and the kind of materials to be
used therein. If a sidewalk, curb or gutter is so required to be constructed or
repaired wholly at the expense of the owners or occupants of the adjoining
lands, a notice specifying the place and manner and the time, not less than
ten (10) days in case of a new walk or not less than twenty-four (24) hours
in case of repairs, within which the sidewalk, curb or gutter is required to
be constructed or repaired shall be served upon such owners or occupants.
If an owner or occupant shall not construct or repair the sidewalk, curb or
gutter as required by the notice, the Board of Trustees may cause the same
to be so constructed or repaired and assess the expense thereof upon the
adjoining land. If a sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed or repaired
at the joint expense of the village and the owner or occupant, the Board of
Trustees may cause the same to be constructed or repaired and assess upon
the adjoining land the proportion of the expense chargeable against the
same. All grading done on sidewalks, curbs or gutters laid or repaired by the
owners of adjoining land shall be in accordance with the specifications and
under the direction and supervision of the Board of Trustees. Assessments
shall be made and collected and taxes levied as provided by law. The Board
of Trustees may issue bonds of the village to defray the expense of any such
work or improvement. Upon the presentation to the Board of Trustees of a
petition for the construction of a sidewalk or curb and gutter, signed by the
the same manner as property taxes are assessed. [Amended
8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
A. When permit required. No person shall, without having secured a
permit therefor, cut down, fell or in any manner remove or uproot any
tree within the incorporated limits of the village, when, by reason of the
height and/or position thereof, it could or any portion thereof or the
limbs thereof could reasonably be expected to fall on or across any
public sidewalk, thoroughfare or place or otherwise endanger the
general public.
B. Application for permit; terms; conditions of issuance. The permit for
such removal shall be issued only upon application to the
Superintendent of Public Works and under such terms and on such
conditions as he or she deems necessary to protect the safety of the
general public.
C. Penalty for violation. Any violation of this section shall subject the
violator to the penalties as provided for in § 1-15 of this Code.
§ 240-21 STORM SEWERS § 240-23
237:443
owners of more than one-half (1/2) of the frontage on a street, the Board of
Trustees shall order a public hearing and make determination as to whether
or not said construction shall be made and how the expense shall be paid.
§ 240-24. Construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters
located over open areas.
§ 240-25. Injury to curbs prohibited.
No person shall cut or otherwise destroy, demolish or change any curb
heretofore or hereafter constructed along any street, avenue, alley or other
public way in the village without first obtaining the consent of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 240-26. Curb filling stations. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No.
5-2013]
In the event that a permit is issued for the construction, alteration or
relocation of any gasoline filling station or gasoline pumps or other
apparatus for furnishing or dispensing gasoline or other commodities as
provided under Chapter 300, a fee of $5 per pump shall be paid by the
applicant to the Village Clerk before the installation thereof.
§ 240-27. Construction of approach; permission required.
[Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
A. Expense of construction and repair. Whenever the Board of Trustees
shall construct or repair any sidewalk, curb or gutter containing a
trapdoor or grate or located wholly or partly over a cellarway,
underground vault or other excavated or open area, the expense of such
construction or repair shall be borne partly by the village and partly by
the owner of the adjoining land.
B. Village's expense. The portion of the expense which shall be borne by
the village shall be the estimated expense of such construction or repair
if the sidewalk, curb or gutter did not contain such trapdoor or grate or
was not located over the cellarway, underground vault or other
excavated or open area.
C. Owner's expense; manner of assessing. The portion of the expense
which shall be borne by the owner of the adjoining land shall be the
balance of the expense. The portion of the expense to be borne by the
owner of the adjoining land shall be assessed upon the adjoining land
according to the provisions of § 4-414 of the Village Law.65
A. No person shall construct a driveway or approach to a parcel without
first obtaining permission of the Superintendent of Public Works after
recommendation by the Village Engineer.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 240-23 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-27
237:444
§ 240-28. Limitations on granting of permission.
B. Such permission shall be granted only upon written application signed
by the owner of the parcel and the tenant, if any, desiring to cut or
otherwise change the curb. Such application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and street address and post office address of the owner
and the tenant.
(2) The purpose for which the premises are to be used.
(3) A description of the premises.
C. Such application shall be accompanied by a map or plan which shall
plainly show the location of all structures on said premises, place of
parking, and any other use of the premises.
A. Permission shall be granted under the provisions of § 240-27:
(1) For any opening of more than two-thirds (2/3) of the frontage of
said premises where the entire width of the lot is to be used for
ingress or egress.
(2) For an opening of more than 40 feet where the length of the lot is to
be used for ingress and egress.
(3) If more than one opening is to be made, unless each opening shall
be separated by an island not less than 10 feet in width.
(4) If the established walk grade is to be changed.
(5) If an opening is to be within five feet of property lines extended to
the curb and, if on a corner lot, within five feet of the inside of the
sidewalk line of the adjoining street.
(6) Unless a cut eight inches higher than the sidewalk grade is to be
constructed in back of each safety island.
(7) In the event that the premises are to be used for a gasoline filling
station, no pump shall be erected or constructed within 10 feet of
the inside of the sidewalk line of either the front or side street.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply to any filling station, parking
lot or other premises where the curb has heretofore been cut or
otherwise changed without the consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 240-27 STORM SEWERS § 240-28
237:445

ARTICLE II
Street Excavations and Disturbances
[Adopted 6-12-1978 as L.L. No. 5-1978]
§ 240-29. Applicability.
The following concerns the regulation of the making of openings and
excavations in certain streets, highways and adjoining lands, the storing of
materials upon and the moving thereover of buildings or other structures
or vehicles carrying loads exceeding in size or weight the limits specified in
the Vehicle and Traffic Code, prohibiting the erection of gasoline pumps or
other obstructions, imposing fees and repealing inconsistent ordinances.
§ 240-30. Definitions.
The following words and terms, as used herein, shall have the following
meanings:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PERMIT AREA — The area within the right-of-way lines of any village
street and any road or highway constructed in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the village.
§ 240-31. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause or permit to be made
or caused any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement
of any permit area or to perform any work within the permit area for the
purpose of installing or repairing pipes, sewers, drains, conduits, sidewalks,
curbs, driveways and similar structures or for erecting or replacing poles
without first having obtained a permit, nor shall any person store materials
upon or move over any permit area buildings or other structures or vehicles
carrying loads exceeding in size or weight the limits specified in the Vehicle
and Traffic Code without having first obtained a permit.
§ 240-32. Applications.
A written application for a permit shall be made to the Engineering
Department of the village setting forth:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The purpose of the application.
C. The time and place where the work is to be done and the permit area to
be occupied.
D. The nature of the work to be done.
E. The name of the owner of the abutting property, together with a
statement that the consent of such owner to the performance of the
work has theretofore been obtained, except that such statement shall
§ 240-29 STORM SEWERS § 240-32
237:447
§ 240-33. Liability and insurance.
not be required where the application is made by a corporation subject
to the supervision of the Public Service Commission, and such other
information as may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works.
[Amended 2-17-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987]
F. That the Village Engineer has set special requirements and regulations
for excavating and trenching procedures, along with terms for
environmental protection. This information will be included with the
issuing of a street work permit. [Amended 2-17-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987]
A. The filing of an application and the issuance of a permit hereunder shall
constitute an agreement on the part of the applicant to comply with all
the terms of this Article and all rules, regulations, standards and
specifications and requirements of the Village of Johnson City now in
force or hereafter adopted and shall also constitute an agreement to
indemnify and save the village harmless from and against all claims,
demands and actions for damages either to person or property that may
be sustained by any reason of or arising out of any work done or action
taken under the application and permit.
B. The application shall be signed by a person who shall in connection
therewith have filed with the Village Clerk a certificate showing that the
applicant has obtained from a responsible and reputable company a
policy of insurance with limits of one million/three million dollars
($1,000,000./$3,000,000.) for public liability and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.) for property damage against any claim, demand or
action for damages either to person or property which may arise out of
any work done or action taken under the application and permit. No
such policy of insurance shall be required, however, where the work is
to be performed by a corporation subject to the supervision of the
Public Service Commission or where the work is to be performed by the
owner himself or herself on his or her own property, does not involve
the breaking of any improved road surface, is to be completed within
three (3) working days and the cost does not exceed the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.).66
C. There shall also be filed a surety bond in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) for each permit in favor of the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Village of Johnson City, guaranteeing compliance
with the provisions of this Article, together with a certified check,
payable to the Village Superintendent of Public Works in the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.). The Superintendent of Public Works shall use
all or any portion of said one hundred dollars ($100.) necessary to
reimburse the Village of Johnson City for any cost incurred in restoring
any excavation as a lawful charge against any applicant who fails to do
so in accordance with the requirements of this Article.67
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 240-32 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-33
237:448
§ 240-34. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay, in
addition to the permit fee hereinafter specified, the fees for construction
and inspection set forth below:
D. In lieu of a separate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.) and a cash deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.) for each
excavation, any person, firm or corporation may file with the Village
Superintendent of Public Works on or before January 31 of each
calendar year or, in any event, prior to the issuance of any permit under
this Article a certified check or its equivalent or assign a bank (interest)
account to the Village of Johnson City in the sum of not less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.) or file a blanket surety
performance bond in the principal sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000.), each of which shall be in favor of the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Village of Johnson City, covering all excavations
by said person, firm or corporation during the remainder of the
calendar year in which said deposit is made or for which said surety
bond is filed, guaranteeing compliance with the provisions of this
Article.68
E. The condition of such deposit or the filing of said surety bond shall be
that the Superintendent of Public Works may use all or any portion of
said deposit or enforce and take any legal remedy against said surety
bond or otherwise to the extent necessary to reimburse the Village of
Johnson City for any cost incurred in restoring any excavation as a
lawful charge against any applicant for a permit who fails to properly
restore said excavation or otherwise comply with the requirements of
this Article.
F. Said surety bond, cash deposit or its equivalent or assignment of any
bank (interest) account shall be retained by the Village Superintendent
of Public Works for a period of one (1) year from the date that the work
is performed.
A. For openings or excavations in an improved or unimproved surface, an
inspection fee of two dollars ($2.) for each one hundred (100) square
feet or fraction thereof in excess of the first one hundred (100) square
feet (for which no inspection fee will be charged).
B. Poles. For the erection of poles in new locations, an inspection fee of
one dollar ($1.) for each pole. No fee will be charged, however, where a
pole is installed merely as a replacement of a pole previously erected.
C. Curbs. Where curbs are constructed by the permittee, the fee shall be
two dollars ($2.) for each twenty-five (25) linear feet or fraction thereof.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 240-33 STORM SEWERS § 240-34
237:449
§ 240-35. Issuance of permit.
Upon the filing of the application, the certificate of insurance, where
required, and the payment of the fee or fees hereinabove specified, the
postings of the guaranties and, in addition, a permit fee of one dollar ($1.),
the Engineering Department shall issue a permit which (unless stated to be
for a shorter period) shall be good for thirty (30) days and may be renewed
for a like period upon payment of a renewal fee of one dollar ($1.). The
permit shall at all times be kept in the possession of a competent person
actually engaged on the work and upon demand shall be exhibited to any
police officer or duly authorized employee of the village, county or state.
§ 240-36. Relocation of structures.
The filing of an application for the installation or repairing of pipes, sewers,
drains, conduits, sidewalks, curbs, driveways and similar structures or for
erecting or replacing poles shall constitute an agreement that the applicant
will, upon notice from and without expense to the village, make such
changes in the location thereof as may be required by the Superintendent
of Public Works. The issuance of a permit hereunder shall not confer upon
the applicant a permanent right to maintain such structures in the permit
area. If any such structure is not removed upon receipt of notice so to do
from the village, the Engineering Department may thereupon remove it and
charge the cost of such removal to the applicant.
§ 240-37. Guarding excavation and obstructions.
It shall be the duty of the applicant to furnish reasonable protection and
as described in Sub-Chapter G of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices to the traveling public surrounding the location of all openings,
excavations, stored materials and buildings or other structures within the
D. Closing road to traffic. For closing a road to traffic, an inspection fee of
one dollar ($1.) per hour for the first twenty-four (24) hours and five
dollars ($5.) per day for each subsequent day or fraction thereof.
E. Occupying permit area. For occupying the permit area with building or
construction materials or carrying on other operations therein, a fee of
five dollars ($5.) for the first twenty-four (24) hours. A fee of one dollar
($1.) per day will be charged thereafter.
F. Moving buildings or other structures or vehicles carrying loads
exceeding in size or weight the limits specified in the Vehicle and Traffic
Code: five dollars ($5.) per day.
G. Special inspections. For special inspections, a fee of five dollars ($5.)
per hour or fraction thereof for the time the Village Inspector is
engaged in such work.
H. Street work permits. A fee for said street work permit shall be five
dollars ($5.) per application. [Added 2-17-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987]
§ 240-34 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-37
237:450
permit area by means of suitable flags, signs and barricades, supplemented
where necessary by warning lights which shall be kept visible from sunset
to sunrise, or to provide such other means of protection [including one
(1) or more flagpersons to direct traffic] as may be required by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 240-38. Performance of work. [Amended 2-17-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987]
All work performed hereunder shall be subject to the supervision and
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works. Whenever the
Superintendent of Public Works shall consider it necessary or advisable,
he or she shall assign a special village inspector to inspect the work as
it progresses. No excavation shall be permitted after November 15 and
before March 15 except in an emergency or for other reason as approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works. All such work shall conform to the
following requirements:
A. Commencement of work. All work shall be undertaken within the time
specified in the permit or within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of
the permit where no time for commencement is specified and shall be
performed diligently and continuously until completed.
B. Closing permit area to traffic. In no case shall a permit area or any part
thereof be closed to traffic without the written consent of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
C. Tunneling under an improved surface. Whenever, in connection with
any work covered by this Article, a tunnel is to be made under an
improved surface, this fact shall be disclosed in the application. Before
a tunnel is excavated, specific approval must be obtained from the
village and endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of the excavation
shall not be done except in the presence of a special village inspector; it
shall be made with one-to-four-to-eight (1:4:8) damp concrete mix,
thoroughly tamped in six-inch layers, or according to a similar method
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
D. Backfilling excavations. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled
promptly with suitable materials thoroughly compacted in layers, each
of which shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in depth, tamped to within
ten (10) inches of the surface or puddled where required.
E. Sidewalks and gutters. Sidewalks, gutters, paving and other
improvements shall be restored by the applicant to the condition and
extent existing before the opening or excavation was made and in
conformance with current construction specifications.
F. Temporary paving. A temporary paving of suitable stony materials eight
(8) inches in depth, thoroughly bound and compacted, and covered with
two (2) inches of compacted asphaltic concrete shall be installed flush
with the surface of the adjoining paving. The applicant shall keep and
§ 240-37 STORM SEWERS § 240-38
237:451
§ 240-39. Lines and grades; curbs and driveways; drains and pipes.
maintain such paving in proper condition until such time as the
permanent paving is installed. If the applicant fails to install such
temporary paving within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of the
improvement or fails to properly maintain such paving, the village shall
perform the work and charge the cost thereof to the applicant.
G. Permanent paving. Permanent paving conforming to village
construction specifications will be installed by the permittee within a
reasonable period of time after installation of the temporary paving. If,
within one (1) year after the installation of the permanent paving,
defects appear therein resulting from defective work or material used
by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the village for the cost of
all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
A. Lines and grades. The Village Engineer shall furnish information as to
lines and grades for the construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs,
drains and driveways within a permit area. No work shall be performed
therein which does not conform with such lines and grades.
B. Curbs. The construction of concrete curbs and the making of cuts
therein shall be performed in accordance with village standards and
specifications.
C. Driveways. Driveways shall be constructed across the permit area at
the grade of the sidewalk and meet the grade of the depressed curb.
Curbs may be depressed to one (1) inch to one and one-half (1 1/2)
inches above the surface of the gutter. Sidewalks shall be continued
across driveways.
D. Drains. No storm, roof, swimming pool, sump, air conditioning,
driveway, parking lot, gasoline or service station, used car lot, car wash
or other drain shall be constructed or maintained which discharges
water or other waste over or upon any sidewalk. Where required by the
Village Engineer, such drains shall extend to a storm drainage facility.
The Village Engineer may require drainage facilities to be installed by
the property owner to accommodate any of the above water sources
which discharge over or upon the permit area. Such drains shall be
constructed under the sidewalk. Where the outlet of a drain is adjacent
to a storm sewer, connection shall be made thereto. Wastes from sinks
or cesspools and foul or offensive drainage shall not be discharged upon
any street, sidewalk or into storm drains.
E. Pipes. Property owners shall keep free of obstructions all existing
gutter pipes under driveways which receive or carry water within a
permit area. No permits will be issued for replacement or new
installations of gutter pipes under driveways which are served by
curbed roads.
§ 240-38 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-39
237:452
§ 240-40. Occupying permit area.
No building or construction materials or facilities for building construction
shall be permitted to occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the width of an
improved road surface or to obstruct any sidewalk so that free passage of
not less than four (4) feet in width shall at all times be maintained, nor shall
such materials be permitted to obstruct the flow of water in any gutter or
be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any fire hydrant or be mixed upon
an improved surface or let within the permit area after the expiration of the
permit.
§ 240-41. Gasoline pumps, fences and other obstructions.
No gasoline pumps, oil tanks, walls, fences, light posts, signs, stones,
planting, shrubbery or similar obstructions shall be placed within the permit
area. Any such obstructions shall be removed promptly by the property
owner whenever written notice to remove the same is given by the
Superintendent of Public Works. If the owner fails to comply with such
notice, the village shall remove the obstruction and charge the cost thereof
to the owner.
§ 240-42. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Any person who shall do or cause any work to be done or any action to be
taken without the permit required by this Article or who shall fail to comply
with any of the provisions of the permit or of this Article shall be liable, on
conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty as provided in § 1-15 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, for each offense. Whenever such person shall
have been notified by a village official or by the service of a summons in a
prosecution or in any other way that he or she is committing a violation of
this Article, each day in which he or she shall continue such violation after
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected before any Judge of the
Village of Johnson City as like fines or penalties are now by law collected. In
addition, civil actions for damages or other relief may be commenced and
prosecuted as provided by law.
§ 240-43. Inspection fees for repeat offenders. [Added 5-20-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014]
F. Specifications and regulations. All work performed within a permit area
shall conform to the village specifications and regulations on file in the
office of the Village Clerk.
A. This section applies to any person, firm or corporation receiving
multiple notices of violation or orders to remedy in a twelve-month
period for a violation of this chapter.
§ 240-39 STORM SEWERS § 240-43
237:453
B. Any person, firm or corporation receiving multiple notices of violation
or orders to remedy within a twelve-month period shall be subject to an
inspection fee as set forth in the fee schedule below:
(1) First notice of violation or order to remedy received: no charge.
(2) Second notice of violation or order to remedy received, inspection
fee of $100.
(3) Third notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection fee
of $150.
(4) Fourth notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection
fee of $200.
(5) Fifth notice of violation or order to remedy received: inspection fee
of $500.
C. The inspection fees prescribed above shall be billed directly to the
tenant or owner as the case may be, and a copy mailed to the owner
and/or contact person/agent of the property. Inspection fees shall be
increased 25% when not paid within 30 days after initial billing, to
cover administrative costs. This subsection shall not be considered the
exclusive method of collecting inspection fees and shall not preclude
collection by other lawful methods. If unpaid after 30 days, the costs
may be added to and collected in the same manner as real property
taxes.
D. Every notice of violation or order to remedy shall contain a clear and
conspicuous explanation of the policy in this section requiring fees for
inspections or a copy of this section.
E. The Code Enforcement Official, Director of Public Services or Village
Treasurer may waive an inspection fee in case of error, mistake,
injustice or other good cause.
§ 240-43 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 240-43
237:454
Chapter 244
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 240-43 STORM SEWERS § 240-43
237:455

ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 244-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and may be cited as "Village of Johnson City
Subdivision Regulations."
§ 244-2. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense include
the future and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes
the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the
word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; the word "occupied" includes
the words "designed for occupancy or intended to be occupied."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Administrative Officer duly
designated by the Village of Johnson City, who shall be responsible
as the agent of the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals or other
designated Village body or official for the execution and/or enforcement
of these Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 300, Zoning, and such other
related ordinances as the Village Board may prescribe.[Amended
5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
APPLICANT — One who proposes a subdivision in conformity with
"subdivision" or "subdivide" below.
APPLICATION — All the steps referred to in § 244-4 of this chapter
whereby the subdivider gains acceptance of and approval of and
becomes eligible for the legal recording of the proposed subdivision.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Johnson City.
BUILDING — Any structure upon a lot resting upon a support or
foundation, and shall include any structure other than a fence,
sidewalk, driveway or boundary wall.
COLLECTOR STREETS — All those streets which are designed and
constructed to carry traffic from the minor streets to the major arterial
street and highway system. This includes the principal entrance street
to a residential development and the streets used for principal internal
circulation within such developments.
LAND PARTITION — Any partition of land containing four or less lots,
plots or other divisions of land, each with existing municipal services
and required road frontage on an existing street. Any land partition,
repartitioned into a cumulative total of five or more lots within a fiveyear
period, shall be treated as a subdivision.[Added 10-7-2014 by
L.L. No. 6-2014]
§ 244-1 STORM SEWERS § 244-2
237:457
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by
one building and accessory building and/or uses, including such open
spaces as are required by this chapter.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — Any adjustment of lot lines maintaining
the existing number of lots, plots or other divisions of land, each
with existing municipal services and required road frontage.[Added
10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
LOT WIDTH — The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan prepared by the Planning
Board pursuant to § 7-722 of the Village Law which indicates the
general locations recommended for the various functional classes of
public works, places and structures and for the general physical
development of the Village of Johnson City, and includes any unit or part
of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or
parts thereof.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Village Board under
§ 7-724 of the Village Law showing streets, highways and parks
theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any
amendments thereto adopted by the Village Board or additions thereto
resulting from approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and
the subsequent filing of such approved plats.
PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan
of subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for approval, and only
after approval shall be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawings and
accompanying information as described in § 244-4A below, indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning
Board for its consideration.
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
STREET WIDTH — That shortest distance measured between the lines
delineating the street right-of-way.
SUBDIVIDER — The developer or contractor who will subdivide, the
owner of the land to be subdivided or any authorized agent or
developer, contractor or owner.
SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDE — Any partition of land not classified as
a land partition or lot line adjustment, including, but not limited to,
partitions of land containing five or more lots, plots or other divisions
of land, and any partition or adjustment requiring any new street or
extension of municipal services. Any land partition, repartitioned into a
cumulative total of five or more lots within a five-year period, shall be
treated as a subdivision.[Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
§ 244-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-2
237:458
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, between the front line of the building and the front line of the
lot and extending the full width of the lot
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space, except for accessory
buildings, on the same lot with the building, between the rear line of
said building and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the
lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard. Any lot line not a rear or front line shall be deemed a side lot
line.
§ 244-2 STORM SEWERS § 244-2
237:459

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 244-3. Basic procedural requirements.
A. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before
contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such subdivision or any part
thereof is made and before any permit for the erection of a structure
shall be granted, the subdivider shall apply, in writing, to the Board for
approval of such subdivision. The application of the subdivider shall be
in conformance with the procedural requirements and general
regulations contained in this Article (Article II), except in those cases
where exceptions shall have been granted, in writing, to the applicant
by the Board.
B. In form and substance, the subdivision application in all respects shall
be in full compliance with the provisions of §§ 7-728 and 7-724 of the
Village Law as are made applicable by this chapter or are otherwise in
effect. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
C. Whenever any land partition or lot line adjustment is proposed to be
made and before contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such
partitioned or adjusted land or any part thereof is made and before any
permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the land
partitioner or lot line adjuster shall apply, in writing, to the
Administrative Officer for administrative review of the proposed
partition or adjustment. [Added 10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
(1) The application of the partitioner or adjuster shall provide such
information necessary to determine whether such proposed land
partition or lot line adjustment in fact meets with the definitional
requirements of this chapter and other complies with the Village
Zoning Code.
(2) Within five business days of receipt of such an application, the
Administrative Officer shall forward the application to the Village
Planning Department for review and recommendation.
(3) Within 10 business days of the Planning Department's receipt of
such an application, the Planning Department shall provide a
written review to the Administrative Officer concerning the
proposed partition or adjustment's compliance with this chapter.
(4) Within five business days of receipt of the Planning Department's
review, the Administrative Officer shall approve the land partition
or adjustment if the same in fact meets with the definitional
requirements of this chapter and is in compliance with the Village
Zoning Code. The Administrative Officer shall deny any land
partition or adjustment that does not meet with the definitional
requirements of this chapter, or is not in compliance with the
Village Zoning Code.
§ 244-3 STORM SEWERS § 244-4
237:461
§ 244-4. Application.
A. Step 1. The subdivider will notify the Board, in writing, of his or her
intention to subdivide. This notice of intent shall contain an adequate
description of the land to be subdivided, the date proposed for
commencing work on the subdivision and the date proposed for the
completion of the subdivision work. There shall be submitted with the
notice of intent two copies of a preliminary layout (at scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch) showing or accompanied by the following
information:
(1) The proposed subdivision name identifying title and the name of
the village and county in which the subdivision is located.
(2) The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider and
the designer of preliminary layout.
(3) The date, true North point and scale.
(4) The location of property lines, existing easements, buildings,
watercourses and other essential features.
(5) The location of any existing sewers and water mains, culverts and
drains on the property proposed for subdivision.
(6) The location, names and present width of existing and proposed
streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and
other public open spaces and similar facts regarding adjacent
properties.
(7) Any changes in the use, height, area and/or density districts or
other regulations under any provision of Chapter 300, Zoning,
applicable to the area proposed for subdivision and any boundaries
of such districts affecting the tract; all parcels of land proposed to
be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
[Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(8) The width and location of any street or other public way or place
upon the Official Map or the Master Plan, if such exists, within the
area proposed for subdivision and the width, location, grades and
street profiles of all streets or other public ways proposed by the
subdivider.
(9) The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(10) Connection with existing water supply or alternative means of
providing water supply to the subdivision as provided in §§ 1115
through 1118 of the Public Health Law.
(11) Connection with an existing sanitary sewerage system or
alternative means of treatment and disposal as provided in the
same §§ 1115 through 1118 of the Public Health Law.
§ 244-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-4
237:462
(12) Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage, or, if
applicable, a preliminary stormwater pollution prevention plan
consistent with the requirements of Article I and Article II of the
Erosion and Sediment Control Law of the Village of Johnson City.69
[Amended 5-29-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
(13) Where the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of
any such facilities within the public area so laid out, the
preliminary layout shall show the boundaries of proposed
permanent easements over or under private property, which
permanent easements shall be not less than 10 feet in width and
which shall provide satisfactory access to an existing public
highway or other public open space shown upon the layout or upon
the Official Map.
(14) Where the preliminary layout submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider's entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future
street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the
street system of the unsubmitted part will be considered in the
light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the
part submitted.
(15) The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and/or the
names of owners of record of adjacent acreage.
(16) A topographic map at the same scale as the preliminary layout.
(17) Typical cross sections of the proposed grading and roadways or
sidewalks and topographic conditions at an appropriate scale.
(18) A deed description and a map of survey of tract boundary made and
certified by a licensed surveyor and, where practicable, tied into
established reference points such as existing street corners,
highways or permanent boundary monuments.
(19) If, in conjunction with the preparation of the site in the manner and
for the use specified in the plat and its accompanying information,
the subdivider intends to excavate or have excavated gravel, sand,
rock, topsoil or other similar materials for sale or for use or reuse
at another site other than the original location of the excavation,
such intention shall be so stated on the plat or its accompanying
information. This statement shall include an estimate of the
amount, in weight measurement or volume measurement units, of
such materials to be excavated. If a rock crusher, material
separator, washer or other such machinery shall be required to
facilitate such excavation in the ultimate preparation of the site for
the use intended, such a requirement shall be noted on the plat or
its accompanying information. The subdivider shall also specify on
the plat or the accompanying information a date by which that
69.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 238, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 244-4 STORM SEWERS § 244-4
237:463
portion of the site preparation involving the excavation of gravel,
sand, rock, topsoil or other similar materials shall be completed.
B. Step 2. Not more than 40 calendar days after the date of his or her
notice of intent, the subdivider will be invited, in writing, to appear at
the next regular meeting of the Board. At this meeting, the subdivider
will discuss with the Board his or her preliminary layout.
C. Step 3. Not later than 30 days after the discussion in Subsection B
above:
(1) The subdivider shall be notified, in writing, by the Board of the
following:
(a) The specific changes which it will require in the preliminary
layout described in reference to §§ 244-4A(1) through (19) and
244-7A, B and C.
(b) The character and extent of the required public improvements
for which waivers may have been requested and which, in its
opinion, may be waived without jeopardy to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
(c) The amount of construction or improvement or the amount of
the performance bond therefor which it will require as
prerequisite to the approval of the formal subdivision plat to be
submitted subsequently.
(2) The subdivider, after official written notification by the Board with
respect to the preliminary layout and the changes, if any, to be
made therein, shall within six months thereafter file with the Board
original drawings of the formal subdivision plat and street profiles.
These shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink on tracing cloth in
sheets 20 inches by 20 inches or 20 inches by 40 inches and to a
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, except that when more
than one sheet is required, an additional index sheet of the same
size shall be filed showing to appropriate scale the entire
subdivision on one sheet with lot and block numbers. The size of
the sheets shall include a margin of one inch outside ruled border
lines on three sides and two inches border along the left side of the
twenty-inch side for binding. The subdivision plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
(a) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the
name of the village and county in which the subdivision is
located, the name and address of record owner and subdivider
and the name, license number and seal of the professional
engineer and/or land surveyor responsible for the design,
survey of the subdivision and/or the preparation of the plats.
(b) Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements
and areas to be dedicated to public use.
§ 244-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-4
237:464
(c) Sufficient data acceptable to the Administrative Officer in
order that he or she might readily determine the location,
bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary
line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where
practicable, these should be referenced to monuments,
included in the state system of plane coordinates, and in any
event should be tied to reference points previously established
by a public authority.
(d) The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii,
length of curves and central angles of all curves, tangent
distances and tangent bearings shall be given for each street.
All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall also be
given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a
foot. The final plan shall show the boundaries of the property,
location, graphic scale and true North point.
(e) The final plat shall also show the proper designation thereon of
all public open spaces for which deeds of cession are included
and those spaces to which title is reserved by the subdivider.
For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with the final
submission plat copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained
and the provisions made therefor.
(f) All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance
of unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of
the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
(g) Lots and blocks within the subdivision shall be numbered and
lettered in alphabetical order in accordance with the prevailing
village practice.
(h) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown thus: X.
(i) All lot corner markers shall be shown thus: O.
(j) The subdivision plat shall show the proposed location of and
type of sidewalks, streetlighting standards and species of
street trees, the location of curbs, gutters, water mains,
sanitary sewers and storm drains and the sizes and types
thereof, the character, width and depth of pavement and
subbase, the location of manholes and basins and underground
conduits.
(k) A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of Article I and Article II of the Erosion and
Sediment Control Law of the Village of Johnson City70 shall be
required for contingent approval. The stormwater pollution
prevention plan shall meet the performance and design criteria
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 244-4 STORM SEWERS § 244-4
237:465
and standards in Article II of the Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control Law of the Village of Johnson
City. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be
consistent with the provisions of the Erosion and Sediment
Control Law of the Village of Johnson City. [Added 5-29-2007
by L.L. No. 3-2007]
D. Step 4. The subdivider shall attend a public hearing to be called by the
Board within 30 days after the date the proposed plat is submitted to
the Board.
E. Step 5.
(1) Within 45 days after the plat is filed, the Board shall notify the
subdivider of the contingent approval, contingent modified
approval or disapproval of the plat.
(2) In case of a contingent modified approval, the subdivider shall
correct the plat and its accompanying data in accordance with the
modifications made by the Board, and he or she shall then resubmit
his or her plat in accordance with Subsections C, D and E of this
section.
(3) The contingent approval shall become final when the subdivider
complies with the following:
(a) The subdivider shall complete in accordance with the Board's
directions a certificate stating that he or she shall construct to
the satisfaction of the Administrative Officer all the street and
sanitary improvements and other improvements specified in
§ 7-724 of the Village Law and not specifically waived by the
Board and/or shall file with the Board a performance bond
complying with § 7-724 of the Village Law and satisfactory to
the Village Board as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution
and surety for the completion of such improvements as are not
to be constructed and/or may not be approved by the
Administrative Officer.
(b) The subdivider shall tender offers of cession in a form certified
as satisfactory by the Village Board of all land included in
streets, highways or parks, not specifically reserved by him or
her, but approval of the plat by the Board shall not constitute
an acceptance by the village of the dedication of any street,
highway, park or other public open space.
(c) When the steps enumerated in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b) have
been completed and when their notation upon the plat has
been duly made by the Administrative Officer, the plat shall be
deemed approved contingent upon a notation of approval upon
the plat from the New York State Department of Health,
Division of Sanitation, in accordance with §§ 1115 through
1118 of the Public Health Law. If such approval is obtained
§ 244-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-4
237:466
§ 244-5. Application fee. [Amended 7-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008;
10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
§ 244-6. Responsibilities of subdivider.
without changes on the plat required, the plat shall be finally
and completely approved, and within 90 days after the Board
has given its contingent final approval, the subdivider shall
file the plat with the County Clerk or Registrar. In accordance
with the provisions of § 7-728 of the Village Law, such final
approval shall have been deemed to expire if the plat is not
so filed within said 90 days. If the plat is not approved by
the New York State Department of Health or is approved only
after changes upon the plat are made, the Board's contingent
approval will become null and void. Thereafter, all procedures
required by this section necessary to achieve and complete
final plat approval shall be repeated.
A. An application for a subdivision shall be accompanied by a fee of $25
per lot proposed in the subdivision.
B. An application for a land partition or lot line adjustment shall be
accompanied by a fee of $25 per lot created or adjusted by the proposed
partition or adjustment.
A. Before improvement construction work at the site can commence, the
subdivider shall within 10 days after filing the plat with the County
Clerk file a copy of the same plat with the Johnson City Village Board.
B. After such plat has been filed, the subdivider shall be granted
permission in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations as
established by the Village Engineer, the Administrative Officer and/or
any other officials so directed by local ordinance to proceed with the
work necessary according to the approved plans and in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, and/or Chapter 114,
Building Code Administration. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No.
5-2013]
C. Inspections.
(1) After subdivision site work is underway, the subdivider shall
cooperate with the Administrative Officer or any other duly
designated official who shall be responsible for those inspections
necessary to ensure that all work is in accordance with plans as
approved and in conformity with the applicable standards and
requirements as described in § 244-7 of this article.
(2) The subdivider shall be required to bear the costs of inspection of
the work by an engineer.
D. Monuments of a type approved by the Administrative Officer shall set at
all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be
§ 244-4 STORM SEWERS § 244-6
237:467
§ 244-7. Standards and requirements.
subdivided; and at all street intersections, angle points in street lines,
points of curve and such intermediate points as shall be required by the
Administrative Officer.
E. Permanent reference monuments shall be constructed in accordance
with specifications of the engineer and, when referenced to the state
system of plane coordinates, shall also conform to the requirements of
the State Department of Public Works. They shall be placed as required
by the Administrative Officer.
F. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located, satisfactory to the
Administrative Officer, at least 3/4 inches (if metal) in diameter and at
least 30 inches in length and located in the ground to existing grade.
G. Continuance of work at the subdivision site and the gaining of village
acceptance for constructed improvements shall be dependent upon the
following:
(1) The applicable standards and requirements described in § 244-7 of
this article shall be at all times fulfilled.
(2) The subdivider shall furnish to the village an affidavit stating that
all bills and accounts for labor and materials in connection with the
improvements constructed and now offered for village acceptance
have been paid in full.
A. General standards. The subdivider shall observe the following general
land subdivision standards:
(1) The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Official Map, the
provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, and the Master Plan, if such
exist. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(2) The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the
continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for
their proper projection when adjoining property is not subdivided
and shall be of a width at least as great as that of such existing
streets. For those streets completed on a portion of an approved
subdivision, the extensions of which are to be completed at a later
date, the subdivider shall provide a turnaround roadway as
specified for dead-end or cul-de-sac streets in Subsection A(4)
below.
(3) The main highways and secondary highways shall not be less than
the width shown on the Master Plan, if such exists; parkways and
boulevards shall be such width as may be designated by the Board.
As a general rule, the width of minor streets shall not be less than
50 feet.
§ 244-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-7
237:468
(4) Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall not in general exceed 400 feet
in length and shall be equipped with a turnaround roadway with a
minimum radius of 35 feet for the outside curb at the closed end.
(5) Block lengths generally shall not exceed 800 feet in length.
(6) A pedestrian right-of-way at least 10 feet wide may be provided
near and through the center of every block over 800 feet long and
shall be paved with a walk at least five feet wide.
(7) Each normal block shall be planned to provide two rows of lots, but
irregularly shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sac streets and
containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly
designed and covered by agreements as to maintenance of interior
parks.
(8) Curb radii at intersections shall not be less than 20 feet and
property line radii shall be at least the equivalent of a ten-foot
radius on a right angle intersection.
(9) Side lines of lots, so far as practicable, shall be at right angles or
radial to street lines.
(10) Reversed frontage of lots at street intersections shall be avoided
where possible, and a series of fan-shaped lots shall not be platted.
(11) Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to
provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the
building line of each street.
(12) Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and
shall be the reasonable minimum, but shall not be less than 0.5%
nor more than 5% for main thoroughfares nor more than 10% for
minor streets.
(13) Paved rear service streets of not less than 20 feet in width or, in lieu
thereof, adequate off-street loading space, suitably surfaced, shall
be provided in connection with all lots designed for commercial
use. Standards shall be in conformity with Chapter 300, Zoning.
[Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(14) In front of areas designed and zoned or where a petition for a
change in zoning is contemplated for commercial use, to permit
such use the street width shall be increased by such amount on
each side as may be deemed necessary by the Board to assure the
free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or
parking vehicles and to provide adequate and safe parking space
for such commercial district. Standards shall be in conformity with
Chapter 300, Zoning. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(15) Land subject to flooding and deemed by the Board to be
uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property
§ 244-7 STORM SEWERS § 244-7
237:469
or aggravate the flood hazard, but for such uses as shall not be
endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not
produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
(16) In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary
building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the
opening of future streets and logical further subdivision.
(17)No reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or to be
dedicated to public use shall be permitted.
(18) In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other
any one point more than 10º shall be connected with a curve, the
radius of which for the inner street lines shall not be less than 350
feet on main thoroughfares, 250 feet on secondary thoroughfares
and 100 feet on local streets. The outer street line in each case
shall be parallel to such inner street line.
(19) Developers shall set aside areas for parks and playgrounds which
shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other
recreation uses when required by the Board. In lieu of land
specified for such purposes, the Board may require the subdivider
to contribute a lawful and reasonable sum for placement in a fund
to be earmarked and used by the Village Board for parks and
playground purposes. Such usage shall be in accordance with the
Master Plan, if such exists.
B. Requirements for streets, roads and other associated utilities. The
following listed specifications for the construction and improvements of
streets, roads and other utilities offered to the Village of Johnson City
for dedication as public streets or utilities constitute the standard
specifications for all finished streets, roads or other utilities which are
to be incorporated in any new subdivision and so offered to the Village
of Johnson City for formal dedication as public streets, highways or
other utilities.
(1) All Collector Streets shall have a minimum width of at least 60 feet,
and the roadbed foundation including drainage ditches on all such
streets shall be at least 36 feet wide.
(2) All minor streets shall have a minimum width in accordance with
the pavement specifications,71 and the roadbed foundation
including drainage ditches on all such streets shall be in
accordance with the pavement specifications.
(3) All streets shall be rough graded, in accordance with the pavement
specifications.
71.Editor's Note: The pavement specifications are on file in the office of the Director of Public
Services.
§ 244-7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-7
237:470
(4) The base of all roadbeds shall be constructed in accordance with
the pavement specifications. The Board shall require greater
depths if, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, a thicker roadbed
is deemed necessary.
(5) The top of all roadbeds shall be constructed in accordance with the
pavement specifications.72
(6) On all streets the ditches shall be cut on either side of the roadbeds
to carry all anticipated surface drainage to the satisfaction of the
Village Engineer. Wherever the grade is 5% or greater, concrete
curb and gutter shall be required. The base of one such roadbed
shall be 34 feet in width.
(7) Sluiceways and culvert pipe drainage shall be required at the
intersection of all streets and other locations as designated by the
Village Engineer and shall be constructed with approved concrete
of sufficient size and strength to carry off anticipated surface
drainage, all of such installations to be made under the supervision
of the Village Engineer.
(8) The minimum width for sidewalks to be constructed in residential
areas shall be five eet and in commercial or industrial areas six
feet.
(9) An adequate storm drainage system shall be provided. In lieu
thereof, the Board may require the subdivider to contribute a
lawful and reasonable sum for placement in a fund to be earmarked
and used by the Village Board for the construction of a storm
drainage system. Such usage shall be in accordance with the
Master Plan, if such exists.
(10) Streetlighting. Underground wiring for the streetlights, the light
poles, light pole bases, heads and luminaries shall be provided by
the subdivider. In general, the streetlights shall be located at street
intersections and spaced at intervals of 500 feet. The location of
said streetlights shall be approved by the Town of Union
Streetlighting Committee. The type of streetlights shall meet the
Town of Union standards. [Added 4-5-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
C. Lot dimension requirements shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 300, Zoning, for the district in which the subdivision is located.
[Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
D. Variations of the general standards and other requirements as outlined
in Subsections A, B and C above may be permitted in accordance with
the zoning variance procedures as enumerated in Chapter 300, Zoning,
Article 67, Variances. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
72.Editor's Note: The pavement specifications are on file in the office of the Director of Public
Services.
§ 244-7 STORM SEWERS § 244-7
237:471

ARTICLE III
Planning Board
§ 244-8. Basic powers and responsibilities.
§ 244-9. Subdivision application review procedures.
A. The Board shall review and process all proposed subdivision
applications to ensure that they are so designed and located as to
achieve the objectives of this chapter and that standards and
requirements conform to § 244-7A, B and C.
B. The Board, in conformity with this chapter and/or other applicable
village laws, shall have the power to prescribe a set of rules and
regulations whereby its responsibilities will be properly discharged and
that will serve as guidance for subdividers and for those officials
delegated with executory responsibilities in connection with this
chapter.
C. In conformity with rules established or to be established by the Village
Board, the Board shall supervise and direct the work of the
Administrative Officer and/or other officials assigned to aid in the
execution and administration of this chapter concerning subdivisions
and/or any planning consultants, surveyors or engineers hired or
contracted for any functions or services necessary to achieve the
objectives of or to secure compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter concerning subdivisions. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No.
6-2014]
D. In form and substance the Board's activities shall in all respects be in
full compliance with the provisions of §§ 7-728, 7-724 and 7-732 of the
Village Law as are made applicable by this chapter or are otherwise in
effect. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
A. Step 1. Within 30 days of the receipt of a notice of intent to subdivide
with the preliminary layout and accompanying data, the Board shall
convene in regular or special session for a preliminary review of the
application.
B. Step 2. Within 40 days of receipt of notice of intent to subdivide, the
Board shall inform the applicant, in writing, to appear at the next
regular meeting of the Board to discuss with it his or her preliminary
layout.
C. Step 3. Within 30 days of the discussion referred to in Subsection B
above, the Board shall:
(1) Convene again in regular or special session and by resolution
decide upon the following:
§ 244-8 STORM SEWERS § 244-9
237:473
(a) The specific changes which it will require in the preliminary
layout described in reference to §§ 244-4A(1) through (18) and
244-7A, B and C.
(b) The character and extent of the required public improvements
for which waivers may have been requested and which, in its
opinion, may be waived without jeopardy to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
(c) The amount of construction or improvement or the amount of
the performance bond therefor which it will require as
prerequisite to the approval of the formal subdivision plat to be
submitted subsequently.
(2) Inform the applicant, in writing, of resolutions passed by the Board
concerning the items in Subsection C(1) above.
D. Step 4. Within 30 days after the subdivider has filed with the Board his
or her formal subdivision plat, the Board shall:
(1) Convene in regular or special session to review the plat and
determine if there has been full compliance with instructions
contained in the Board's previous resolutions concerning said
subdivision.
(2) If there has not been full compliance with previous resolutions:
(a) Consider the subdivider's written request for exceptions
thereto and afford the subdivider an opportunity to be heard
concerning said exceptions if he or she so requests or if the
Board determines that subdivider's presence is warranted; and
(b) After due consideration as described in Subsection D(2)(a),
inform the subdivider of resolutions passed by the Board which
shall indicate under what conditions the plat will be accepted
for final review and public hearing.
(3) If there has been full compliance with all previous resolutions or
after, by resolution, it has determined to accept the plat for public
hearing as presented, inform the subdivider, in writing, of the date
and time of a public hearing on the submitted plat and request his
or her presence thereto.
(4) If there has been full compliance, in conformance with existing
village law, call for and conduct a public hearing on the submitted
plat.
E. Step 5. Within 45 days after the plat has been filed, the Board shall:
(1) Convene in regular or special session to consider the submitted
plat and by resolution determine its approval, approval with
modifications or disapproval of said plat.
§ 244-9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-9
237:474
(2) Inform the applicant, in writing, of the Board's resolution.
§ 244-9 STORM SEWERS § 244-9
237:475

ARTICLE IV
Village Board
§ 244-10. Designation of officials.
The Village Board shall designate those officials or official bodies required
to execute, administer and/or enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 244-11. Certificate of filing.
The Village Clerk shall deliver to the subdivider a certificate of filing which
certifies the date on which the subdivider submitted his or her formal
subdivision plat as specified in Article II, § 244-4A(2), of this chapter.
§ 244-12. Acceptance of improvements for public use and
maintenance.
A. Upon completion of the construction and installation of streets and
utilities in accordance with the approved map and plans of the
subdivider and upon delivery to the Village Board of satisfactory deeds,
abstracts of title and easements for streets, storm sewers and sanitary
sewers as the same are required, the Village Board shall take all
necessary steps to accept these improvements for public use and
permanent maintenance in accordance with the provisions of the
Village Law and any other applicable law, and the subdivider shall
thereupon be released from any performance bonds posted and filed
with the village to guarantee any of the aforesaid proposed construction
and installation.
B. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the Village Board shall require
from the subdivider an affidavit stating that all bills and accounts for
materials and labor used in the construction of improvements have
been paid in full before said improvements will be accepted by the
Village Board for public use and maintenance.
§ 244-10 STORM SEWERS § 244-12
237:477

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 244-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter is an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding
$50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation. A first violation shall be deemed to have occurred from
the date of written notification of violation issued by the Administrative
Officer or from such date as may be designated in such written notice.
§ 244-14. Complaints of violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint
in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be
filed with the Administrative Officer (or other enforcing officer), who shall
properly record such complaint and immediately investigate any report
thereon.
§ 244-13 STORM SEWERS § 244-14
237:479
Chapter 250
TAXATION
§ 244-14 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 244-14
237:480
ARTICLE I
Utilities Tax
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Subpart M of Part I of the 1973 Code]
§ 250-1. Imposition of tax on utilities. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income for each and every twelvemonth
period commencing from April 1, 1969, and thereafter is hereby
imposed on every utility doing business in the Village of Johnson City which
is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service,
except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article 9
of the Transportation Law, which has a gross income for 12 months ending
May 31 in excess of $500, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating
income is hereby imposed for the same period upon every other utility
doing business in the Village of Johnson City which has a gross operating
income for 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall
have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Johnson
City and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed
by any other provision of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not
be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the
territorial limits of the Village of Johnson City, notwithstanding that some
act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such
limits.
§ 250-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by any reason of
sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with
respect to which it is provided that profits from sale shall be included in
gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser in the Village of Johnson City, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or
such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used,
labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other
expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits
from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or
interest in such property; also profits from the sale of personal property
(other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a
return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived
from sources within the Village of Johnson City other than such as are
received from a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned
by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses
whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof; and also profits
§ 250-1 STORM SEWERS § 250-2
237:481
from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the Village
of Johnson City whatsoever. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section or of § 186-a of the Tax Law, the words "gross income" shall include:
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of any division
of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in
the business of operating on the public highways of this state one (1) or
more omnibuses having a seating capacity of more than seven (7) persons
and persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and
parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface,
rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person
(whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas,
electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered
through mains, pipes or wires or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water,
refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or
wires; regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such
person or are only incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 250-3. Records to be kept.
Every utility subject to tax under this Article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and such
records shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated
within the Village of Johnson City.
A.
In the case of a utility selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only
receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Johnson City.
B.
Receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise,
made for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of gas,
electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy or in or
by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric,
steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in the Village
of Johnson City, including cash, credits and property of any kind or
nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
C.
§ 250-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-4
237:482
§ 250-4. Filing requirements.
§ 250-5. When tax is due.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this Article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
A. Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually on or before
March 25, June 25, September 25 and December 25 a return for the
three (3) calendar months preceding such return date, including any
period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is
effective, each of which returns shall state the gross income or gross
operating income for the period covered by each such return. Returns
shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by
him or her for such purpose and shall contain such other data,
information or matter as the Village Treasurer may require to be
included therein.
B. Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before
the 25th day of February, a return for twelve (12) calendar months
ending December 31 preceding such return date or any portion thereof
for which the tax imposed hereby is effective, which return shall state
the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered.
Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be
furnished by him or her for such purpose and shall contain such other
data, information or matter as the Village Treasurer may require to be
included therein. Every return shall have annexed thereto a
certification by the head of the utility making the same or of the owner
or of a copartner thereof or of a principal officer of the corporation, if
such business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the
statements contained therein are true.
C. The Village Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed,
may require at any time a further or supplemental return which shall
contain any data that may be specified by the Village Treasurer. The
Village Treasurer may require any utility doing business within the
confines of the Village of Johnson City to file an annual return, which
shall contain any data specified by him or her, regardless of whether the
utility is subject to tax under this Article. Every return shall have
annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same
or of the owner or of the copartner thereof or of the principal officer of
the corporation to the effect that the statements contained therein are
true.
§ 250-4 STORM SEWERS § 250-6
237:483
§ 250-6. Insufficient returns.73
In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within twenty (20) days after the same is required by
notice from the Village Treasurer or if no return is made for any period,
from such information as he or she is able to obtain, and if necessary, the
Village Treasurer may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or
otherwise. The Village Treasurer shall give notice of such determination
to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall,
within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice of such determination,
apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing or unless the Village Treasurer,
of his or her own motion, shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the
Village Treasurer shall give notice of his or her decision to the person
liable for the tax. The decision of the Village Treasurer may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York, if application therefor is made within thirty (30)
days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited
with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him or her, in
such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall
approve to the effect that if such order is dismissed or the tax confirmed,
the applicant for the order will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of the applicant, such
undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties,
costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be
required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to
the granting of such order.
§ 250-7. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him or
her in the last return filed by him or her under this Article or, if no return
has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of
such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by
the person to whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined
according to the provisions of this Article by the giving of notice, shall
commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 250-8. Failure to file; penalty.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay a tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this Article shall be subject
to a penalty of five per centum (5%) of the amount of tax due, plus one
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 250-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-8
237:484
per centum (1%) of such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof
excepting the first month after which the return was required to be filed or
such tax became due, but the Village Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay
was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty fixed by the
foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 250-9. Refunds.
If within one (1) year from the payment of any tax or penalty the payer
thereof shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village
Treasurer or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any
portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer
shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same
period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer.
However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to
a determination of the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless
the Village Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his
or her own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have
been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules of the State of New York that such determination was erroneous
or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this
Article. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall
be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained
of, and the Village Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect
thereto. After making his or her determination, the Village Treasurer shall
give notice thereof to the person interested, and he or she shall be entitled
to an order to review such determination under said Article 78, subject to
the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an
order.
§ 250-10. Tax not chargeable to customers.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
cost of such utility.
§ 250-11. When tax to constitute lien.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
Article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 250-8 STORM SEWERS § 250-12
237:485
§ 250-12. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this Article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be necessary for the exercise of his or her powers and the performance
of his or her duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other
records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take
testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the
line of his or her official duty under this Article and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers
and documents.
§ 250-13. Secrecy provisions; penalties.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Johnson City to divulge or
make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross
operating income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return
under this Article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns
shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything
contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on
behalf of the Village of Johnson City in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of this Article or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in
an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State
of New York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under
the provisions of this Article when the returns or facts shown thereby
are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which
events the court may require the production of and may omit in
evidence so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are
pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his or her duly
authorized representative of a copy of any return filed by him or her,
nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular returns and the items thereof or the
publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have
failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by
this Article, together with any relevant information which, in the
opinion of the Village Treasurer, may assist in the collection of such
delinquent taxes or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal
representatives of the Village of Johnson City of the return of any
person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based
thereon or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provision shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or by
imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both, and if the offender
is an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Johnson City, he
or she shall be dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding
§ 250-12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-13
237:486
§ 250-14. Deposit of funds.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer for taxes
heretofore or hereafter imposed under this Article shall be credited and
deposited by him or her in the general fund of the village.
any office or employment in the Village of Johnson City for a period of
five (5) years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any first class
village in the State of New York information contained in returns filed
under this Article, provided that such other city or village grants similar
privileges to the Village of Johnson City, and provided that such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with
any information contained in such returns.
§ 250-13 STORM SEWERS § 250-14
237:487

ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 8-20-1973 as Division 1 of Subpart N of Part I of the 1973
Code; amended in its entirety 2-19-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 250-15. Exemption granted. [Amended 6-18-1993]
Real property owned by one (1) or more persons, each of whom is sixtyfive
(65) years of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife,
one (1) of whom is sixty-five (65) years of age or over, previously exempt
from taxation pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York and Village Local Law No. 8-1981,74 shall be exempt from taxation
commencing June 1, 1986, pursuant to the provisions of § 467-d of said Real
Property Tax Law75 to the extent set forth in the following table based on
the maximum annual income of the owner(s), as that term is defined in the
Real Property Tax Law.
Income Level
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From Taxation
$15,000 and under 50
$15,001 to $15,600 45
$15,601 to $16,200 40
$16,201 to $16,800 35
$16,801 to $17,400 30
$17,401 to $18,000 25
$18,001 to $18,600 20
$18,601 to $19,200 15
$19,201 to $19,800 10
§ 250-16. Application for exemption.
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or owners
of the property in the manner required by law and the rules and
regulations of the New York State Board of Equalization and
Assessment and/or the Assessor of the Town of Union on forms provided
by the Assessor of the Town of Union.
B. Application for such exemption must be made annually and filed in the
office of the Assessor of the Town of Union between January 1 and May
31 of the year 1985 and each year thereafter.
74.Editor's Note: Local Law No. 8-1981 set the upper annual income limit for exemption
eligibility at eight thousand two hundred dollars ($8,200.) and was superseded 2-19-1985
by L.L. No. 1-1985.
75.Editor's Note: Section 467-d of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed by L.1985, c.440,
§ 3; see now § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 250-15 STORM SEWERS § 250-16
237:489

ARTICLE III
Targeted Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 3-20-2007 by L.L. No. 1-200776]
§ 250-17. Purpose.
A. The Town of Union has established and appointed an Industrial and
Commercial Incentive Board ("ICIB") that includes Village residents
and the ICIB has recommended a plan to the Town Board of the Town of
Union concerning the various types of business real property which
should be granted eligibility for an exemption pursuant to § 485-b(9)(b)
of the Real Property Tax Law ("RPTL") ("Plan"). The Town of Union has
accepted the Plan and approved implementation of a local law
regarding the same.
B. The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City has reviewed the Plan
proposed by the ICIB to implement a targeted business investment
exemption and determined that the Plan is the product of the research
and study conducted by the ICIB. In addition, the Plan has been
reviewed by the Johnson City Planning Department and it is determined
that the plan takes into consideration the planning objectives of the
Village of Johnson City within the proposed geographic area, the
necessity of the exemption to the attraction of retention of such
businesses and the economic benefit to the area of providing the
targeted business investment exemption.
C. Section 485-b of the RPTL further provides that the Village Board may,
after the presentation of the findings of the ICIB, adopt by local law a
restricted real property tax exemption targeted, among other criteria,
to specific geographic areas identified in the Plan presented by the
ICIB.
D. The Village Board finds that the implementation of a targeted business
investment exemption will encourage private investment, thereby
benefiting all of the residents of the Village of Johnson City by the
creation of and retention of private sector jobs. The Village Board
further finds that the exemptions are necessary to encourage targeted
economic development and the value of the exemptions is justified by
the need to provide employment opportunities and broaden the tax
base. The targeted business investment exemptions will particularly aid
in the revitalization or maintenance of certain identified commercial
areas in the Village of Johnson City.
E. Accordingly, the Village Board of the Village of Johnson City has
determined that it is in the best interest of the Village to implement a
targeted business investment exemption and the Village Board hereby
enacts the following article pursuant to the authority provided under
Real Property Tax Law § 485-b for certain real property constructed,
76.1 Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Art. III, Business Investment
Exemption, adopted 7-18-1977 by L.L. No. 10-1977 (Division 2 of Subpart N of Part I of
§ 250-17 STORM SEWERS § 250-17
237:491
§ 250-18. Exemption granted.
altered, installed or improved subsequent to the enactment of this
article for commercial, business or industrial activity.
A. Certain real property constructed, altered, installed or improved
subsequent to the effective date of this article for the purpose of
commercial, business or industrial activity and which is contained
within the geographic areas of the Village set forth in § 250-19 shall be
exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies, except for special
ad valorem levies for fire district, fire protection district and fire alarm
district purposes, to the extent hereinafter provided.
B. Computation; exceptions; applicability.
(1) Computation of exemption.
(a) Such real property located within the geographic area(s) set
forth in § 250-19 of this article shall be exempt for a period of
one year to the extent of 50% of the increase in assessed value
thereof attributable to such construction, alteration,
installation or improvement and for an additional period of
nine years; provided, however, that the extent of such
exemption shall be decreased by 5% each year during such
additional period of nine years, and such exemption shall be
computed with respect to the exemption base. The "exemption
base" shall be the increase in assessed value as determined in
the initial year of such ten-year period following the filing of an
original application, except as provided in Subsection B(1)(b)
of this section.
(b) In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or
more is certified for a final assessment roll pursuant to the
rules of the state board, the exemption base shall be multiplied
by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the total
assessed value of the parcel on such final assessment roll (after
accounting for any physical or quantity changes to the parcel
since the immediately preceding assessment roll) and the
denominator of which shall be the total assessed value of the
parcel on the immediately preceding final assessment roll. The
result shall be the new exemption base. The exemption shall
thereupon be recomputed to take into account the new
exemption base, notwithstanding the fact that the Assessor
receives the certification of the change in level of assessment
after the completion, verification and filing of the final
assessment roll. In the event that the Assessor does not have
custody of the roll when such certification is received, the
Assessor shall certify the recomputed exemption to the local
officers having custody and control of the roll, and such local
officers are hereby directed and authorized to enter the
recomputed exemption certified by the Assessor on the roll.
§ 250-17 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-18
237:492
The assessor shall give written notice of such recomputed
exemption to the property owner, who may, if he or she
believes that the exemption was recomputed incorrectly, apply
for a correction in the manner provided by Title 3 of Article 5
of the New York State Real Property Tax Law for the correction
of clerical errors.
(c) The following table shall illustrate the computation of the tax
exemption:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
(2) No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(a) Such construction, alteration, installation or improvement was
commenced subsequent to the adoption of this article.
(b) The cost of such construction, alteration, installation or
improvement exceeds the sum of $50,000.
(c) Such construction, alteration, installation or improvement is
completed as may be evidenced by a certificate of occupancy
or other appropriate documentation as provided by the owner.
(3) For purposes of this section, the terms "construction," "alteration,"
"installation" and "improvement" shall not include ordinary
maintenance and repairs.
(4) No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent
to any other real property tax exemption granted to the same
improvements to real property except, where during the period of
such previous exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other
payments were made to the local government in an amount that
would have been paid on such improvements had such property
been granted an exemption pursuant to this article. In such case,
an exemption shall be granted for a number of years equal to the
ten-year exemption granted pursuant to this section less the
§ 250-18 STORM SEWERS § 250-18
237:493
§ 250-19. Geographic areas.
number of years the property would have been previously exempt
from real property taxes.
C. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such real property on a form prescribed by the state board. Such
application shall be filed with the Assessor of the Village having the
power to assess property for taxation on or before the appropriate
taxable status date of the village, town or county and within one year
from the date of completion of such construction, alteration, installation
or improvement.
D. If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this section, he or she shall approve the application and
such real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special
ad valorem levies, except for special ad valorem levies for fire district,
fire protection district and fire alarm district purposes, as herein
provided, commencing with the assessment roll prepared after the
taxable status date of March 1 of each year. The assessed value of any
exemption granted pursuant to this section shall be entered by the
Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property, with the
amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to real property used primarily
for the buying, selling, storing or developing goods or services, the
manufacture or assembly of goods or the processing of raw materials.
This section shall not apply to property used primarily for the furnishing
of dwelling space or accommodations to either residents or transients
other than hotels or motels.
F. In the event that real property granted an exemption pursuant to this
section ceases to be used primarily for eligible purposes, the exemption
granted pursuant to this section shall cease.
A. Targeted Business Investment Exemption Area No. 1 shall be that area
bounded by the east from the intersection of Harry L. Drive and Airport
Road, to the west to the Village Boundary along Harry L. Drive, to the
south from the New York State right-of-way on the north side of NYS
Route 17, and to the north to a point 100 yards north of Harry L. Drive,
and for Reynolds Road only to the north to a point 100 yards north of
Fairview Avenue.
B. Targeted Business Investment Exemption Area No. 2 shall be that area
bounded as follows: [Added 8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
(1) To the east: from a point where Main Street meets the City of
Binghamton Boundary;
(2) To the west: to the intersection of N. Arch Street and Main Street;
(3) To the south: frontage on south side of Main Street; and
§ 250-18 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-19
237:494
(4) To the north: frontage on north side of Main Street, and from the
east side of N. Arch Street to the west side of Lester Avenue – all
tax map parcels located south of the railroad tracks.
§ 250-19 STORM SEWERS § 250-19
237:495

ARTICLE IV
Duplicate Tax Bills and Notices
[Adopted 3-3-1987]
§ 250-20. Application deadline for designation of third party.
The Village of Johnson City adopts May 1 as the last day and deadline for the
receipt and acceptance of applications from taxpayers for the designation
of a consenting third party adult who shall receive duplicate tax bills and
notices of unpaid taxes in addition to said eligible taxpayer applicant.
§ 250-20 STORM SEWERS § 250-20
237:497

ARTICLE V
Infrastructure Exemption
[Adopted 10-18-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
§ 250-21. Exemption adopted; application.
The infrastructure exemption as provided for in Real Property Tax Law §
485-g is hereby adopted by the Village of Johnson City, and said application
for such exemption may be made to the Town of Union Assessor as provided
for in § 485-g of the Real Property Tax Law as it may be amended from time
to time.
§ 250-21 STORM SEWERS § 250-21
237:499

ARTICLE VI
Home Improvement Tax Exemption
[Adopted 1-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 250-22. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 250-23. Exemption criteria.
A. The purpose of this exemption is to encourage property owners to make
improvements, and thus to keep neighborhoods viable and attractive.
B. This article is adopted pursuant to § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law
of the State of New York.
A. Only one-family and two-family residences qualify.
B. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment, the original of which shall be filed with
the Town of Union Assessor ("Assessor"). Such original application shall
be filed on or before the taxable status date and within one year from
the date of completion of such reconstruction, alteration or
improvement. A copy of said application shall also be filed with the
State Board of Equalization and Assessment. If the Assessor is satisfied
that the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this Article VI,
the Assessor shall approve the application and such real property shall
thereafter be exempt from taxation as herein provided commencing
with the first assessment roll prepared after the taxable status date.
The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this section
shall be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separation
column. [Amended 8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011; 8-7-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012; 12-3-2013 by L.L. No. 10-2013; 12-1-2015 by L.L. No.
9-2015]
C. Exemption terminates immediately if the property is sold/transferred
other than to an immediate family member.
D. Value of the improvement must exceed $3,000, but the maximum value
of the improvement for which the exemption would apply cannot exceed
$80,000, although the total value of the improvement itself may exceed
$80,000.
E. Ordinary maintenance and repairs do not qualify.
F. The greater portion of the property (that part prior to the project) must
be at least five years old.
G. The exemption does not apply to special district charges.
H. Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall require the
issuance of a building permit and is completed with the issuance of a
§ 250-22 STORM SEWERS § 250-23
237:501
certification of occupancy and/or other required documentation and
permits. [Amended 12-1-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
I. The exemption is for eight years. The first year the exemption will be
100% of the increase in assessment due to the improvement, and
thereafter, reduced by 12.5% per year for the remaining term of the
exemption.
J. All provisions of § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law are adopted as if
fully set forth herein. [Amended 8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011;
8-7-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012; 12-3-2013 by L.L. No. 10-2013;
12-1-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
§ 250-23 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 250-23
237:502
Chapter 254
(RESERVED)
Chapter 256
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Antennas — See Ch. 100. Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 256-1. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
A. Statutory authority. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 7 of
the Village Law of the State of New York and the Municipal Home Rule
Law of the State of New York, the Village Board of the Village of
Johnson City, County of Broome, State of New York, has ordained and
does hereby enact this chapter regulating and restricting the location,
size and use of telecommunications facilities and their accessory
structures in the Village of Johnson City.
B. Legislative intent. The Village of Johnson City recognizes the increased
demand for wireless communication transmitting facilities and the need
for the services they provide. Often these facilities require the
construction of a communications tower and/or similar facilities. The
intent of this article is to regulate the location, construction and
modification of the telecommunications facilities in accordance with the
guidelines of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other applicable
laws by:
(1) Accommodating the need for telecommunications towers/antennas
while regulating their locations and number in the community.
(2) Minimizing adverse visual impacts of these towers/antennas
through proper siting, design and screening.
(3) Preserving and enhancing the positive aesthetic qualities of the
natural environment and current development in the Village of
Johnson City.
(4) Providing for the health, safety and welfare of the community by
avoiding potential damage or other negative impact to adjacent
properties from power failure, falling ice, etc., through proper
siting and engineering.
(5) Requiring the joint use of towers when available and encouraging
the placement of antennas on existing structures to minimize the
number of such structures in the future.
§ 250-23 STORM SEWERS § 256-1.1
237:503
§ 256-1.1. Definitions. [Added 4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the
context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meanings given in
this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number
include words in the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and
not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An accessory facility or
structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless
telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot
as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited
to utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals.
ANTENNA SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit
by which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to
construct and use a DAS or microcell as granted or issued by the
Village.
APPLICANT — Any wireless service provider submitting an application
for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
APPLICATION — All necessary and appropriate documentation that an
applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
CO-LOCATED/EXISTING STRUCTURE ANTENNAS — Any antenna that
is attached to an existing telecommunications tower.
CO-LOCATION — The use of an existing tower or structure to support
antennas for the provision of wireless services. A replacement tower
that is constructed on the same site as an existing tower will be
considered a co-location as long as the new tower is no taller than the
old tower and the old tower is removed within 180 days after the new
tower is constructed.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — The inability to perform an act on terms that are
reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not
have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the
financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory
financial return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem
a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not render an act
or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable."
§ 256-1.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-1.1
237:504
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all
information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be
made with respect to an application.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport
medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or
structure. DAS antenna elevations are generally at or below the clutter
level, and node installations are compact.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance
measured from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the
tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightning
protection device.
MICROCELL — A cell in a mobile phone network served by a low-power
cellular base station (tower), covering a limited area such as a mall,
hotel, school or transportation hub.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The addition, removal or change of
any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects
of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters,
landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of
any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/
or an upgrade or changeout of equipment for better or more modern
equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a
telecommunications tower or telecommunications site as a co-location
is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement of
any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical
to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the
normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding,
removing or changing anything.
NIER — Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
NON-CO-LOCATED/NEW STRUCTURE ANTENNAS — An antenna that
will not be mounted on an existing structure as defined herein or
that is located 15 feet higher than the existing structure on which
it is mounted. These antennas are permitted in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint
stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint
common interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
§ 256-1.1 STORM SEWERS § 256-1.1
237:505
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS — The same meaning as
defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Johnson
City.
REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE — The replacement of any components
of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the
component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal
repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition,
removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable
components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible
appearance of the facility as originally permitted.
STATE — The State of New York.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — To minimize adverse aesthetic
and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities
adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities,
which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive
facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under
the facts and circumstances.
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of
audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light,
and other electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — A structure used in the
provision of services described in the definition of "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TEMPORARY — Temporary in relation to all aspects and components of
this chapter; something not intended to, or that does not, exist for more
than 90 days.
TOWER — Any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for
receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal.
TOWER SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit by
which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct
and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by
the Village.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Johnson City.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Includes a
"telecommunications site" and "personal wireless facility." It means a
structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or
used to support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices.
This includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and
structures, including but not limited to buildings, church steeples, silos,
§ 256-1.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-1.1
237:506
§ 256-2. Permitted locations; approvals and bulk requirements.
No telecommunications facility shall be sited, located, constructed, erected
or modified without the issuance of a building permit, tower special use
permit and site plan approval, and such other permits or approvals as are
prescribed by the Code of the Village of Johnson City.
water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as a support
structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further
includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment
shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure
and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television,
cellular, SMR, paging, 911, personal communications services (PCS),
commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial
wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC.
A. Co-located/existing structure antennas and modifications to existing
towers/antennas, approvals, submittal and requirements. [Amended
4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(1) Approvals. A co-located or existing structure antenna is permitted
without a tower special use permit upon issuance of site plan
approval and a building permit. DAS/microcell applications that
also meet the definition of a co-located/existing structure antenna
shall only require minor site plan approval and a building permit.
The applicant shall also be responsible for all reasonable costs
incurred by the Village in reviewing and analyzing an application,
including, but not limited to, any engineering or technical reports
or studies submitted by the applicant relative to its application and
any legal fees related thereto. As a condition of approval, the
approving department or board may require a removal bond.
(2) Submittal and bulk requirements. The site plan and building permit
application shall include the following:
(a) A structural analysis/report, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, verifying the ability of the
structure to handle the antenna.
(b) Certification by a qualified radio frequency engineer (signed
and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or architect)
that the cumulative emissions from all antennas proposed to be
located at the proposed site meet federal guidelines.
(c) The height of the new antenna shall extend no more than 15
feet above the height of the existing structure. Antennas
projecting over walkways or sidewalks must have a minimum
clearance between the bottom of the equipment and the
ground of nine feet. Antennas projecting over a traffic area,
such as a driveway or parking lot aisle, must have a minimum
§ 256-1.1 STORM SEWERS § 256-2
237:507
clearance between the bottom of the equipment and the
ground of 15 feet.
(d) The antenna and any mounting structure and related
equipment shall be integrated into said structure in such a
manner as to minimize its visual impact to the greatest extent
practicable.
B. Non-co-located/new structure antennas, approvals and bulk
requirements. [Amended 4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(1) Requirements for approval. No application for a non-co-located or
new structure antenna, regardless of whether such antenna is a
DAS/microcell, shall be considered complete unless and until the
applicant shall have submitted a report that establishes to the
satisfaction of the Village of Johnson City Planning Board the
following:
(a) That the applicant is required to provide service to locations
which it is not able to serve through existing facilities which
are located either within or outside of the Village, showing the
specific locations and/or areas the applicant is seeking to
serve.
(b) The report shall set forth an inventory of existing facilities and/
or structures, within or outside of the Village, which might be
utilized or modified in order to provide coverage to the
locations the applicant is seeking to serve and shall include a
report on the possibilities and opportunities for co-location as
an alternative to a new site.
(c) The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed facility
cannot be accommodated on any such existing facility or
structure either within or outside of the Village due to one or
more of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed equipment would exceed the existing
reasonable potential structural capacity of existing
facilities or structures within or outside of the Village,
considering existing and planned use for those facilities or
structures.
[2] The existing or proposed equipment would cause
interference with other existing or proposed equipment
that could not reasonably be mitigated or prevented.
[3] Said existing facilities or structures do not have space on
which the proposed equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and reasonably, and/or the applicant
has not been able, following good faith efforts, to reach an
agreement with the owner(s) of such facilities or
structures.
§ 256-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-2
237:508
§ 256-3. Application for tower special use permit.
[4] Other reasons which make it impractical to locate or place
the proposed equipment on said facilities or structures.
(2) Bulk requirements.
(a) Non-co-located or new structure antennas, other than DAS/
microcells. In all residential zoning districts, including the PUD
District, new or relocated towers and antennas shall be set
back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to their
height (measured from their base) plus 100 feet and in all other
zoning districts a minimum distance equal to their height
(measured from their base). The towers shall also be set back a
minimum distance equal to their height from all power lines.
The Planning Board may require an additional setback area in
the case of guy wires, taking into consideration the length of
the guy wires and the location of ground anchors.
(b) DAS/microcells. In residential districts, setbacks from all
property lines should be equal to 1/2 the height of the
structure. In commercial and industrial districts, the setbacks
from all property lines shall be 1/3 the height of the structure.
If placed within a public right-of-way, setback of structures
should be determined by acceptable engineering practices.
The Planning Board may require an additional setback area in
the case of guy wires, taking into consideration the length of
the guy wires and the location of ground anchors.
(3) Tower special use permit required. For all new, relocated or
replacement towers and antennas, including DAS/microcells that
do not meet the definition of a co-located/existing structure
antenna, a tower special use permit shall be required.
(4) The applicant shall also be responsible for all reasonable costs
incurred by the Village in reviewing and analyzing an application,
including, but not limited to, any engineering or technical reports
or studies submitted by the applicant relative to its application and
any legal fees related thereto.
C. All applications for telecommunications facilities in all zoning districts
shall comply with the requirements of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQRA).
A. Application required. All applicants for a tower special use permit shall
make a written application for special use permit to the Village of
Johnson City Zoning Board.
B. Said application shall include:
(1) A completed tower special use permit application form. In addition
to the requirements set forth herein, all applications shall be
§ 256-2 STORM SEWERS § 256-3
237:509
processed in accordance with the requirements of § 300-66 of the
Code of Johnson City generally applicable to special use permits.
The application shall be accompanied by the payment of the tower
special use permit application fee of $2,500. In addition to the
tower special use permit application fee, the applicant shall also
be responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by the Village in
reviewing and analyzing an application, including, but not limited
to, any engineering or technical reports or studies submitted by
the applicant relative to its application and any legal fees related
thereto.
(2) A special use application form, including long-form environmental
assessment form (EAF). The application shall not be deemed
complete unless accompanied by the propagation studies and
search ring analysis described in Subsection B(4) and (5) of this
section.
(3) A site plan, in the form and content acceptable to the Village,
prepared to scale and in sufficient detail and accuracy. In addition
to the site plan requirements set forth in § 300-63, the site plan
shall include:
(a) The exact location of the proposed tower, together with guy
wires and ground anchors, if applicable, and any accessory
structures.
(b) The maximum height of the proposed tower and antennas.
(c) A detail of tower type (monopole, guyed, freestanding or
other).
(d) The color or colors of the tower.
(e) The location, type and intensity of any lighting on the tower
and antennas.
(f) A survey, showing the boundary of the property and any
easements, and a topographical map of the property with
contour lines not exceeding two-foot intervals.
(g) Proof of ownership of the land by the applicant or the
landowner's consent if the applicant will not own the property.
A copy of the final lease agreement, plus any amendments
thereto, must also be provided if the applicant will not own the
property.
(h) The location of all current and proposed structures on the
property and all structures on any adjacent property within 50
feet of the property lines, together with the distance of these
structures to the tower and antennas.
(i) Identification of adjacent landowners.
§ 256-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-3
237:510
(j) The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing and
landscaping or screening. Existing on-site vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(k) The location and nature of proposed utility easements and
access roads, if applicable. The applicant must demonstrate
that all private access roads will be maintained in order to
ensure access by emergency vehicles on a year-round basis.
(l) Building elevations of accessory structures or immediately
adjacent buildings.
(m) Visual study showing where within a two-mile radius any
portion of the proposed tower/antenna could be seen.
(4) Before-and-after propagation studies prepared by a qualified radio
frequency engineer (signed and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer) demonstrating existing signal coverage resulting from
the proposed telecommunications facility.
(5) Search ring analysis:
(a) A search ring analysis prepared by a qualified radio frequency
engineer (signed and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer) and overlaid on an appropriate background map
demonstrating the area within which the telecommunications
facility needs to be located in order to provide proper signal
strength and coverage to the target cell.
(b) The applicant must be prepared to explain to the Village of
Johnson City Planning and Zoning Boards how and why it
selected the proposed site, discuss the availability (or lack of
availability) of a suitable structure, within the search ring,
which would have allowed for collocated antenna(s), and to
what extent the applicant explored locating the proposed
tower and antennas in a more desirable use district. Proof of
correspondence with other telecommunications companies
concerning collocation shall be part of this requirement.
(6) The Village of Johnson City Planning Board, upon reviewing the
application, may request reasonable additional visual, aesthetic
and site information, as it deems appropriate on a case-by-case
basis. Such additional information may include, among other
things, visual impact statements, enhanced landscaping plans, lineof-
sight drawings and/or visual simulations from viewpoints
selected by the Village Planning staff.
(7) For sites in close proximity to significant historical sites or
important preservation/conservation areas, the Village will request
additional site plans and tower special use permit requirements.
These requirements can include specially designed towers,
additional screening, greater setbacks and improved landscaping.
§ 256-3 STORM SEWERS § 256-3
237:511
§ 256-4. Permit standards.
Siting in these areas should be avoided to the maximum extent
possible.
(8) Upon issuance of a tower special use permit by the Village of
Johnson City Planning and Zoning Boards, the applicant will apply
to the Johnson City Planning Board for site plan review and, upon
approval, to the Village of Johnson City for a building permit.
A. The following criteria will be considered by the Village prior to the
approval/denial of a request for a tower special use permit. The criteria
listed may be used as a basis to impose reasonable conditions on the
applicant. Tower special use permits are not assignable and
nontransferable, except upon approval by resolution of the Village of
Johnson City Zoning Board.
B. The Village may express a preference for an alternative site(s) and/or
that the proposed telecommunications facility be located in a higherintensity-
use district or on higher-intensity-use property, provided that
there is a technologically feasible and available location. A guideline for
the Village's preference, from most desirable to least desirable zoning
district/property, is as follows:
(1) Property with an existing structure suitable for collocation.
(2) Municipal or government-owned property.
(3) Industrial (IN) or General Commercial (GC) Zoning Districts.
(4) Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Central Business (CB) Zoning
Districts.
(5) Commercial Office (CO) Zoning District, and any over lay districts.
(6) Rural Residential (RR), Urban Single-Family (USF), Suburban
Single-Family (SSF), Urban Two-Family (UTF), Urban Multifamily
(UMF) and Suburban Multifamily (SMF) Zoning Districts.
(7) Sites which are in close proximity to significant historic sites and/or
important preservation/conservation areas.
C. Any request by the Village for information or technical analysis on a
preferred alternate site shall be provided by the applicant at its sole
cost and shall not unreasonably delay the application.
D. Aesthetics. Telecommunications facilities shall be located and buffered
to the maximum extent that is practical and technologically feasible to
help ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. In order to
minimize any adverse aesthetic effect on neighboring residences to the
extent possible, the Village of Johnson City Planning Board may impose
reasonable conditions on the applicant, including, but not limited to,
the following:
§ 256-3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-4
237:512
(1) Tower height, including antennas, and design are matters of
primary public concern. The Board may require a monopole or
guyed tower (if sufficient land is available to the applicant) instead
of a freestanding tower. Monopoles are a preferred design. The
Board may impose reasonable restrictions and/or conditions on
height. For example, the Board may reasonably determine that
adverse impact upon the community will be best mitigated by
requiring the applicant to construct multiple towers of lower height
at several different locations to meet the applicant's demonstrated
service coverage requirement(s) or that the tower height be
reduced in the future if the applicant is unable to demonstrate a
continuing need for the approval height in light of changes in the
applicant's service coverage needs or technological advances.
(2) The Board may require reasonable landscaping consisting of trees
or shrubs to screen the base of the tower and antennas and/or to
screen the tower and any accessory structure or buildings to the
extent possible from adjacent residential property. Existing on-site
trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(3) The Board may require the applicant to show that it has made goodfaith
efforts to collocate on existing towers or other available and
appropriate structures and/or to construct new towers near
existing towers in an effort to consolidate visual disturbances.
However, such request shall not unreasonably delay the
application.
(4) The type of finish, color and lighting shall be subject to Village and/
or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) approval. The Village may
require lights to be shielded to minimize ground visual impact.
(5) No tower shall contain any signs or advertising devices.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board may require appropriate
signage indicating ownership of the facility and phone numbers to
call in case of emergency.
(6) The applicant must submit a copy of its policy regarding collocation
on the proposed tower with other potential future applicants. Such
policy should allow collocation under the following conditions:
(a) The new antenna(s) and equipment do not exceed structural
loading requirements, interfere with Village space used or to
be used by the applicant or pose any technical or radio
frequency interference with existing equipment.
(b) The party desiring to collocate pays the applicant an
appropriate and reasonable sum to collocate.
(c) The party desiring to collocate has a similar policy of
collocation for the applicant.
§ 256-4 STORM SEWERS § 256-4
237:513
(7) All other uses ancillary to the antenna and associated equipment
(including a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle storage,
etc.) are prohibited from the site unless otherwise permitted in the
zoning district in which the facility is located.
E. Radio frequency; inspections.
(1) The Village of Johnson City Planning Board shall impose a condition
on the applicant that the communications antenna will be operated
only at Federal Communication Commission (FCC) designated
frequencies and power levels and/or Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) technical exposure limits and may periodically
require that the applicant provide competent documentation to
support that maximum allowable frequencies, power levels and
exposure limits for radiation will not be exceeded.
(2) Unless otherwise preempted by federal or state law, the
telecommunications facility shall be inspected every two years, at
the applicant's expense, for radio emissions, and a copy of the
report shall be promptly delivered to the Building Inspector. A
licensed professional engineer specializing in electrical
engineering with expertise in radio communications facilities shall
perform radio emission inspections. The radio emission inspection
shall describe the power density levels of the electromagnetic
energy generated from the facility, including the cumulative effects
of collocated antennas. In the event that the radio emission
inspection indicates that the electromagnetic energy generated
from the facility is above the allowable limits stated with applicable
FCC or ANSI standards or other applicable federal or state
guidelines in effect at the time of inspection, the applicant shall
cease all use of the facility until such time as it proves, to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector or pertinent Village
consultant, that the power density levels of the electromagnetic
energy to be generated at the facility are below the applicable
standards.
F. Traffic, access, and safety.
(1) A road turnaround and one parking space shall be provided to
assure adequate year-round emergency and service access.
Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
The use of public roadways or road rights-of-way for the siting of a
tower or antenna(s) accessory structures is prohibited.
(2) All towers and ground anchors, if applicable, shall be enclosed by a
fence not less than eight feet in height and otherwise sufficiently
protected from trespassing or vandalism.
(3) The applicant must comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations, including, but not limited to, FAA and FCC regulations,
and from time to time may be required to provide certification of
such compliance.
§ 256-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 256-4
237:514
§ 256-5. Exemptions.
Exemptions are as follows:
(4) All towers and antennas shall include anticlimbing devices for a
minimum of 25 feet extending above ground level.
G. Removal of tower.
(1) The applicant shall agree to remove the tower and antenna if the
telecommunications facility becomes obsolete or ceases to be used
for its intended purpose for 12 consecutive months. The Village of
Johnson City Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide
an appropriate and adequate demolition bond for the purpose of
removing the telecommunications facility and restoration of the
land in case the applicant fails to do so as required above.
(2) The sufficiency of the demolition bond shall be confirmed at least
every five years by analysis and report of the cost of removal and
property restoration, which is to be performed by a licensed
professional engineer, the cost of same to be borne by the
applicant. If the said analysis and report determines that the
amount of the bond in force is insufficient to cover the removal,
disposal and restoration costs, the bond shall be increased to the
amount necessary to cover such costs within 10 days of the
applicant's receipt of such report.
H. Structural safety.
(1) During the application process and after construction of the tower,
the applicant shall provide a certification from a qualified licensed
professional engineer, certifying that the tower and antennas meet
applicable New York State and ANSI structural safety standards.
(2) Unless otherwise preempted by federal or state law, the
telecommunications facility shall be inspected every two years, at
the applicant's expense, for structural integrity. A copy of the
report shall be promptly delivered to the Building Inspector. A
licensed professional engineer specializing in structural
engineering shall perform the structural inspection. The structural
inspection report shall describe the structural integrity of the
facility, maintenance issues and repairs needed or made, if any. In
the event that the structural inspection indicates structural
deficiencies, then the deficiencies must be remedied within the
time reasonably set by the Building Inspector. Upon the applicant's
failure to do so, the permit may be revoked.
I. Maintenance of telecommunications facility. All telecommunications
facilities shall be maintained in good order and repair. The Village may
require that reasonable records of such maintenance be kept and
available for Village review upon request.
§ 256-4 STORM SEWERS § 256-5
237:515
§ 256-6. Conflicts with other laws; technology changes.
Chapter 258
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 258-1. Policy intent.
The intent of this procedure is to provide for the prompt and safe removal of
vehicles that are disabled, abandoned, or otherwise need to be removed via
tow truck from public roadways at the direction of the Police Department
under an established fair and uniform regulation. It is important for the
safety and convenience to other motorists that said vehicles are removed as
promptly as possible, that delay in removal can result in unnecessary traffic
congestion, confusion, and delay and may result in secondary crashes. This
policy shall not supersede any specific orders issued by the Chief of Police
either through special or general orders of the Chief addressing specific
situations such as vehicles impounded for criminal investigative purposes.
§ 258-2. Rotational tow lists.
There shall be a regular duty towing rotational list for passenger vehicles
or small trucks less than 10,000 pounds, and a separate rotational heavy
duty towing list for larger vehicles 10,000 pounds or more. The procedure
A. Towers and antenna(s) may be repaired and maintained without
restriction.
B. Antennas and satellite antennas used solely for residential household
television and radio reception.
C. Satellite antennas measuring two meters or less in diameter and
located in commercial and industrial districts and satellite antennas
one meter or less in diameter regardless of location.
A. In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between this chapter and
any other local law, including the Zoning Law, this article is meant to
control for telecommunications towers and similar facilities in the
Village unless otherwise specifically referenced in this article.
B. In the event that there is a change in technology that alters the use of
the telecommunications facilities cited pursuant to this chapter, the
Village reserves the right to require a new application to be submitted,
which complies with the above requisites, from all owners of such
telecommunications facilities.
§ 256-5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 258-2
237:516
for selection from the rotational tow list and dispatch of a tow firm upon the
request by the Police Department is handled by the 911 Communications
Center, pursuant to the Policy and Procedures of the Broome County Office
of Emergency Services.
§ 258-3. List of towing firms.
The towing firms can participate on either or both the light and/or heavy
tow list at any time. Vacancies on the list shall be filled on a first-come, firstserved
basis from eligible applicants.
§ 258-4. Eligibility requirements and application process.
The requirements for placement on a rotational towing list shall be as
follows:
A. The towing firm must have a minimum insurance liability policy of
$1,000,000 protecting their activities while operating within the Village
of Johnson City. A copy of said certificate of insurance shall be approved
by the Village Attorney and filed with the Village of Johnson City Police.
B. The towing firm must supply the Johnson City Police, Traffic Division,
with a list of all equipment at their disposal, including truck weights,
capacities, make, year and registration numbers. Required towing
equipment for placement on the regular-duty towing rotational list must
be at least one conventional tow truck with wheel-lift, and one rollback.
Required towing equipment for placement on the heavy-duty towing
rotational list must be at least one large capacity tow truck with a rating
of at least 20 tons. Towing firm trucks must also meet the following
requirements:
(1) Must be clearly marked and lettered with the towing firm's name
and phone number in at least three-inch lettering of contrasting
color.
(2) Must have at least one or more amber lights affixed and visible to
all approaching traffic from a distance of 500 feet and said lighting
shall be displayed when the tow truck is engaged in a hazardous
operation.
(3) Must be equipped with speedy dry or similar absorption material to
clean minor spills, as well as a broom, shovel, and other proper
equipment to clean up the scene.
C. The towing firm must provide a twenty-four-hour service, accept all
calls given to it by the Village Police Department (staffing permitting)
and maintain a response time of 20 minutes or less.
D. The towing firm must supply the Police Department, Traffic Division,
with a photo copy of the driver's license for each employee who
operates their equipment; all drivers must maintain a valid license
applicable to the class of tow truck they operate. The Police Department
§ 258-2 STORM SEWERS § 258-4
237:517
must be supplied with an updated photo copy of the driver license
of any new employee after initial application and assignment to the
rotational tow list.
E. The towing firm must supply the Police Department, Traffic Division,
with a complete listing of all current towing, storage, additional and/or
incidental fees that will be charged for services rendered. The Police
Department must be supplied with a new list if any said fees are
changed.
F. The towing firm shall provide a storage lot which is located within the
limits of the Village of Johnson City, or within one mile of the boundaries
of the Village of Johnson City. The storage lot shall be lighted and
secured and insured to store towed vehicles. Reasonable measures
shall be taken to prevent theft and/or damage to the vehicles. Towing
firms shall furnish a key to the Police Department to allow access to
said storage lot so that officers will have access to finish their
investigations.
G. The towing firm shall tow all vehicles to their determined storage lot
located in the Village of Johnson City, or within one mile of the
boundaries of the Village of Johnson City, and shall not tow vehicles
outside of the Village unless directed to by the owner or the police. No
towed vehicle shall be stored on a public street.
H. All towing company premises, including the location of the towing
company and the location of the vehicle storage facility, shall be in
compliance with all local zoning, building, and fire safety codes, and
shall comply with all New York State and federal regulations limiting or
otherwise governing the use of said properties.
I. Towing firms shall maintain complete and accurate records concerning
all vehicles towed. Such records shall be maintained for at least one
year after a towed vehicle has been retrieved or has otherwise been
released out of the possession of the towing firm. These records shall be
readily available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee.
J. All towing firms shall be required to remove all debris related to the
incident to which they are called, in accordance with New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1219(c). A towing firm called to the scene of a
crash involving serious injury or death, or where a police investigation
is ongoing, shall not remove or otherwise cause to be disturbed any
debris or move or reposition any vehicles until directed by police
personnel on scene to do so.
K. All towing firms shall maintain all licenses and insurance required by
the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, and all equipment used
shall comply with the Vehicle and Traffic Law and the rules and
regulations of the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles (Title 15 of the
NYCCR). All equipment used shall be in good operating condition, and
all towing firm personnel shall be properly trained and fully competent
§ 258-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 258-4
237:518
to perform their functions and shall perform those functions in a
courteous and orderly manner.
L. Application.
(1) Any towing firm that meets the eligibility requirements may
complete and submit an application to be added to the rotational
tow list. The application shall contain the following:
(a) The name and address of the owner and operator of the towing
firm;
(b) The address where the towing firm is or will be located;
(c) The address where motor vehicles towed by the towing firm
shall be stored;
(d) The name and address of the owner of the premises where
towed vehicles are to be stored;
(e) If the towing firm is owned or will be owned by a partnership,
corporation, or other business entity or association, then the
names and addresses of each partner, officer, principal, or
owner or part owner however titled shall be listed on the
application;
(f) All names listed on the application shall be full legal names,
and all addresses shall be home addresses, listing street and
number of each such residence;
(g) The telephone number to be called for the retrieval of any
motor vehicle towed by the towing firm;
(h) The hours of operation the towing firm will be open for the
towing of motor vehicles;
(i) The hours of operation the towing firm will be open for towed
vehicles to be retrieved;
(2) The above notwithstanding, the Police Department may require
such additional information as may be necessary in order to fully
enforce and administer this chapter.
M. Upon receipt of an application, the Police Department shall investigate
the proposed location of the vehicle storage facility to determine
compliance with this chapter and to determine whether public safety
problems exist. The Department shall also make such investigation as is
deemed appropriate or necessary regarding the background of any
information listed on the license application.
N. Towing firms' position on the rotational list, once assigned, is not
transferable. Towing firms are not permitted to subcontract any tow
call to another towing firm. All towing firms must have their own tow
§ 258-4 STORM SEWERS § 258-4
237:519
§ 258-5. Denial of application.
The Police Department shall give written notice to an applicant of the
reason or reasons for the denial.
§ 258-6. Expiration of list.
The rotational tow list shall remain valid until a towing firm withdrawals
from the list, a towing firm's status on the list is revoked as a result of terms
as set forth by this chapter, or the list is disbanded by resolution of the
Village Board.
§ 258-7. Complaints.
§ 258-8. Penalties; suspension or revocation from list.
truck available and able to respond in order to fulfill a request for
service made by the Police Department.
A. Anyone wishing to file a complaint with the Police Department will do so
in writing and submit it to the Police Department.
B. All complaints will be investigated with all parties involved and the
complainant will be advised of the outcome in writing.
A. The Chief of Police or designee is charged with ensuring compliance
with this chapter.
B. A towing firm's assignment to the list may be suspended or revoked if
the towing firm violates any federal, New York State, or local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation regarding the operation of the towing
business or the fitness to conduct that business.
C. Any towing firm that refuses calls by the Police Department (unless said
firm is unavailable due to being on another service call which prohibits
being able to timely respond) or fails to answer calls from the Police
Department three times within a six-month period, will have their
assignment to the list revoked and must reapply to be reinstated to the
list. The Police Department shall provide written notice to the towing
firm for each incident outlining the failure by the towing firm.
D. For a violation of this chapter, the Police Department shall issue written
notice to the towing firm containing a statement of the manner in which
the firm is alleged to be in violation of this law and the date of the
hearing to be held within 10 days' after written notice is given to the
firm either in person or by registered mail addressed to the licensee on
file.
E. A towing firm's assignment to the list shall not be revoked without the
hearing first taking place; however, the Chief of Police may suspend the
firm's assignment to the list where there are safety concerns or
concerns that the alleged violation may be repeated prior to the holding
§ 258-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 258-8
237:520
§ 258-9. Information to vehicle owner.
Each towing firm on the rotational tow list must supply the owner/operator
of a vehicle who is at the scene with a card containing their business name,
address, phone numbers, hours of operation and summary of the expected
charges.
§ 258-10. Owner's preference/AAA request.
Nothing within this chapter shall prevent a vehicle owner from choosing to
call a tower who is not on the Village towing list or to request a AAA tow;
provided, however, that should that owner be unable to respond in what the
police officer at the scene feels is a reasonable period of time and the police
officer at the scene has safety concerns regarding the vehicles' location, the
officer may supersede the desires of the owner and call a tower based upon
the lists.
§ 258-11. Rates and charges.
The towing firm on the rotational tow list, upon completion of a tow or
roadside service rendered, shall levy charges against the rightful owner of
the vehicle. No fee may be levied for a response that does not result in
either the removal of a vehicle or any on-scene roadside service rendered.
The cost of the towing or service shall be the responsibility of the vehicle
owner or operator.
§ 258-12. Documentation of requirements.
All towing firms desiring to be on the rotational tow lists must provide
the Village Police Department with proof of all of the requirements set
forth here in advance of the effective date of this chapter. Following the
establishment of the initial rotational tow list, the Village will update the
list, based upon any new applications, as needed.
§ 258-13. Indemnification of Village.
Each towing service operator on a rotational tow list shall agree to defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Village from any claims or liabilities which
may occur as a result of performing service at the request of the Police
Department.
of the hearing. In the event that the towing firm's assignment to the
list is suspended, the firm shall have the right to file a written notice of
appeal with the Chief of Police within 10 days of the date of the notice
of suspension or revocation. Determination of appeals should be made
by the Chief of Police or his or her designee within 30 days of receipt of
the appeal.
§ 258-8 STORM SEWERS § 258-13
237:521
Chapter 264
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 240.
§ 258-13 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 258-13
237:522
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 264-1. Definitions.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
LEFT SIDE TO CURB — Except where angle parking is authorized, a
vehicle stopped, standing or parked partially on a roadway shall be so
stopped, standing or parked parallel to the curb or edge of roadway.
On a one-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of
authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway, such vehicle shall
be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion
of the roadway on which the vehicle rests.
NO PARKING — No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, but may stop or stand temporarily for the purpose of and
while actively engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers.[Added 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
NO STANDING — No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except for the purpose of actually and expeditiously
unloading or loading passengers.[Added 5-15-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
NO STOPPING — No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary during a true
emergency or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.[Added 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
OUT OF SPACE — All vehicles parked on public highways, municipal
parking lots, shopping plazas and shopping malls shall be parked within
a single designated parking space. If a vehicle is too large to fit into a
single designated parking space, it shall be parked to take up as few
parking spaces as possible.[Added 1-22-2002]
§ 264-1 STORM SEWERS § 264-1
237:523
§ 264-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall install and maintain
traffic control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter and may install and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 264-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
TAXICAB STAND — Includes any place alongside the curb of a street
or elsewhere which is exclusively reserved by either the Director of
Security of the County of Broome or an officer designed by him to
perform the duties and carry out the responsibilities assigned to the
Director of Security hereunder, and/or by the codes and rules of the
Village of Johnson City for the use of taxicabs and specifically
designated therefor.[Added 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
C. Pursuant to § 1640 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, the
Board of Trustees may adopt traffic regulations by resolutions, subject
to limitations regarding state highways imposed by § 1684 of the New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. [Added 1-4-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000]
§ 264-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-3
237:524
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 264-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 264-76), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 264-5. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 264-77), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 264-6. School speed limits.
Fifteen miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of the Village when
traveling within a school speed zone during school days between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. As used in this section, "school speed zone"
means that portion of the public street passing a school building and
extending 300 feet along such public street in each direction from the
building line of a school abutting on the public street.
§ 264-7. Speed limits in playgrounds, recreational areas.
No person shall further operate or drive a motor vehicle, motor cycle or
any similar vehicle on any public street or highway adjoining or bordering
a public playground or recreation center in the Village at a rate of speed
exceeding 25 miles per hour.
§ 264-8. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 264-78), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 264-9. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 264-79), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 264-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 264-80), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 264-4 STORM SEWERS § 264-11
237:525
§ 264-11. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 264-81),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 264-12. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 264-82),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each street
intersecting the through street.
§ 264-13. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 264-83), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 264-14. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 264-84), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 264-15. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
§ 264-16. Lane use reservations.
The lanes described in Schedule XI (§ 264-86), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby reserved for the uses noted in said Schedule XI
(§ 264-86).
A. Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule X (§ 264-85), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
B. Establishment of a five-ton truck route. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive or operate a five-ton vehicle on any public streets except
the following to gain egress from and ingress to Grand Avenue:
(1) For ingress: north from the traffic circle onto Route 201, north on
Route 201 to the Main Street exit, at Main Street west (left) to the
entrance ramp for Route 201 south, south on Route 201 to Thomas
Street exit, right on Thomas Street and another right onto
Riverside Drive, north on Riverside Drive to Grand Avenue.
(2) For egress: south on Riverside Drive to Thomas Street, left on
Thomas Street to Route 201 and right on Route 201 to the traffic
circle.
§ 264-11 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-16
237:526
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 264-17. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 264-18. Parking near fire hydrants.77
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within 15 feet of a fire hydrant
except when such vehicle is attended by a licensed operator or chauffeur
who is seated in the front seat and who can immediately move such vehicle
in case of emergency, unless a different distance is indicated by official
signs, markings or parking meters.
§ 264-19. General parking time limit.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no vehicle shall be parked on
any Village street for more than eight hours between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight.
§ 264-20. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified
places. [Amended 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic, or when in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, in the
following specified places:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at
the edge of a curb or street.
(2) On a sidewalk.
(3) Within an intersection, except when permitted by official signs or
parking meters on the side of a street opposite a street which
intersects but does not cross such street.
(4) On a crosswalk.
B. No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to expeditiously unload or load passengers:
(1) In front of, or within three feet of the edge of a public or private
driveway, except that it shall be permissible for the owner, lessor or
lessee of the lot accessed by a private driveway to park a passenger
vehicle registered to him/her at that address in front of such
driveway, provided that such lot does not contain more than two
77.Editor's Note: See § 1202, Subdivision 3(b), of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 264-17 STORM SEWERS § 264-20
237:527
§ 264-20.1. Additional parking regulations. [Added 5-15-2018 by
L.L. No. 5-2018]
§ 264-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 264-87), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 264-22. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 264-88), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 264-23. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 264-89), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 264-24. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 264-90) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 264-25. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 264-91) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
dwelling units and further provided that such parking does not
violate any other provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or local
law or rule concerning the parking, stopping or standing of motor
vehicles.
(2) In an officially designated and appropriately posted bus stop,
except for an authorized bus.
(3) In any fire lane designated and marked as such.
A. Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped,
standing, or parked upon a street shall be so stopped, standing, or
parked within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.
B. Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped,
standing, or parked upon a street shall be so stopped, standing, or
parked with the passenger side right-hand wheels of such vehicle
parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of
authorized traffic movement.
§ 264-20 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-25
237:528
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 264-26. No parking or standing certain hours.
No person shall park or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVII (§ 264-92) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 264-27. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 264-93) at any time between the hours listed in said
schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 264-28. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 264-94), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 264-28.1. Police only parking. [Added 8-21-2012 by L.L. No.
7-2012; amended 5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
Only official police vehicles shall use the parking spaces described in
§ 264-105, attached to and made a part of this chapter, which are hereby
reserved for the use of police agencies on official business.
§ 264-29. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 264-95), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 264-30. Taxi stands. [Amended 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
A. Designation of taxicab stands: Pursuant to this section, the Board of
Trustees may designate streets or portions of streets within the Village
as taxicab stands and shall cause such stands to be marked and
indicated by suitable signs. This designation is subject to approval by
the County Legislature under Chapter 85-24 of the Administrative Local
Laws of Broome County.
B. The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 264-96), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 264-25 STORM SEWERS § 264-31
237:529
§ 264-31. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 264-97), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 264-32. Handicapped parking. [Amended 11-16-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
§ 264-33. Alternate-side parking.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park in spaces clearly marked for use by
the handicapped, as more fully identified, described and set forth in
Schedule XXIII (§ 264-98), without a special vehicle identification
parking permit, a special municipal parking permit or whose motor
vehicle is not registered in accordance with § 404-a of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and being used for the
transportation of a handicapped person; or with such permit or
registration and such person is not one to whom the permit or
registration was issued or is not transporting the person issued the
permit or registration.
B. Failure to display handicapped permit. No person shall stop, stand or
park in spaces clearly marked for use by the handicapped, as more fully
identified, described and set forth in Schedule XXIII (§ 264-98), without
displaying a special vehicle identification parking permit or a special
municipal parking permit on the vehicle's dashboard or rearview
mirror.
C. A violation of Subsection A or B of this section shall be subject to the
fines and additional penalties as set forth in § 264-64, or as set forth in
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-c, whichever are higher.
A. General provisions. The provisions of the alternate-side-of-the-street
parking are as follows: [Amended 10-6-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(1) Parking is permitted on the even side of the street on even calendar
days until 4:59 p.m. The even side of the street shall be that side of
the street having even residence house numbers. Parking is
permitted on the odd side of the street on odd calendar days. The
odd side of the street shall be that side of the street having odd
residence house numbers.
(2) Parking shall be permitted from 5:00 p.m. daily and shall be in
effect until 4:59 p.m. the following day.
(3) After 5:00 p.m., on even days, drivers shall park on the odd side of
the street so that they "park for tomorrow." After 5:00 p.m. on odd
days, drivers shall park on the even side of the street so that they
"park for tomorrow."
(4) Alternate side of the street parking regulations shall be enforced
December 1 through March 31 of the following year.
§ 264-31 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-33
237:530
§ 264-34. Streets where parking is prohibited between November 1
and April 1.
§ 264-35. Establishment of fire lanes in shopping centers, malls and
plazas.
(5) From the first day of December through the 5th day of December,
inclusive, in each year, persons who violate this § 264-33 shall be
given written warning tickets only and shall not be liable for any
penalty or punishment.
B. Applicability.
(1) Alternate-side parking provisions shall not apply to the locations
described in Schedule XXV (§ 264-100), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
(2) This section shall also not apply to those locations where other
parking restrictions, rules or regulations have been heretofore or
are hereafter made or enacted. However, it shall apply to the
following locations, notwithstanding the application of other
parking restrictions:
(a) Floral Avenue, south side, 31.9 feet east of Utility Pole No.
55-125.
(3) Alternate-side parking provisions shall not apply to streets with
metered parking, either on one or both sides of the street, limited
to where metered parking has been established on the street.
[Added 10-6-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
C. Any vehicle that is parked in violation of § 264-33A or is found, in the
opinion of the Commissioner of Public Works, his or her designee, or the
Chief of Police, his or her designee, to be hindering snow removal or
plowing or so parked as to obstruct vehicular traffic or safe passage
through a Village street may be ticketed or towed by the Director of
Public Services, his or her designee, or the Chief of Police, his or her
designee. Any towing of vehicles shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Article V, Removal and Storage of Vehicles. [Amended
10-15-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013]
A. Authority. The Chief of Police, in his discretion and with the approval of
the Board of Trustees, shall determine those streets, parts of streets
and other areas where parking shall be prohibited between November
first and the next succeeding April first in order to ensure the proper
and safe flow of traffic and shall post the same with signs indicating that
parking is prohibited during such period.
B. Parking is hereby prohibited between November 1 and April 1 on the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXVI (§ 264-101),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 264-33 STORM SEWERS § 264-35
237:531
§ 264-36. Municipal parking lot fees.
Municipal parking lot fees shall be in the amounts fixed by the Village Board
upon resolution.
§ 264-37. General regulations for certain parking areas.
A. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to designate and
establish fire lanes in shopping centers, malls and plazas throughout
the Village of Johnson City and shall cause such areas to be marked by
suitable signs or other devices, including but not limited to a no
standing anytime zone. (See also § 264-89.)
B. It shall be unlawful to park, stop or stand a vehicle in any of the
designated and marked fire lanes enumerated in in Schedule XXVII
(§ 264-102), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
A. These regulations shall apply to premises which slope toward adjoining
premises or public places at a grade of 3% or more. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to parking areas which have, together with
other parking areas on the same premises or on contiguous premises
owned by the same owner, a maximum capacity of five automobiles.
B. No person owning or having possession of such premises shall permit
parking of any automobile thereon, and no person shall park any
automobile thereon, unless the following conditions have first been
met:
(1) Parking places shall be clearly marked so as to require automobiles
to park at right angles to the direction of the slope, and such
markings shall be maintained and renewed so that they are clearly
visible. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner or a
person in possession of a parking area to permit parking at an
angle other than the angle designated by the marked parking
places, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to park
an automobile at an angle other than the angle designated by such
parking places.
(2) A fence or other barrier of adequate height and strength to prevent
automobiles from rolling off the parking area onto adjoining
premises or public places shall be maintained between the parking
areas and the adjoining premises or public places at every point in
the perimeter of the parking area toward which any portion of the
parking area slopes, except for necessary points of entry and exit to
the parking areas as the same may be approved in accordance with
Subsection B(3) of this section. Such fence or barrier shall be
maintained in good repair and condition.
(3) The manner of marking parking places and the type and location of
the fence or barrier shall meet with the approval in writing of the
Chief of Police and the Superintendent of Public Works. Such
§ 264-35 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-37
237:532
§ 264-38. Parking of commercial vehicles; general time limit.
§ 264-39. Snow emergency parking. [Amended 9-16-2008 by L.L.
No. 3-2008]
written approvals shall be valid to and including the 30th day of
April following the dates of such approvals; prior to May 1 of any
year, application for new approvals shall be made by the owner or
person in possession of said parking areas and such new approvals
shall be dated as of May 1 and shall be effective until the following
April 30.
C. The maintenance of an area paved or otherwise surfaced so as to
accommodate the weight of automobiles and of a point of entry and exit
suitable for the use of automobiles adjoining any place of business or
place of public accommodation shall create a presumption that the
owner of said premises and the operator or operators of such places of
business and places of public accommodation have permitted the use of
such areas for parking areas.
D. Parking areas which require site plan approval by the Planning Board
or which constitute a portion of premises which require site approval
shall be deemed to comply with this chapter if the approval of the site
plan by the Planning Board contains a finding that parking areas
substantially comply with the foregoing provisions of this chapter.
A. No commercial vehicle with six or more wheels, tractor or tractortrailer
combination may park on any Village street for more than three
hours unless loading or unloading.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter of the Code of the Village
of Johnson City, no vehicle shall be parked on any Village street for
more than eight hours between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
A. Parking restricted on designated streets after snowfall. No owner or
operator of a motor vehicle shall park the same unattended on
designated Village streets or highways within the Village of Johnson
City following any snowfall of two inches or more until said street or
highway shall have been plowed by or at the direction of the
Department of Public Works of the Village of Johnson City. Any two-inch
snowfall shall, for the purpose of this section, constitute a snow
emergency.
B. Towing away of vehicles. The motor vehicles in violation of Subsection A
hereof may be towed away, by or at the direction of the Chief of Police
or the Director of Public Services or his designee of the Village of
Johnson City, and impounded until reasonable towing and storage costs
are paid, in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Removal and
Storage of Vehicles. [Amended 10-15-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013]
§ 264-37 STORM SEWERS § 264-39
237:533
§ 264-39.1. Parking of vehicles without inspection and registration.
[Added 7-14-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all Village streets and
municipal parking lots unless such vehicle shall have a current inspection
certificate and a current certificate of registration.
C. Signs. The Chief of Police shall maintain reasonable and appropriate
signs on such designated streets or highways between November 15
and April 15 of each year stating "Emergency Snow Routes, No Parking
After a Two Inch Snowfall Until Plowing Operations Have Ceased."
D. Designation of emergency snow routes. After a snowfall of two or more
inches, no person shall park a vehicle upon the streets and highways
specified in Schedule XXVIII (§ 264-103), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 264-39 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-39.1
237:534
ARTICLE IV
Parking Meters
§ 264-40. Construal; provisions deemed cumulative.
This article shall be construed to assist in the regulation of overtime parking
by the use of parking meters and shall be likewise construed as a
supplement to the general traffic ordinances of the Village for the
preservation of peace, health, safety and property.
§ 264-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
OPERATOR — Any person who operates or drives a vehicle upon any public
street or highway in the Village.
PARKING — The stopping of a vehicle unattended by a person capable of
driving or operating the same for a period longer than necessary to load or
unload passengers.
PARKING METER — A device or devices, which shall indicate thereon
the length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular
place, containing a mechanism to indicate the interval of time during which
parking is permissible.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a public street or highway, except such as are
operated exclusively by human power.
§ 264-42. Designation of zones.
For the purpose of this article, portions of Main Street and other streets,
in accordance with a map duly prepared by the Village Engineer and on
file in the office of the Village Clerk, are hereby designated as parking
meter zones and shall be subject to the provisions of this article. (See also
Schedule XVIII, Time Limit Parking.)
§ 264-43. Designation, discontinuance of additional zones.
The Board of Trustees may by resolution designate additional parking meter
zones from time to time as it deems advisable in the public interest and
as traffic conditions require. The Board may likewise, by resolution,
discontinue any such zone or part thereof at any time it may so elect.
§ 264-44. Designation of parking spaces.
The Village Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to designate and
mark off such individual parking spaces as he deems proper along portions
of Main Street and other streets as designated by the map provided for in
§ 264-42.
§ 264-40 STORM SEWERS § 264-45
237:535
§ 264-45. Installation, maintenance of meters.
The Village Engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed at the
spaces provided for in § 264-44, subject, however, to the approval of the
New York State Highway Department and State Traffic Commission. Such
parking meters shall be placed on the curbline along the side of or next
to such individual parking spaces, and each of said parking meters shall
be so placed as to display a signal that the parking space covered by such
meter is or is not in use, and said meters shall be under the management,
supervision and control of the Police Department of the Village.
§ 264-46. Signal, legend upon meters; charges.
§ 264-47. Parking time limits.
The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to designate parking time
limits for the various parking meter zones, and parking shall be permitted
in the parking meter spaces in such zones for a period not to exceed the
amount of time specified on the parking meter signal legend.
§ 264-48. Operation of meters.
A. Each parking meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal
parking on the deposit of a ten-cent United States coin therein for one
hour of parking time in the space upon which said meter is placed, or
for such lesser period of time as may be permitted by this chapter, as
amended from time to time, in the particular location in which the
meter is placed. Except where parking is restricted to a period less than
two hours, such meter shall also be so set, to the extent its design
permits, as to display a signal showing legal parking on the deposit of
two ten-cent United States coins therein for two hours of parking time
in the space upon which said meter is placed.
B. Each parking meter shall have clearly evidenced thereon the periods of
legal parking for the coin or number of coins deposited therein, for the
information of the public. Each such meter shall clearly start in motion
and continue in operation from the time of depositing such coin or coins
until the expiration of the time fixed by this article as the parking limit
for such coins so deposited. Each such meter shall likewise indicate by
its time mechanism the passage of the interval of time during which
parking is permissible and shall also display an appropriate signal when
the aforesaid interval of time shall have expired.
A. Duty of operator; effect of deposit. Wherever any vehicle shall be
parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter, the owner, operator or
driver thereof shall, upon entering said parking space, immediately
deposit a coin or coins of the United States in the parking meter
alongside of said parking space, and said parking space may then be
used for the length of time for which said coin or coins are deposited,
within the parking limits as provided herein for the part of the street in
which said parking space is located.
§ 264-45 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-48
237:536
§ 264-49. Illegal parking.
Any vehicle which remains in an individual parking space after the
prescribed time for parking is hereby determined to be illegally parked, but
in no event shall it be considered illegal parking if the meter display signal
shows that proper deposit has been made for such parking.
§ 264-50. Hours when regulations in effect.
The provisions of this article relating to parking in metered spaces shall
be applicable only on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Thursday, when such hours shall be from 9:00
a.m. to 8:30 p.m., legal holidays excepted.
§ 264-51. Temporary restrictions on parking in metered areas.
The Police Department or the Department of Public Works may establish
temporary restrictions on parking in such locations and during such hours
as may be deemed necessary by placing hoods or covers upon and over
parking meters in such locations, which may be established for loading,
unloading or as necessity may require, and parking in such temporary
restricted zones is hereby prohibited.
§ 264-52. Overnight parking in metered zones prohibited.
[Amended 12-17-2002; 10-6-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015; 4-19-2016 by
L.L. No. 3-2016]
Metered on-street parking throughout the Village of Johnson City is
prohibited from December 1 through March 31, from the hours of 12:01
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 264-53. Manner of parking in spaces.
B. Overtime parking. If said vehicle remains for a greater length of time
than is permitted in said parking space, the parking meter shall display
a signal showing illegal parking, and in that event such vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime, and the parking of vehicles overtime or
beyond the period of time fixed by this article on such street and in said
space shall be a violation of this article. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any such vehicle registered in
his name to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time.
A. At each place where individual parking spaces are marked off or
otherwise provided for, each vehicle shall be parked entirely within
such individual parking space, and failure to park entirely within the
same shall constitute illegal parking.
B. All vehicles parked under this article shall be parked parallel to the
curb unless otherwise provided, and any vehicle parked in any parking
space in any parking meter zone shall be parked with the hood of such
§ 264-48 STORM SEWERS § 264-53
237:537
§ 264-54. Designation of monthly parking stalls. [Amended
10-18-2016 by L.L. No. 6-2016]
Monthly parking shall be permitted at metered parking stalls in municipal
parking lots and at on-street parking meters except for Main, Harrison,
Baldwin and Arch Streets. Said tag shall be purchased from the Village
Clerk for a monthly fee as determined by the Board of Trustees upon
resolution. The tag must be displayed from the rear view mirror of the
vehicle. Said tag will not permit parking at on-street meters in violation of
§ 264-33 or 264-27. Failure to display a tag will result in the ticketing of the
vehicle.
§ 264-55. Offenses enumerated and prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person:
vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter located at such
parking space, except as otherwise provided.
A. To park in any parking space where a meter is installed when such
meter displays a signal showing that parking is not permitted unless a
coin is deposited in such meter. Any vehicle parked in contravention to
this article shall be illegally parked, and such parking under this
section, unless a proper coin is deposited in such meter, shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such motor
vehicle by its operator and/or owner.
B. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter a coin or coins
for the purpose of extending or continuing time of a then legally parked
vehicle beyond the legal time limit fixed by this article in a space where
a parking meter is placed.
C. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under this article.
D. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter a slug, device
or metallic substance or any other substitute for a five-cent United
States coin or a ten-cent United States coin.
E. To park in an area designated as a place for parking for handicapped
persons unless such parking is pursuant to a permit issued by the
Village to a handicapped person. Such permit must be displayed to a
law enforcement officer upon request.
F. To park in a reserved monthly parking area without a monthly parking
tag or without displaying a monthly parking tag.
§ 264-53 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-56
237:538
§ 264-56. Duty of traffic patrolmen.
It shall be the duty of each traffic patrolman, such other officer or such
other designee of the Village of Johnson City as shall be instructed by the
Chief of Police to report:
§ 264-57. Notice.
Each police officer or designee of the Village of Johnson City shall attach to
any vehicle parked in violation of this article a notice to the owner thereof
that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this
article and instructing such owner or operator to report to the office of the
Village Justice in regard to such violation.
§ 264-58. (Reserved)78
§ 264-59. Collection and delivery of meter deposits.
Collection of all coins deposited in parking meters as herein provided shall
be made by officers of the Police Department or such other designee of
the Village of Johnson City under such rules and regulations as shall be
hereafter established. In collection of such coins, the officer or officers
designated shall remove the coins from each parking meter and deliver the
same in its entirety to the Village Treasurer, who shall count the coins and
deposit the amount in the fund designated in the Village general fund.
A. The number of any meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the
parking space adjacent thereto is or has been parked in violation of any
of the provisions of this article and all other circumstances necessary to
a thorough understanding of such violation.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of the
provisions of this article.
78.Editor's Note: Former § 264:58, Payment of fine; failure to pay, was repealed 10-18-2016
by L.L. No. 7-2016.
§ 264-56 STORM SEWERS § 264-59
237:539

ARTICLE V
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 264-60. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 264-61. Storage and charges. [Amended 8-17-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010]
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police
or his designee.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Chief of Police.
C. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the power and authority to
provide for the removal and storage or immobilization of vehicles
parked in violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation and of
vehicles on which there are outstanding tickets or fines for parking
violations. Any vehicle which has three or more outstanding unpaid
tickets for parking violations or which has accumulated over $200 in
outstanding fines and/or penalties for parking violations may be
removed and stored or immobilized by or under the direction of the
Chief of Police or his designee. Such vehicles may be removed and
stored or immobilized by or under the direction of the Chief of Police or
his designee by means of towing or other means of removal, securing by
use of a wheel lock or other immobilization device and storage at a
public or private impound lot as designated by the Chief of Police. Such
removal and storage or immobilization shall be at the expense and risk
of the owner of the vehicle. [Added 8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
A. After removal of any vehicle pursuant to § 264-60A or B, the Chief of
Police or his designee may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the
expense of the owner. The owner of the vehicle may redeem the vehicle
upon payment of towing and storage fees and charges to the person or
corporation with whom the vehicle is stored.
B. In the event a wheel lock or other immobilization device is utilized
pursuant to § 264-60C, an administrative surcharge of $50 is hereby
imposed to offset the cost of maintenance, placement and removal of
the immobilization device; said surcharge shall be imposed and paid to
the Village Clerk/Treasurer prior to the release of an immobilized
vehicle.
C. If the vehicle has been impounded or immobilized pursuant to
§ 264-60C, the vehicle will be released to its owner upon payment of all
§ 264-60 STORM SEWERS § 264-61
237:541
§ 264-62. Notice of removal. [Amended 8-17-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010]
towing and storage fees and charges, if any, together with payment
of all fines and penalties for delinquent parking tickets or judgments
against the owner arising from such nonpayment. Payment may be
made to the Village of Johnson City Court.
D. If a vehicle has been impounded or immobilized pursuant to § 264-60C,
and the vehicle owner contests the outstanding parking violations, the
vehicle owner shall be required to appear in Village Court to answer
outstanding summonses and post bond, the amount of which shall not
exceed the total of the maximum fines permitted upon conviction of the
offenses charged in outstanding summonses against the vehicle
(including accrued penalties) plus the expense of towing and storage.
Upon posting of the bond with the Village of Johnson City Court, and
payment of wheel lock fee, if applicable, to the Village Clerk, the vehicle
shall be released to the owner.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his designee to, without
delay, report the removal and the disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided in this article to the Police Department, and it shall be the duty
of such Police Department to ascertain to the extent possible the owner
of the vehicle or person having charge of same and to notify him of the
removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be
required to redeem same.
B. When a vehicle is immobilized, the Police Department shall attach to
the vehicle a notice containing the following information:
(1) The location and identifying characteristics of the vehicle.
(2) The date and time of placement of the immobilization device and
the signature of the installer.
(3) Notice that further parking penalties will be waived during the
immobilization period for a period of three days from the date of
immobilization.
(4) Notice that any person tampering with the immobilization device or
the vehicle will be subject to criminal prosecution and liable for any
loss to the Village.
(5) The steps the owner must take to release the vehicle.
(6) Such other information, statements, notices and warnings as the
Chief of Police may from time to time determine are appropriate.
C. Tampering with or attempted removal of immobilization device
prohibited. No person shall attempt to or tamper with, deface, remove
or destroy any immobilization device or move a vehicle immobilized as
§ 264-61 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-62
237:542
herein provided. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for up to 10 days, or both.
§ 264-62 STORM SEWERS § 264-62
237:543

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 264-63. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and which is not enumerated in the
schedule in § 264-64 below shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction
within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within
18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 264-64. Fines; penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-16-1999 by
L.L. No. 4-1999]
A. The fines and penalties for the violation of this chapter shall be as
follows: [Amended 9-15-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009; 9-6-2011 by L.L.
No. 10-2011; 9-18-2012 by L.L. No. 11-2012; 10-18-2016 by L.L.
No. 7-2016]
Computer
Code No. Violation Fine
Fine If Paid
Within 5
Business Days
01 Expired meter $40 $20
10 No parking anytime
(a) Here to corner $40 $20
(b) Between signs $40 $20
(c) In handicapped zone $155 $125
(second offense within 24
months)
$200 $170
(d) Failure to display
handicapped permit
$30 $15
(e) Parking in reserved
monthly parking area
without monthly
parking tag
$40 $20
(f) Failure to display
monthly parking tag
$30 $15
28 Restricted time in excess of:
§ 264-63 STORM SEWERS § 264-64
237:545
Computer
Code No. Violation Fine
Fine If Paid
Within 5
Business Days
(a) Passenger vehicles, 8
hours
$40 $20
(b) Commercial vehicles,
3 hours
$40 $20
30 Alternate-side parking $40 $20
31 Parked improperly
(a) Over 12 inches from
curb
$40 $20
(b) Left side to curb $40 $20
(c) Out of space $40 $20
42 Blocking
(a) Crosswalk $40 $20
(b) Intersection $40 $20
(c) Walk $40 $20
(d) Driveway $40 $20
52 Emergency removal $70 $50
53 Bus zone $40 $20
60 Fire hydrant $70 $50
61 Fire lane $70 $50
70 Vehicle
(a) Uninspected:
Within 60 days of due
date
$50 $25
Overdue 61 days or
more
$75 $50
(b) Unregistered:
Within 60 days of due
date
$50 $25
Overdue 61 days or
more
$75 $50
71 Miscellaneous
(a) Parked in three-hour
parking in excess of 3
hours
$40 $20
(b) (Reserved) $40 $20
§ 264-64 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-64
237:546
§ 264-65. Temporary closing of streets during accidents and
emergencies.
Any police or peace officer shall have power and authority whenever
deemed advisable during a fire or at the time of an accident or special
emergency and for such period of time only as is necessitated thereby for
the public safety or convenience to temporarily close any street, avenue or
any public place in the Village to vehicular traffic or to vehicles of certain
description or to divert the traffic therefrom or to divert or break the
course of pedestrian traffic. Any person interfering with the execution of the
foregoing police officers or peace officers shall be a disorderly person.
§ 264-66. Obstruction of traffic by railroad cars.
No person acting as engineer, conductor or other person in the employ of
a railroad company or corporation shall cause or permit any locomotive,
car or cars to stop and stand on or across any public street or avenue in
the Village so as to obstruct travel thereon for a longer period than five
minutes at a time, except when necessarily loading or unloading the same
with passengers or freight.
§ 264-67. Existing signs, signals, markings and devices.
All existing signs, signals, markings and devices posted pursuant to order of
the Board of Trustees shall be deemed to have been posted under authority
granted by this chapter and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, and the posting
thereof is hereby ratified and confirmed.
§ 264-68. Obedience to signs, signals, markings and devices.
B. The fine for violations of this chapter shall be set forth in § 264-64A;
however, each such registered owner may, within five business days,
exclusive of the date on which the ticket was issued, pay to the Village
Court the "five-business-day fine" as set forth in § 264-64A. Failure to
pay the fine or contest the ticket within 30 days of the date of issuance
will be deemed an admission of liability, and a penalty of $15 will be
added to the assessed fine indicated above. If an information is filed
with the court, an arrest warrant for the arrest of the registered owner
of the vehicle may issue. This chapter shall take effect immediately and
shall apply to violations which occur on or after the effective date
hereof. [Amended 10-18-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016]
C. Fines for any of the offenses listed above which are also covered by the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall in no event be less than
those mandated by state law. In the event that state law is amended
such that the fines described in such law are different from those set
forth herein, the law providing for the largest possible fine shall prevail
in all cases.
A. Required. The operator of a vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device applicable thereto
§ 264-64 STORM SEWERS § 264-68
237:547
§ 264-69. Injury to signs, signals and markings.
No person shall willfully or otherwise deface, injure, move, obstruct or
interfere with any legal traffic sign or signal or any other restrictive or
directional sign temporarily or otherwise placed under or by direction of
any of the municipal departments of the Village.
§ 264-70. Traffic control signal legend.
The Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, determine those streets,
intersections and areas where traffic shall be controlled by signals
exhibiting different colored lights successively or with arrows. The
provisions of § 1111 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be applicable
whenever traffic is controlled by such traffic control signals.
§ 264-71. Flashing signals.
The Board of Trustees shall from time to time determine those streets and
intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by means of illuminated
flashing red or yellow signals. The provisions of § 1113 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law shall be applicable whenever traffic is controlled by means of
such flashing signals.
§ 264-72. Through streets intersecting with each other.
The erection of stop signs at all four corners of through streets intersecting
with each other shall be authorized, with the right-of-way as provided by the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 264-73. Duty of driver on approach of emergency vehicle.
All emergency vehicles shall have the right-of-way through all streets and
avenues in the Village. On the approach of an emergency vehicle, as
evidenced by suitable warning or signal indicating the route of such
emergency vehicle, every driver or person in control of another vehicle
shall immediately drive such vehicle as near as practicable to the right-hand
curb or side of each avenue or street and parallel thereto and bring it to a
standstill and there remain until such emergency vehicle shall have passed.
placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle in the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B. Signs. No provision of this chapter or of the Vehicle and Traffic Law for
which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place.
§ 264-68 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-74
237:548
§ 264-74. Crossing fire hose.
Whenever any hose of the Fire Department of the Village shall be placed
in or upon any street or avenue or across any railroad tracks in the Village
in response to any alarm of fire or for the purpose of putting out a fire, it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel or cause to be driven
or propelled on or across such hose any motor vehicle, truck, wagon,
locomotive, car or other vehicle.
§ 264-75. Stopping to make repairs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop to make repairs to or upon any
vehicle in or on any public street or roadway in the Village except in an
emergency.
§ 264-74 STORM SEWERS § 264-75
237:549

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 264-76. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Intersection
Ackley Avenue North Floral Avenue
Arch Street North Main Street
Arch Street South Main Street
Avenue A South Main Street
Avenue C South Main Street
Avenue D South Main Street
Baldwin Street
[Repealed
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
Baldwin Street North Grand Avenue
Baldwin Street
[Repealed
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
Baldwin Street South Grand Avenue
Broad Street North Main Street
Broad Street South Main Street
Burbank Avenue North Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue South Floral Avenue
C.F.J. Boulevard East Lester Avenue
C.F.J. Boulevard West Lester Avenue
Corliss Avenue
[Repealed
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
Corliss Avenue East St. Charles Street
Corliss Avenue
[Repealed
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
Corliss Avenue West St. Charles Street
§ 264-76 STORM SEWERS § 264-76
237:551
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Intersection
Crocker Avenue North Main Street
First Street South Main Street
Floral Avenue East Ackley Avenue
Floral Avenue East Burbank Avenue
Floral Avenue West Ackley Avenue/St. Charles Street
Floral Avenue West Burbank Avenue
Grand Avenue East Baldwin Street
Grand Avenue East Willow Street
Grand Avenue West Baldwin Street
Grand Avenue West Willow Street
Harry L. Drive East Route 201 intersection
Harry L. Drive East Route 201 intersection
Harry L. Drive East Giant Plaza intersection
Harry L. Drive East Lester Avenue
Harry L. Drive East North Baldwin Street
Harry L. Drive East North Broad Street
Harry L. Drive East Oakdale Road
Harry L. Drive East Toys R Us
Harry L. Drive East Wegmans intersection
Harry L. Drive North Across from Mall
Harry L. Drive North Giant Plaza
Harry L. Drive South Across Wegmans
Harry L. Drive South Friendly's
Harry L. Drive West Giant Plaza inter.
Harry L. Drive West Lester Avenue
Harry L. Drive West Mall (Across Wegmans)
Harry L. Drive West N. Baldwin Street
Harry L. Drive West N. Broad Street
Harry L. Drive West Oakdale Road
Harry L. Drive West Route 201
Harry L. Drive West Toys R Us
Isabelle Pl. South Main Street
Jenison Avenue North Main Street
Lester Avenue North C.F.J. Boulevard
§ 264-76 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-76
237:552
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Intersection
Lester Avenue North Harry L. Drive
Lester Avenue South Main Street
Lester Avenue South Main Street
Main Street East Allen Street
Main Street East Arch Street
Main Street East Broad Street
Main Street East Crocker Avenue
Main Street East Isabelle Place
Main Street East Jenison Avenue
Main Street East Lester Avenue
Main Street East Third Street
Main Street East Willow Street
Main Street West Allen Street
Main Street West Arch Street
Main Street West Avenue A
Main Street West Avenue C
Main Street West Avenue D
Main Street West First Street
Main Street West Isabelle Place
Main Street West Lester Avenue
Main Street West Riverside Drive
Main Street West Third Street
North Baldwin
Street
North Harry L. Drive (also single light
pole, northeast corner)
North Baldwin
Street
South Harry L. Drive (also single light
pole, southwest corner)
North Broad Street North Harry L. Drive
Oakdale Road North Harry L. Drive
Oakdale Road South Harry L. Drive
Reynolds Road East Entering Taco Bell
Reynolds Road East Exiting Oakdale Arms Apartments
Reynolds Road North JC High School
Reynolds Road North Taco Bell
Reynolds Road South Harry L. Drive
Reynolds Road South JC High School
§ 264-76 STORM SEWERS § 264-76
237:553
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Intersection
Reynolds Road South Taco Bell
Reynolds Road West Exiting JC High School
Reynolds Road West Exiting Taco Bell to Mall
Riverside Drive North Brewster Street (yellow light)
Riverside Drive South Brewster Street (yellow light)
St Charles Street North Corliss Avenue (blinking red light)
St Charles Street South Corliss Avenue (blinking red)
St Charles Street South Floral Avenue
Third Street South Main Street
Willow Street Both Grand Avenue
Willow Street North Main Street
Zoa Avenue South Harry L. Drive
§ 264-77. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-5, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
Direction
of Travel Location
All Village streets and
highways, unless
otherwise provided
30 Both Entire length
Academy Street [Repealed 9-2-2003]
Academy Street 30 North Utility Pole No.
1644-105-5
Ackley Avenue 30 North House No. 267
Ackley Avenue 30 South North of Utility Pole
No. L1589-2
Albert Street 15 North Across school
playground
Albert Street 15 South House No. 64
Albert Street 30 North House No. 63
Albert Street end 15 North House No. 63
Cherry Street [Repealed 9-2-2003]
Cherry Street 30 North Grand Avenue
Chrisfield Avenue 15 East House No. 44
§ 264-76 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-77
237:554
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
Direction
of Travel Location
Chrisfield Avenue 15 West Corner entering
avenue from traffic
circle
Columbia Drive 30 North Entire east side
Columbia Drive 30 South Entire west side
Corliss Avenue 15 East House No. 276
Corliss Avenue 15 West House No. 211
Corliss Avenue 30 West House No. 271
Crocker Avenue 15 North North of Corliss
Avenue
Crocker Avenue 15 South House No. 56
Deyo Hill Road 30 East Utility Pole No. 2-101
Deyo Hill Road 30 West Across from House
No. 33
Floral Avenue 25 West 35.4 feet west of
Cook Street
Floral Avenue 25 West East of Traffic Circle
Floral Avenue 30 East Utility Pole No.
54-124
Floral Avenue 30 West House No. 315
Floral Avenue 30 West House No. 65
Grand Avenue 30 East House No. 372
Grand Avenue 30 West House No. 35
Greenridge 30 West House No. 19
Harry L. Drive
[Repealed 9-2-2003]
Harry L. Drive 30 East In front of Kwik Fill
(end 15)
Harry L. Drive 30 East Business No. 298
Harry L. Drive 30 East East of Route 201
Harry L. Drive 30 East In front of Wegmans
Harry L. Drive 30 East West of Valley Plaza
Harry L. Drive 30 West 160.10 feet west of
Airport Road
Harry L. Drive 30 West North of Utility Pole
No. 1638-199-80495-1975
§ 264-77 STORM SEWERS § 264-77
237:555
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
Direction
of Travel Location
Harry L. Drive 30 West West of Route 201
intersection
C.F.J. Boulevard 30 West Across from Business
Nos. 74 through 76
Lusk Street 30 North South of Utility Pole
No. 11-11F-1911
Main Street 20 East Across from Business
No. 167
Main Street 20 West 235.0 feet west of
Lester Avenue
Main Street 20 West East of Lester Avenue
Main Street 30 East East of Route 201
bridge
Main Street 30 East House No. 116
Main Street 30 West Avenue A
Main Street 30 West East corner of Main
Street and Riverside
Drive
Main Street 30 West East of Meter No.
M-75
Margaret Street 25 North North of Patricia
Street (Binghamton)
Margaret Street 25 South South of Utility Pole
No. E-104
Marie Street 30 South House No. 16
North Arch Street
[Repealed 9-2-2003]
North Arch Street 30 North House No. 50 (end
15)
North Broad Street
[Repealed 9-2-2003]
North Broad Street 30 South House No. 179 (end
15)
Oakdale Road 30 North Across from House
No. 801
Oakdale Road 30 North Business No. 100
Oakdale Road 30 North Business No. 226
Oakdale Road 30 North South of Utility Pole
No. 825-45
§ 264-77 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-77
237:556
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
Direction
of Travel Location
Oakdale Road 30 South House No. 325
Oakdale Road 30 South House No. 707
Oakdale Road 30 South House No. 849
Overbrook Road 30 East North of Nelson Road
Reynolds Road 15 North House No. 602
Reynolds Road 15 South House No. 817
Reynolds Road 30 North 80 feet north of
Harry L. Drive
Reynolds Road 30 South House No. 1183
Reynolds Road 30 South South of House No.
535
Reynolds Road 30 South South Taco Bell
intersection
Reynolds Road end 15 North South of Utility Pole
No. 24-5
Reynolds Road end 15 South House No. 561
Riverside Drive 25 North House No. 515
Riverside Drive 25 South North of Chrisfield
Avenue
Riverside Drive 30 North Elfred Street
Riverside Drive 30 North Margaret Street
Riverside Drive 30 South South of Utility Pole
No. 3-33-2-1955
Riverside Drive 30 South Sunset Knoll Avenue
Riverside Drive 30 South Utility Pole No. E201
Roberts Street
[Repealed 9-2-2003]
Roberts Street 30 South House No. 56
Robinson Hill Road 30 East House No. 821
St. Charles Street 30 North House No. 221
Theron Street 30 West Exiting Route 201
Thomas Street 30 West Exiting Route 201
§ 264-78. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-8, the following described streets
or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 264-77 STORM SEWERS § 264-78
237:557
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Corliss Avenue
[Added 5-19-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
West From Arch Street to Baldwin
Street
Farr Avenue South Entire length
Fourth Street North From Main Street to Crocker
Place
Harry L. Drive East From east of House No. 84 to
Almond Street
North Broad Street North From Brocton Avenue to Brown
Street
§ 264-79. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-9, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Reynolds Road Taco Bell intersection
Reynolds Road Harry L. Drive
§ 264-80. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-10, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name
of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection of
Baldwin Street
[Added
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
North Right All Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street
[Added
5-19-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
South Left All Corliss Avenue
East Thomas
Street
West Left All House No. 27
Floral Avenue East Left All 72.9 feet east of
Utility Pole No.
56-126
Floral Avenue West Left All Utility Pole No.
59-1
§ 264-78 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-80
237:558
Name
of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection of
Floral Avenue South Left All Exiting Lusk
Street
Floral Avenue East Left All East of Utility
Pole No. 56-1
Harry L. Drive West Left All Marie Street
Lusk Street South Left All Floral Avenue
Marie Street North Left All Harry L. Drive
Theron Street East Left All Entering Route
201
Thomas Street East Left All Entering Route
201
§ 264-81. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-11, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited
Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
Arch Street North All/All Main Street
Avenue C South All/All Main Street
Avenue D South All/All Main Street
Burbank Avenue North All/All Floral Avenue
Harry L. Drive
[Repealed
9-2-2003]
Harry L. Drive West All/All Zoa Avenue
Isabelle Place South All/All Main Street
Lester Avenue North All/All Harry L. Drive
Main Street East All/All Broad Street
Main Street West All/All Avenue C
Main Street West All/All Avenue D
North Broad Street
[Repealed
9-2-2003]
Willow Street North All/All Main Street
§ 264-80 STORM SEWERS § 264-81
237:559
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited
Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
Willow Street South All/All Grand Avenue
Zoa Avenue South All/All Harry L. Drive
§ 264-82. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-12, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic
control devices shall be installed on each street intersecting the through
street:
Name
of Through
Street
Name
of Entrance
Street
Direction
From Which
Entering
Traffic
Control
Device
(Reserved)
§ 264-83. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Academy Street North Fairview Street
Academy Street South Harry L. Drive
Ackley Avenue North Ethel Street (all ways)
Ackley Avenue South Ethel Street
Ackley Avenue South Riverside Drive
Adams Avenue North Greenridge Street
Adams Avenue North Hill Avenue
Adams Avenue North Union Street
Adams Avenue South Hill Avenue
Adams Avenue South Riverside Drive
Adams Avenue South Union Street
Aetna Road East Fernwood Avenue
Aetna Road East Oakdale Road
Aetna Road West Fernwood Avenue
§ 264-81 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:560
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Aetna Road West Oakdale Road
Albany Avenue North Wren Street
Albany Avenue South Harry L. Drive
Albert Street North Main Street
Albert Street South Corliss Avenue
Allen Street South Corliss Avenue
Almond Street North Harry L. Drive
Andrews Street North Robinson Hill Road
Andrews Street South Grant Street
Anna Maria Drive North Marian Drive
Anna Maria Drive North Penna Road
Anna Maria Drive South Marian Drive
Arch Street North Corliss Avenue
Arch Street South Corliss Avenue
Arlington Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Arlington Street West New York Avenue
Arthur Avenue South South end dead end
Avenue A North Brigham Avenue
Avenue B North Brigham Avenue
Avenue B South Main Street
Azon Road West Oakdale Road
Baker Street North Main Street
Baker Street South Corliss Avenue
Balch Street East Coleville Avenue
Balch Street East Virginia Avenue
Balch Street West Coleville Avenue
Balch Street West Virginia Avenue
Balch Street West Zoa Avenue
Baldwin Street
[Added
5-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
North Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street North Main Street
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:561
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Baldwin Street
[Added
5-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
South Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street South Floral Avenue
Banks Avenue East Riverside Drive
Banks Avenue West Boland Drive
Berkley Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Berkley Street West New York Avenue
Bernice Street East Lusk Street
Bernice Street East Riverside Drive
Bernice Street West Boland Drive
Beverly Place North Main Street
Boland Park
parking lot exit
[Added 3-1-2011
by L.L. No.
1-2011]
East Boland Drive
Brady Street South North Street
Brewster Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Brewster Street West Riverside Drive
Brigham Avenue East Lester Avenue
Broad Street South Corliss Avenue
Brocton Street East Lester Avenue
Brocton Street West Arch Street
Brown Street East North Broad Street
Burbank Avenue North Grand Avenue
Burbank Avenue North Greenridge Street
Burbank Avenue South Greenridge Street
Burbank Avenue South Riverside Drive
Burdick Avenue North Brewster Street
Burdick Avenue South Shelby Street
Burns Street North Brown Street
Burns Street South Brown Street
Carhart Avenue North Main Street
Carhart Avenue South Grand Avenue
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:562
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Carlton Street East North Broad Street
Carlton Street West North Hudson Street
Cherry Street North Grand Avenue
Cherry Street South Floral Avenue
Chrisfield Avenue East Riverside Drive
Chrisfield Avenue West Boland Drive
Clarendon Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Clarendon Street West New York Avenue
Cleveland Avenue South Grand Avenue
Columbia Drive North Deyo Hill Avenue
Columbia Drive South Fairview Street
Columbia Drive West Business 515
Columbus Place North Union Street
Columbus Place South Riverside Drive
Concord Street North Brocton Street
Concord Street North Service Road
Concord Street South Brocton Street
Concord Street South Pratt Avenue
Cook Street North Grand Avenue
Cook Street South Floral Avenue
Corliss Avenue East Arch Street
Corliss Avenue
[Added
5-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
East Baldwin Street
Corliss Avenue East Ozalid Road
Corliss Avenue East St. Charles Street
Corliss Avenue East Willow Street
Corliss Avenue West Arch Street
Corliss Avenue
[Added
5-19-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
West Baldwin Street
Corliss Avenue West Jenison Avenue
Corliss Avenue West St. Charles Street
Corliss Avenue West St. Charles Street
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:563
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Corliss Avenue West Willow Street
Crocker Avenue South Corliss Avenue
Crocker Place East Fourth Street
Crocker Place West Riverside Drive
Custer Avenue East Carhart Avenue
Custer Avenue West Cleveland Avenue
Cyndy Street East Jerry Street
Cyndy Street North Placek Drive
Daniel Drive North Robinson Hill Road
Dartmouth Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Dartmouth Street West New York Avenue
David Drive West Reynolds Road
Davis Avenue East Margaret Street
Davis Avenue West Burbank Avenue
Dedrick Avenue East North Harrison Street
Dedrick Avenue West North Hudson Street
Dell Rose Lane East Reynolds Road
Dellapenna Drive South Tokos Grove Road
Dewitt Street East Margaret Street
Dewitt Street West Burbank Avenue
Deyo Hill Road West Reynolds Road
Diment Street North Brocton Street
Diment Street South Pratt Avenue
Division Street West Burbank Avenue
East Bernice
Street
East Lusk Street
East Theron
Street
East Lusk Street
East Thomas
Street
East Lusk Street
East Thomas
Street
West Route 201
Edward Street North Riale Avenue
Edward Street South Sunset Knoll Avenue
Eldredge Avenue East Riverside Drive
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:564
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Eldredge Avenue West Boland Drive
Elfred Street East Ackley Avenue
Elfred Street West Riverside Drive
Elizabeth Street North Grand Avenue
Elizabeth Street South Floral Avenue
Endicott Avenue East Cleveland Avenue
Endicott Avenue West Willow Street
Endwell Street West Riverside Drive
Enid Place West Reynolds Road
Eric Court North Eric Drive
Eric Drive West Reynolds Road
Ester Street East Myrtle Avenue
Ester Street West Jay Street
Ethel Street East Burdick Avenue
Ethel Street East Fowler Avenue
Ethel Street East Massachusetts Avenue
Ethel Street West Ackley Avenue
Ethel Street West Burdick Avenue
Ethel Street West Massachusetts Avenue
Ethel Street West Riverside Drive
Evert Street East Ackley Avenue
Evert Street East Marie Street
Evert Street West Marie Street
Evert Street West Oakdale Road
Faatz Alley West Baldwin Street
Fairfax Avenue East North Baldwin Street
Fairfax Avenue East North Harrison Street
Fairfax Avenue East North Hudson Street
Fairfax Avenue West North Harrison Street
Fairfax Avenue West North Hudson Street
Fairfax Avenue West Richard Street
Fairview Street East Jay Street
Fairview Street East North Baldwin Street
Fairview Street East North Harrison Street
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:565
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Fairview Street
[Added
9-5-2000]
East North Hudson Street
Fairview Street
[Added
9-5-2000]
East Richard Street
Fairview Street West North Baldwin Street
Fairview Street West North Baldwin Street
Fairview Street West North Harrison Street
Fairview Street
[Added
9-5-2000]
West North Hudson Street
Fairview Street West Reynolds Road
Fairview Street
[Added
9-5-2000]
West Richard Street
Farr Avenue South Floral Avenue
Fernwood Avenue South Robinson Hill Road
Field Street West Oakdale Road
Fourth Street North Endwell Street
Fowler Avenue North Hill Avenue
Fowler Avenue South Hill Avenue
Fowler Avenue South Union Street
Frank Street West Oakdale Road
Franklin Street East North Arch Street
Franklin Street East North Baldwin Street
Franklin Street East North Harrison Street
Franklin Street East North Hudson Street
Franklin Street West North Baldwin Street
Franklin Street West North Harrison Street
Franklin Street West North Hudson Street
Franklin Street West Richard Street
Grand Avenue East Riverside Drive
Grand Avenue West Boland Drive
Grand Avenue West Boland Drive
Grand Avenue West Riverside Drive
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:566
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Grant Street East Oakdale Road
Greenridge Street East Burbank Avenue
Greenridge Street East Margaret Street
Greenridge Street West Burbank Avenue
Greenridge Street West Fowler Avenue
Harrison Street North Grand Avenue
Harrison Street North Main Street
Harrison Street South Floral Avenue
Harrison Street South Grand Avenue
Harrison Street South Park Place
Harry L. Drive East Almond Street
Harry L. Drive East Virginia Avenue
Harry L. Drive West 2 signs exiting Harry L. Drive to
Oakdale Road
Haynes Avenue North Ethel Street
Haynes Avenue South Hill Avenue
Helen Street North Grand Avenue
Helen Street South Floral Avenue
High Street North Harry L. Drive
High Street South North Street
Hill Avenue East Burbank Avenue
Hill Avenue East Fowler Avenue
Hill Avenue West Ackley Avenue
Hill Avenue West Fowler Avenue
Hillside Street East Albany Avenue
Hillside Street East Virginia Avenue
Hillside Street East Zoa Avenue
Hillside Street West Albany Avenue
Hillside Street West Pearl Avenue
Hillside Street West Zoa Avenue
Hudson Street North Grand Avenue
Hudson Street North Main Street
Hudson Street North Park Place
Hudson Street South Corliss Avenue
Hudson Street South Floral Avenue
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:567
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Hudson Street South Grand Avenue
Hudson Street South Park Place
Ivy Place North North of Aetna Road (stop dead end)
Ivy Place North South of Aetna Road
Ivy Place South North of Aetna Road
Ivy Place South South of Aetna Road (stop dead end)
Jay Street North Harry L. Drive
Jay Street North Wren Street
Jay Street South Harry L. Drive
Jay Street South North Street
Jenison Avenue South Corliss Avenue
Jerry Street East Harry L. Drive
Jerry Street North Victory Street
Johnson Street North Endicott Avenue
Johnson Street South Grand Avenue
Lacey Avenue South Ethel Street
Laurel Street East Lester Avenue
Laurel Street West Avenue A
Leigh Street East Ukranian Hill Road
Leigh Street West Zoa Avenue
Lewis Street East Jenison Avenue
Lewis Street West Willow Street
Lincoln Avenue North Division Street
Lincoln Avenue North Floral Avenue
Lincoln Avenue South Division Street
Locust Street East Brady Street
Locust Street West Spruce Street
Lou Rene Circle West Reynolds Road
Louise Street East Albany Avenue
Louise Street East Myrtle Avenue
Louise Street East Pearl Avenue
Louise Street West Jay Street
Louise Street West Myrtle Avenue
Louise Street West Pearl Avenue
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:568
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Lowell Avenue West North Broad Street
Lusk Street North Grand Avenue
Lusk Street South Floral Avenue
Margaret Street North Division Street
Margaret Street North Stokes Avenue
Margaret Street South Greenridge Street
Margaret Street South Riverside Drive
Marian Drive East Reynolds Road
Marie Street North Harry L. Drive
Marie Street South Field Street
Marlayne Drive South Eric Drive
Marlayne Drive West Reynolds Road
Martin Avenue North Greenridge Street
Martin Avenue North Hill Avenue
Martin Avenue North Union Street
Martin Avenue South Hill Avenue
Martin Avenue South Riverside Drive
Martin Avenue South Union Street
Massachusetts
Avenue
North Ethel Street
Massachusetts
Avenue
North Floral Avenue
Massachusetts
Avenue
South Ethel Street
Massachusetts
Avenue
South Shelby Street
Mildred Avenue West Farr Avenue
Mill Place West Coleville Avenue
Milton Avenue East Arthur Avenue
Milton Avenue West Oakdale Road
Miriam Street West Zoa Avenue
Myrtle Avenue North Harry L. Drive
Myrtle Avenue North North Street
Myrtle Avenue North Wren Street
Myrtle Avenue South Harry L. Drive
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:569
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Myrtle Avenue South North Street
Narwood Street East Margaret Street
Narwood Street West Burbank Avenue
Nassau Street North Brocton Street
Nassau Street North Service Road
Nassau Street South Brocton Street
Nassau Street South Pratt Avenue
Nelson Road North Overbrook Road
Nelson Road South Overbrook Road
New York Avenue North Floral Avenue
New York Avenue South Brewster Street
Newark Avenue East Arthur Avenue
Newark Avenue West Oakdale Road
Nicholas Avenue North Miriam Street
North Arch Street North Fairview Street
North Arch Street South Harry L. Drive
North Baldwin
Street
South Carlton Street
North Broad
Street
North Across Brown Street
North Broad
Street
North Brocton Street
North Harrison
Street
North Harry L. Drive
North Harrison
Street
South Carlton Street
North Harrison
Street
South Fairfax Avenue
North Harrison
Street
South Harry L. Drive
North Hudson Street [Repealed 4-17-2001]
North Hudson
Street
North Harry L. Drive
North Hudson
Street
South Carlton Street
North Hudson
Street
South Fairfax Avenue
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:570
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
North Hudson
Street
South Harry L. Drive
North Street East Lester Avenue
North Street East Myrtle Avenue
North Street West Myrtle Avenue
North Street West North Broad Street
Oakdale Road North Overbrook Road
Oakdale Road South Overbrook Road
Oakview Drive South Penna Road
Olive Street East North Broad Street
Orchard Avenue North Floral Avenue
Orchard Avenue South Brewster Street
Overbrook Road East Reynolds Road
Overbrook Road West Oakdale Road
Ozalid Road North Main Street
Ozalid Road South Corliss Avenue
Pamela Drive West Reynolds Road
Park Place South Corliss Avenue
Park Place West St. Charles Street
Park Street North Main Street
Pearl Avenue [Repealed 4-19-2005]
Pearl Avenue South Harry L. Drive
Penna Road East Anna Marie Drive
Penna Road East Reynolds Road
Peterson Street East Margaret Street
Peterson Street West Burbank Avenue
Placek Drive East Oakdale Road
Pleasant Avenue West Baldwin Street
Plymouth Street North Brocton Street
Plymouth Street North Service Road
Plymouth Street South Brocton Street
Plymouth Street South Pratt Avenue
Pratt Avenue East Lester Avenue
Pratt Avenue West North Broad Street
Riale Avenue East Riverside Drive
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:571
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Riale Avenue West Boland Drive
Richard Street [Repealed 4-17-2001]
Richard Street South Harry L. Drive
Riverside Drive South Thomas Street
Roberts Street North Grand Avenue
Roberts Street South Floral Avenue
Robinson Hill East Oakdale Road
Rogers Street South C.F.J. Boulevard
Sanford Street East Columbus Place
Sanford Street West Ackley Avenue
Schulte Avenue West Riverside Drive
Second Street South Main Street
Sergeant Street North Sturtevant Street
Sergeant Street South Corliss Avenue
Shelby Street East Ackley Avenue
Shelby Street East Riverside Drive
Shelby Street West East of Riverside Drive
Shelby Street West West of Riverside Drive (dead end)
Sherman Street North Grand Avenue
Sherman Street South Floral Avenue
Spring Street North Leigh Street
Spring Street South Leigh Street
Spring Street South Miriam Street
Spring Street West Sacred Heart exit
Spruce Street South North Street
St. Charles Street North Corliss Avenue
St. Charles Street North Grand Avenue
St. Charles Street North Main Street
St. Charles Street South Corliss Avenue
St. Charles Street South Grand Avenue
Stearns Avenue East Margaret Street
Stearns Avenue West Burbank Avenue
St. John Parkway West Virginia Avenue
Sturtevant Street East Baker Street
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-83
237:572
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Summit Street East Albany Avenue
Summit Street East Myrtle Avenue
Summit Street East Pearl Avenue
Summit Street West Jay Street
Summit Street West Myrtle Avenue
Summit Street West Pearl Avenue
Sunset Knoll
Avenue
East Riverside Drive
Sunset Knoll
Avenue
West Edward Street (dead end)
Taber Street North Brown Street
Taber Street South Brown Street
Taber Street South Olive Street
Theron Street East Route 201
Theron Street West Boland Drive
Third Street North Endwell Street
Thomas Street East Route 201
Thomas Street West Boland Drive
Tokos Grove Road East Reynolds Road
Tyler Street East Robinson Hill Road
Union Street East Burbank Avenue
Union Street West Ackley Avenue
Valley Plaza East Oakdale Road
Valley Plaza West Harry L. Drive
Victory Street East Cyndy Street
Victory Street East Oakdale Road
Victory Street West Cyndy Street
Virginia Avenue North Harry L. Drive
Virginia Avenue North Leigh Street
Virginia Avenue North Miriam Street
Virginia Avenue South Harry L. Drive
Virginia Avenue South Leigh Street
Virginia Avenue South Miriam Street
Wells Avenue South Main Street
Weymouth Lane North David Drive
§ 264-83 STORM SEWERS § 264-83
237:573
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Weymouth Lane North Enid Place
Weymouth Lane South David Drive
Willow Street South Floral Avenue
Wren Street
[Added
4-19-2005]
East Pearl Avenue
Wren Street East Zoa Avenue
Wren Street West On fence at dead end
Wren Street
[Added
4-19-2005]
West Pearl Avenue
§ 264-84. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Floral Avenue West Entering circle
Floral Avenue West Entering circle
Harry L. Drive North Toys R Us
Harry L. Drive North Wegmans
Harry L. Drive South Toys R Us
Harry L. Drive South Wegmans
Reynolds Road East Sears exit
Riverside Drive North Entering circle
§ 264-85. Schedule X: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-15, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts
thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
§ 264-83 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-85
237:574
Name
of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Corliss Avenue 5 West of Baldwin Street
Corliss Avenue 5 Meter No. CO31
Evert Street 5 Oakdale Road
Frank Street 5 Oakdale Road
Grant Street 3 From Oakdale Road west to dead
end
Lusk Street 5 Grand Avenue
Lusk Street 5 Floral Avenue
Marie Street 5 Field Street
Marie Street 5 Harry L. Drive
Riverside Drive 5 South of Chrisfield Avenue
Taber Street 5 Brown Street
Thomas Street 5 Exiting Route 201
§ 264-86. Schedule XI: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-16, the lanes described below
are hereby reserved for the uses noted:
Name
of Street Lane
Direction
of Travel
Approaching
Intersection
of
Use
Reserved
East Thomas
Street
Right West Route 201 Right turn only
Floral Avenue Right West Route 201 Righ turn only
Harry L. Drive Left West North Broad
Street
Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Left West Giant Plaza Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Left West Route 201 Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right/
center
West Route 201/
Reynolds
Road
Straight only
Harry L. Drive
turn or straight
Right West Reynolds
Road
Right only
Harry L. Drive Right West West of Utility
Pole No.193-4
Right lane must
turn right
Harry L. Drive Left West Oakdale Road Left turn only
§ 264-85 STORM SEWERS § 264-86
237:575
Name
of Street Lane
Direction
of Travel
Approaching
Intersection
of
Use
Reserved
Harry L. Drive Right West Mall (Wards) Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left West Entrance to
Wegmans
Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right West Hess and
Oakdale Road
Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Center West Hoss's Straight only
Harry L. Drive Left East Airport Road Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Left East Oakdale Road Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right East Wegmans Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left East Mall (Wards) Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right East Route 201 Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left East Reynolds
Road
Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right East Giant Plaza Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Center East Giant Plaza Straight only
Harry L. Drive Right East Giant Plaza Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left East Friendly's Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right East Rickel's Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left East Small Mall Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Left North Wegmans exit Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Center North Wegmans exit Straight only
Harry L. Drive Right North Wegmans exit Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left South Wegmans
entrance
Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Left North Mall entrance Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Right North Mall entrance Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left South Mall exit Left turn only
Harry L. Drive Center South Mall exit Straight only
Harry L. Drive Right South Mall exit Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Right East Toys R Us Right turn only
Harry L. Drive Left West Toys R Us Left turn only
Main Street Right West Lester Avenue Right turn only
Main Street Left West Arch Street Left turn only
Main Street Right East Route 201 Right turn only
§ 264-86 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-86
237:576
Name
of Street Lane
Direction
of Travel
Approaching
Intersection
of
Use
Reserved
Main Street Left East Brigham
Avenue
Left turn only
Main Street Right East Carhart
Avenue
Right turn only
Main Street Left West Carhart
Avenue
Left turn only
Main Street Right West Brigham
Avenue
Right turn only
Main Street Left East Lester Avenue Left turn only
Oakdale Road Right North Harry L.
Drive
Right turn only
Oakdale Road Left South Harry L.
Drive
Left turn only
Oakdale Road Left North Harry L.
Drive
Straight or left
turn only
Reynolds Road Left South Taco Bell Left turn only
Reynolds Road Left South Harry L.
Drive
Straight or left
turn only
Reynolds Road Right North JC High
School
Right turn only
Reynolds Road Left North JC High
School
Straight only
Reynolds Road Left South JC High
School
Left turn only
Reynolds Road Right South JC High
School
Straight only
Reynolds Road Left North Mall entrance Left turn only
Reynolds Road Right North Taco Bell Right turn only
Reynolds Road Left North Mall entrance
(Sears)
Left turn only
Riverside Drive Right North Traffic circle Right turn only
Riverside Drive Center and
left
North Traffic circle Yield
Theron Street Right East Route 201 Right turn only
Thomas Street Right East Route 201 Right turn only
§ 264-87. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Amended
8-17-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
§ 264-86 STORM SEWERS § 264-87
237:577
A. No parking anytime. In accordance with the provisions of § 264-21, no
person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Ackley Avenue West From a point 95 feet from Floral
Avenue to a point 185 feet from
Floral Avenue
Arch Street [Added
4-19-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
East From Corliss Avenue to Faatz Alley
Arch Street West Meter No. AS27
Arthur Avenue
[Added 2-5-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
East From a point 30 feet north of 226
Arthur Avenue property line to the
north edge of 342 Arthur Avenue
property line
Avenue C West North of Utility Pole No. 163L-3
Baldwin Street East Business No. 19 (fire lane) Beverly
East Place House Nos. 8 through 2
Baldwin Street East From Faatz Alley to Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street
[Added 4-19-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
East From a point 243 feet south of Main
Street to parking meter BS-37
Baldwin Street West North of Utility Pole No.
12-560-1921
Columbia Drive
[Added 8-11-2003]
Both Entire length
Corliss Avenue From 5 feet east to 5 feet west of
the driveway at 266 Corliss Avenue
Corliss Avenue
[Added 5-19-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
South From Arch Street to Baldwin Street
Corliss Avenue South Across from Utility Pole 1624-3
Crocker Avenue East Entire east side
Crocker Place North From Fourth Street to Riverside
Drive
Crocker Place South From Riverside Drive to Fourth
Street
Elfred Street [Added
5-15-2018 by L.L.
No. 5-2018]
East 120 feet to Riverside Drive
Endwell Street South East of Utility Pole No. 2AL1606-
204
§ 264-87 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-87
237:578
Name of Street Side Location
Faatz Alley [Added
12-2-2008 by L.L.
No. 4-2008]
North Entire length
Fairview Street North From North Hudson Street to
Richard Street (this side)
Fairview Street South From west of Richard Street to
North Arch Street
Farr Avenue West South of Utility Pole No. E4A
Floral Avenue
[Amended
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Both Riverside Drive to Burbank Avenue
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Grand Avenue
[Added
12-18-2001]
North From the Mosque 90 feet east to
House No. 161
Grand Avenue North West of St. Charles Street
Grand Avenue North West of Willow Street
Grand Avenue South From the on-street sign pole to
Willow Street
Hudson Street West Across House No. 153
Lee Circle [Added
9-2-2003]
Both Entire length
Lester Avenue East Main Street Nos. 90 through 96
(Fountains Pavilion)
Lester Avenue West From C.F.J. Boulevard to Main
Street
Lou Rene Circle
[Added 2-19-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
All Cul-de-sac
Lou Rene Circle
[Added 2-19-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
North Between 440 feet and 466 feet
measured from the Reynolds Road
east curb
Lou Rene Circle
[Added 2-19-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
North Between 20 feet west of cul-de-sac
and start of cul-de-sac
Lou Rene Circle
[Added 2-19-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
South Between 20 feet west of cul-de-sac
and start of cul-de-sac
§ 264-87 STORM SEWERS § 264-87
237:579
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street North From the Post Office exit to light
pole No. 87
Main Street North Over bridge to Lester Avenue
Main Street [Added
9-18-2001]
South Between Baldwin Street and
Hudson Street
Main Street South From House No. 116 to Carhart
Avenue
Main Street South House No. 12
Main Street South House No. 374
Main Street South Midway between Hudson Street
and Harrison Street
Margaret Street East From Patricia Street to House No.
87
North Baldwin Street East Corner Harry L. Drive
North Broad Street
[Added 12-21-1999
by L.L. No. 7-1999]
East From Harry L. Drive to North
Street
North Broad Street East House No. 200
North Broad Street West On guard rail at dead end
North Street North From Lester Avenue to a point 79
plus or minus feet westerly thereof
Oakdale Road West House No. 171
Oakdale Road West South of Utility Pole No.
825-21-1920
Park Place [Added
1-18-2000]
South Between Hudson Street and
Harrison Street
Park Place South West of visitor parking (UHS)
Park Place South House No. 48
Park Place South House No. 52
Park Place South House No. 60
Richard Street West House Nos. 45 through 5
Route 201 East From Thomas Street to the Village
line
Route 201 West South of underpass near Thomas
Street
St. Charles Street East Across House No. 88
Third Street West North of Utility Pole No. 1610-1-1
Victory Street North 36.9 feet to Oakdale Road
§ 264-87 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-87
237:580
Name of Street Side Location
Virginia Avenue East From St. John Parkway to House
No. 72
Virginia Avenue East House No. 92
Willow Street East From House No. 185 to Grand
Avenue
Willow Street East House Nos. 217 through 197
Willow Street
[Added 11-17-2015
by L.L. No. 8-2015]
West From 300 feet north of Corliss
Avenue to the intersection of Willow
Street and Corliss Avenue
Willow Street West In front of Police Station (Police
Department vehicles only)
Willow Street West North of Meter No. W1
Willow Street West Utility Pole No. 1563-6A
B. No parking here to corner. In accordance with the provisions of
§ 264-21, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Ackley Avenue East 30.0 feet south of Ethel Street
Ackley Avenue East 30.5 feet north of Ethel Street
Ackley Avenue East 48.5 feet to Floral Avenue
Ackley Avenue West 30.10 feet north of Ethel Street
Ackley Avenue West 24.6 feet south of Ethel Street
Ackley Avenue West 48.5 feet to Riverside Drive
Albany Avenue East 31.3 feet south of Hillside Drive
Albany Avenue East 29.5 feet north of Hillside Drive
Albany Avenue West 29.5 feet north of Hillside Drive
Albany Avenue West 31.3 feet south of Hillside Drive
Albert Street East 5.10 feet to the fire hydrant
Allen Street West 57.11 feet to Main Street
Baldwin Street East 34.2 feet to Floral Avenue
Baldwin Street East 52.2 feet to Grand Avenue
Baldwin Street West 72.6 feet to Grand Avenue
Baldwin Street West 33.8 feet to Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue East 36.8 feet to Dewitt Street
Corliss Avenue North 39.5 feet to Allen Street
Corliss Avenue South 42.5 feet west of Willow Street
Corliss Avenue South 41.5 feet east of Willow Street
§ 264-87 STORM SEWERS § 264-87
237:581
Name of Street Side Location
Crocker Place South 41.2 feet to Riverside Drive
Crocker Place South 42.5 feet to Fourth Street
East Theron Street North 35.6 feet to Lusk Street
East Thomas Street North 39.4 feet to Lusk Street
Endicott Avenue South 24.11 feet to Johnson Street
Ethel Street North 20.7 feet east of Ackley Avenue
Ethel Street North 33.8 feet west of Ackley Avenue
Ethel Street South 46.4 feet west of Ackley Avenue
Ethel Street South 34.1 feet east of Ackley Avenue
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Grand Avenue South 59.0 feet to Baldwin Street
Grant Street
[Amended
8-17-2010 by L.L.
No. 4-2010]
North 60 feet to Oakdale Road
Harrison Street West 43.10 feet to Floral Avenue
Harry L. Drive South 39.11 feet to Lester Avenue
Hillside Drive North 32.0 feet to Albany Avenue
Hillside Drive South 35.5 feet east of Albany Avenue
Hillside Drive South 33.5 feet west of Albany Avenue
Lester Avenue East 91.0 feet to Harry L. Drive
Main Street North 37.3 feet to Avenue B
Main Street North 55.11 feet to Avenue D
Main Street North 43.11 feet to Isabelle Place
Main Street South 95.0 feet to Arch Street
Main Street South 97.4 feet to Broad Street
Main Street South 48.7 feet to Willow Street
Milton Avenue North 88.8 feet to Oakdale Road
North Arch Street East 45.6 feet to Harry L. Drive
North Arch Street West 35.5 feet to Harry L. Drive
§ 264-87 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-87
237:582
§ 264-88. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
Name of Street Side Location
North Broad Street South On guard rail at dead end by Pratt
Avenue
New York Avenue West 32.3 feet to Floral Avenue
Park Place North 33.9 feet west of Harrison Street
Park Place North 25.6 feet east of Harrison Street
Pearl Avenue West 30.2 feet to Harry L. Drive
Richard Street East 34.10 feet south of Fairfax Avenue
Richard Street East 55.5 feet north of Fairfax Avenue
Schulte Avenue South 20.0 feet east of Riverside Drive
St. Charles Street West 76.0 feet to Floral Avenue
Stearns Avenue South 45.9 feet to Margaret Street
Stearns Avenue North 44.3 feet to Margaret Street
Thomas Street
[Added 5-22-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
North 35.0 feet to Boland Drive
Thomas Street
[Added 5-22-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
North 35.0 feet to Riverside Drive
A. No stopping any time. In accordance with the provisions of § 264-22, no
person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the following described streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Baldwin Street East House No. 151
Baldwin Street East Traffic pole at Grand Avenue
Floral Avenue
[Amended
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Both From Burbank Avenue to Riverside
Drive
Lester Avenue
[Added 7-17-2018
by L.L. No.
11-2018]
West From Harry L. Drive to Pratt
Avenue
Lester Avenue
[Added 7-17-2018
by L.L. No.
11-2018; amended
12-4-2018 by L.L.
No. 15-2018]
East From 172 Lester Avenue to Harry
L. Drive
§ 264-87 STORM SEWERS § 264-88
237:583
§ 264-89. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street North From Arch Street to west of Post
Office
Main Street South From Baldwin Street to Arch Street
B. No stopping here to corner. In accordance with the provisions of
§ 264-22, no person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Avenue North 74.11 feet east of Willow Street
Grand Avenue North 103.5 feet east of Baldwin Street
Main Street North 20.5 feet to Brigham Avenue
Main Street North 32.7 feet east of Lester Avenue
Main Street South 21.0 feet west of Carhart Avenue
C. No stopping bus stop. In accordance with the provisions of § 264-22, no
person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the following described streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Harry L. Drive North Southeast of Utility Pole No.
1638-184-1957
A. No standing here to corner. In accordance with the provisions of
§ 264-23, no person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Academy Street East 55.6 feet to Harry L. Drive
Ackley Avenue East 93.8 feet to Floral Avenue
Albany Avenue West 23.0 feet to Harry L. Drive
Albert Street East 89.0 feet to Main Street
Allen Street East 102.6 feet to Main Street
Allen Street East 35.6 feet to Corliss Avenue
Arch Street
[Repealed
4-19-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
Arch Street East 88.5 feet to Main Street
Arch Street West 26.3 feet to curve (near Brown Street)
Arch Street West 33.5 feet to Faatz Alley
§ 264-88 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:584
Name of Street Side Location
Arch Street West 43.9 feet to Corliss Avenue
Avenue A East 36.11 feet to Laurel Street
Avenue A West 106.3 feet to Main Street
Avenue B East 29.5 feet to Brigham Avenue
Avenue C West 86.10 feet to Main Street
Avenue D East 39.5 feet to Main Street
Azon Road South 29.3 feet to Oakdale Road
Azon Road North 29.3 feet to Oakdale Road
Baker Street East 29.0 feet to Corliss Avenue
Baker Street East 56.9 feet to Main Street
Baker Street East 34.0 feet north of Sturtevant Street
Baker Street East 34.7 feet south of Sturtevant Street
Baker Street West 29.0 feet to Corliss Avenue
Baker Street West 53.1 feet to Main Street
Balch Street South 39.8 feet to Zoa Avenue
Balch Street North 38.6 feet to Zoa Avenue
Baldwin Street East 34.2 feet to Floral Avenue
Baldwin Street West 30.7 feet south of Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street West 82.11 feet north of Corliss Avenue
Banks Avenue South 44.8 feet to Riverside Drive
Banks Avenue North 33.7 feet to Boland Drive
Bernice Street South 58.11 feet to Riverside Drive
Brewster Street North 37.3 feet to Orchard Avenue
Broad Street East 105.2 feet south of Main Street
Broad Street East 40.3 feet to Corliss Avenue
Broad Street West 24.6 feet to Corliss Avenue
Brocton Street North 34.3 feet to Lester Avenue
Brocton Street South 21.0 feet to North Broad Street
Brocton Street South 32.11 feet west of Diment Street
Brocton Street South 32.4 feet to Lester Avenue
Brocton Street South 35.7 feet E. of Diment Street
Burbank Avenue East 107.2 feet to Riverside Drive
Burbank Avenue East 248.3 feet to Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue East 60.7 feet to Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue West 40.6 feet south of Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue West 70.1 feet north of Floral Avenue
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:585
Name of Street Side Location
Burbank Avenue West 95.0 feet to Riverside Drive
C.F.J. Boulevard North 49.4 feet to Rogers Street
Cherry Street East 22.8 feet to Floral Avenue
Cherry Street East 53.4 feet to Grand Avenue
Cherry Street West 22.8 feet to Floral Avenue
Chrisfield Avenue South 106.9 feet to Riverside Drive
Chrisfield Avenue South 31.5 feet to Riverside Drive
Cleveland Avenue West 29.9 feet North of Endicott Avenue
Cleveland Avenue West 37.4 feet south of Endicott Avenue
Cook Street East 50.9 feet to Floral Avenue
Cook Street East 64.1 feet to Grand Avenue
Cook Street West 40.2 feet to Grand Avenue
Cook Street West 53.9 feet to Floral Avenue
Corliss Avenue South 56.0 feet to Baldwin Street
Corliss Avenue South 88.7 feet to Ozalid Road
Corliss Avenue North 28.2 feet to Crocker Avenue
Corliss Avenue North 31.7 feet to Hudson Street
Corliss Avenue North 34.10 feet west of Arch Street
Corliss Avenue North 45.2 feet to Willow Street
Corliss Avenue North 66.5 feet to Jenison Avenue
Corliss Avenue North 68.11 feet east of Arch Street
Corliss Avenue North 83.5 feet to Ozalid Road
Crocker Avenue West 49.8 feet to Corliss Avenue
Crocker Avenue West 77.5 feet to Main Street
Dewitt Street South 43.5 feet to Burbank Avenue
Diment Street East 47.10 feet to Brocton Street
Diment Street West 32.6 feet to Brocton Street
East Thomas Street North 62.6 feet to Route 201
Elfred Street South 30.2 feet to Riverside Drive
Elfred Street North 31.1 feet to Riverside Drive
Endicott Avenue South 51.7 feet to Willow Street
Endicott Avenue South 68.6 feet to Cleveland Avenue
Endicott Avenue North 52.0 feet to Willow Street
Farr Avenue West 44.1 feet to Floral Avenue
First Street West 105.10 feet to Main Street
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:586
Name of Street Side Location
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
North
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Fourth Street East 89.3 feet to Main Street
Fourth Street West 99.5 feet to Main Street
Grand Avenue North 38.2 feet to Baldwin Street
Grand Avenue North 33.7 feet to Harrison Street
Grand Avenue North 35.9 feet east of Hudson Street
Grand Avenue North 16.1 feet west of Hudson Street
Grand Avenue South 17.10 feet west of Helen Street
Grand Avenue South 26.4 feet to Cook Street
Grand Avenue South 29.8 feet west of Harrison Street
Grand Avenue South 30.8 feet east of Helen Street
Grand Avenue South 32.11 feet to Elizabeth Street
Grand Avenue South 35.8 feet to Cherry Street
Grand Avenue South 37.4 feet west of Hudson Street
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:587
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Avenue South 39.3 feet east of Harrison Street
Grand Avenue South 39.8 feet to Baldwin Street
Grand Avenue South 40.4 feet to Roberts Street
Grand Avenue South 42.6 feet east of Hudson Street
Grand Avenue South 47.11 feet to Street Charles Street
Grand Avenue South 47.9 feet to Riverside Drive
Grand Avenue South 52.11 feet east of Willow Street
Grand Avenue South 95.2 feet west of Willow Street
Grant Street North 36.8 feet to Oakdale Road
Harrison Street East 122.5 feet to Floral Avenue
Harrison Street East 128.3 feet to Main Street
Harrison Street East 28.0 feet to Grand Avenue
Harrison Street East 57.8 feet to Grand Avenue
Harrison Street West 107.11 feet to Main Street
Harrison Street West 30.2 feet to Park Place
Harrison Street West 30.8 feet to Grand Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 103.5 feet to North Hudson Street
Harry L. Drive North 124.5 feet to Zoa Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 24.4 feet to Myrtle Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 29.3 feet West of Academy Street
Harry L. Drive North 30.10 feet West of Pearl Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 33.2 feet east of Albany Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 33.3 feet West of Albany Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 38.11 feet to North Arch Street
Harry L. Drive North 56.0 feet east of Academy Street
Harry L. Drive South 107.10 feet to Myrtle Avenue
Harry L. Drive South 149.11 feet to North Broad Street
Harry L. Drive South 32.10 feet to Almond Street
Harry L. Drive South 34.5 feet to Almond Street
Helen Street East 36.2 feet to Grand Avenue
High Street
[Repealed
9-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016]
Hudson Street East 29.1 feet to Park Place
Hudson Street East 30.11 feet to Grand Avenue
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:588
Name of Street Side Location
Hudson Street East 39.5 feet to Floral Avenue
Hudson Street East 40.8 feet to Corliss Avenue
Hudson Street East 64.3 feet to Main Street
Hudson Street West 29.11 feet to Grand Avenue
Hudson Street West 30.10 feet to Main Street
Hudson Street West 31.1 feet to Floral Avenue
Hudson Street West 48.4 feet to Park Place
Jenison Avenue East 60.5 feet to Main Street
Laurel Street North 15.2 feet to Avenue A
Lester Avenue West 49.3 feet to Pratt Avenue
Lewis Street South 27.0 feet to Willow Street
Lincoln Avenue East 27.4 feet to Floral Avenue
Lincoln Avenue West 32.2 feet to Floral Avenue
Lou Rene Circle North 69.6 feet to Reynolds Road
Lou Rene Circle South 38.0 feet to Reynolds Road
Lusk Street East 51.6 feet to Floral Avenue
Lusk Street West 41.2 feet to Floral Avenue
Main Street North 64.3 feet to Avenue A
Main Street North 55.0 feet to First Street
Main Street North 37.10 feet to Lester Avenue
Main Street North 28.9 feet to Second Street
Main Street
[Amended
11-17-2015 by
L.L. No. 8-2015]
South 30 feet to Albert Street
Main Street South 32.11 feet to Allen Street
Main Street South 38.11 feet east of Carhart Avenue
Main Street
[Added
11-17-2015 by
L.L. No. 8-2015]
South 30 feet to Crocker Avenue
Main Street South 86.2 feet to Harrison Street
Main Street
[Amended
11-17-2015 by
L.L. No. 8-2015]
South 30 feet to Hudson Street
Margaret Street West 30.11 feet south of Stearns Avenue
Margaret Street West 30.3 feet north of Stearns Avenue
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:589
Name of Street Side Location
Massachusetts
Avenue
West 49.5 feet to Floral Avenue
Mildred Avenue North 38.6 feet to Farr Avenue
Mildred Avenue South 28.1 feet to Farr Avenue
Myrtle Avenue East 46.6 feet to Harry L. Drive
Myrtle Avenue
[Added 9-20-2016
by L.L. No.
5-2016]
East 30 feet to North Street
Newark Avenue South 27.8 feet to Oakdale Road
North Arch Street East 45.6 feet to Harry L. Drive
North Broad Street East 21.0 feet north of Brocton Street
North Broad Street East 27.7 feet south of Brocton Street
North Broad Street West 19.4 feet to Brocton Street
North Hudson
Street
East 173.7 feet to Harry L. Drive
North Hudson
Street
West 225.9 feet to Harry L. Drive
North Street North 41.9 feet to Lester Avenue
North Street North 101.9 feet to North Broad Street
North Street South 34.11 feet to Lester Avenue
North Street South 83.3 feet to North Broad Street
Oakdale Road East 53.5 feet north of Milton Avenue
Oakdale Road East 57.0 feet south of Milton Avenue
Oakdale Road East 40.0 feet north of Overbrook Road
Oakdale Road East 42.10 feet south of Overbrook Road
Orchard Avenue East 36.7 feet to Brewster Street
Orchard Avenue West 38.10 feet to Floral Avenue
Ozalid Road West 28.7 feet to Corliss Avenue
Park Place East 79.0 feet to Corliss Avenue
Park Place South 67.0 feet east of Hudson Street
Park Place South 44.2 feet west of Hudson Street
Pearl Avenue East 49.6 feet to Harry L. Drive
Placek Drive North 41.7 feet to Oakdale Road
Pratt Avenue North 31.4 feet to Diment Street
Richard Street East 104.4 feet to Harry L. Drive
Roberts Street East 38.3 feet to Floral Avenue
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:590
Name of Street Side Location
Roberts Street West 36.0 feet to Grand Avenue
Rogers Street West 23.2 feet to C.F.J. Boulevard
Route 201 West 73.4 feet to Thomas Street
Sanford Street South 49.1 feet to Ackley Avenue
Shelby Street North 34.5 feet to Riverside Drive
Shelby Street South 33.8 feet to Riverside Drive
Sherman Street East 34.6 feet to Grand Avenue
Spring Street East 37.3 feet to Leigh Street
Spring Street East 22.10 feet to Ukranian Hill Road
St. Charles Street East 37.10 feet to Floral Avenue
Sunset Knoll
Avenue
South 111.5 feet to Riverside Drive
Theron Street
[Added 3-1-2011
by L.L. No.
1-2011]
In the turnaround at dead end located on
south side
Theron Street North 38.3 feet to Boland Drive
Theron Street South 27.7 feet to Boland Drive
Thomas Street North 65.6 feet to Route 201
Thomas Street South 23.3 feet to Boland Drive
Thomas Street South 174.0 feet to Route 201
Ukranian Hill Road West 65.5 feet to Leigh Street
Victory Street South 88.4 feet to Oakdale Road
Virginia Avenue West 30.0 feet north and south of Hillside
Drive
Willow Street West 123.7 feet to Grand Avenue
Wren Street South 50.4 feet to Zoa Avenue
Zoa Avenue East 36.9 feet to Harry L. Drive
B. No standing anytime. In accordance with the provisions of § 264-23, no
person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the following described streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Academy Street West North of Harry L. Drive
Albany Avenue East From Harry L. Drive to House No. 62
Albert Street East 12.8 feet north of Utility Pole No.
1615-1
Arch Street East 16.4 feet north of fire hydrant
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:591
Name of Street Side Location
Arch Street East Entire length from Faatz Alley to
Corliss Avenue
Arch Street East North of Utility Pole No. E6-10
Arch Street East South of Utility Pole No. 1621-3-1912
Arch Street West Meter No. 21
Arch Street West Meter No. 8
Arch Street West South of ramp entrance
Avenue C [Added
4-19-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
West 9-11 Avenue C
Avenue D East 10.10 feet south of Utility Pole No.
1634-3
Avenue D East 62.4 feet south of Utility Pole No.
1634-3
Avenue D West Utility Pole No. 42P E1
Avenue D West Utility Pole No. 4E
Azon Road North East of Utility Pole No. 2877-80978
Azon Road South Entire length
Baker Street West 26.5 feet to Main Street
Baker Street West North and south of playground
Baldwin Street East Between Meter Nos. 29 and 30
Baldwin Street East Entire length from Floral Avenue
to Faatz Alley
Baldwin Street
[Repealed
4-19-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
Baldwin Street East South of Meter No. 43
Baldwin Street
[Added 2-5-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
West Between 36.5 feet north of Utility
Pole NYSEG 1560/9 NYT 102 and
128.0 feet north of Utility Pole NYSEG
1560/9 NYT 102
Baldwin Street
[Added 2-5-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
West Between north edge of parking space
of parking meter BS1 and Main Street
Baldwin Street West Between the entrance and exit to the
First Baptist driveway
Baldwin Street West Hospital entrance (crosswalk)
Baldwin Street West North of fire hydrant
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:592
Name of Street Side Location
Baldwin Street West North of Meter No. 5
Baldwin Street West North of Utility Pole No. 1560-109
Baldwin Street West South of Meter No. BS03
Baldwin Street West South of Utility Pole No. 1560-3-108
Bernice Street South From the dead end to Lusk Street
Beverly Place East Utility Pole No. 2-1
Beverly Place West Entire west side
Boland Drive West North of Utility Pole No. 2673-4
Boland Drive West Utility Pole No. 5
Broad Street East From the north end of street to south
of railroad tracks
Broad Street East House No. 59
Broad Street West House No. 52
Broad Street West North of Meter No. 4
Broad Street West North of Red Robin entrance
Brocton Street North Between North Broad Street and Arch
Street
Brocton Street North West of Senior Citizen Center lot to
north side of Arch Street
Brocton Street South Between Arch Street and North Broad
Street
Brown Street North Corner at North Broad Street
Burbank Avenue East House No. 81
Burbank Avenue West Utility Pole No. 140
Carhart Avenue East From Main Street to Grand Avenue
Carhart Avenue West From Main Street to Grand Avenue
C.F.J. Boulevard North From Airport Road to House No. 57
C.F.J. Boulevard South Across from House No. 57 to Airport
Road
Cherry Street West Entire west side; from Grand Avenue
to Floral Avenue
Chrisfield Avenue South House No. 4
Concord Street West House No. 25
Concord Street West House No. 45
Corliss Avenue North From Allen Street to Crocker Avenue
Corliss Avenue North From Baldwin Street to Hudson
Street
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:593
Name of Street Side Location
Corliss Avenue North From Broad Street to Arch Street
Corliss Avenue North From Jenison Avenue to Willow Street
Corliss Avenue North From St. Charles Street to Allen
Street
Corliss Avenue North House No. 46
Corliss Avenue North West of Willow Street
Corliss Avenue South From Baldwin Street to Arch Street
Corliss Avenue South House No. 200
Corliss Avenue South House No. 204
Corliss Avenue South Meter No. C030
Custer Avenue South From Cleveland Avenue to Carhart
Avenue
East Bernice Street South From dead end to Lusk Street
East Thomas Street South From Lusk Street to Route 201
Endwell Street South East of Utility Pole No. 2-203 to end
of street
Faatz Alley South From Baldwin Street to Arch Street
Fairview Street North From Richard Street to Reynolds
Road
Fairfax Avenue South From North Harrison Street to North
Baldwin Street
Fairview Street South From Reynolds Road to Richard
Street
Farr Avenue West From House Nos. 24 to 30
Farr Avenue West House No. 44
First Street East From Main Street to south of Utility
Pole No. 4-1
Floral Avenue
[Added 7-18-2017
by L.L. No. 6-2017]
Both From Riverside Drive to Burbank
Avenue
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:594
Name of Street Side Location
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Fourth Street West 68.5 feet North of Main Street
Grand Avenue South From House Nos. 446 to 438
Grand Avenue South House No. 186 (east of driveway)
Grand Avenue South House No. 192 (west of driveway)
Harrison Street East From Park Place to south of Meter
No. 25
Harrison Street East North of Utility Pole No. E112-8
Harrison Street West North of Meter No. 10
Harrison Street West North of Meter No. 8
Harry L. Drive North 24.5 feet west of Utility Pole No.
100N-1638-133A-61/2
Harry L. Drive North 49.6 feet west of Utility Pole No.
100N-1638-133A-61/2
Harry L. Drive North 58.5 feet west of Academy Street
Harry L. Drive North Corner of North Arch Street
Harry L. Drive North Entire length from Richard Street to
the Village line
Harry L. Drive North From Airport Road to Zoa Avenue
Harry L. Drive South Entire length from the Village line
to High Street
Helen Street West 38.8 feet to Floral Avenue
High Street
[Repealed
9-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016]
High Street [Added
9-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016]
East Entire length from North Street to
Harry L. Drive
Hillside Street South Entire length from Zoa Avenue to
Virginia Avenue
Hudson Street West Across from House No. 153
Hudson Street West 30.1 feet to Park Place
Hudson Street West Park Place (on stop sign)
Isabelle Place East 36.3 feet to Main Street
Jenison Avenue West 73.8 feet south of Main Street
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:595
Name of Street Side Location
Johnson Street East House No. 3
Lester Avenue
[Repealed
7-17-2018 by L.L.
No. 11-2018]
Lewis Street North East of Willow Street
Lewis Street North West of Utility Pole No.
1625-1-1-693A
Locust Street South From Spruce Street to Brady Street
Main Street North Business 507
Main Street North Moore's Car Wash
Main Street North West of Light Pole No. M2
Main Street South East of Baker Street
Main Street South East of Light Pole M7
Main Street Terrace North From Utility Pole No. 1 to the dead
end
Mildred Avenue North House Nos. 12, 14, 16 and 18
Mildred Avenue South From Farr Avenue to House No. 9
Milton Avenue South Entire south side
Nassau Street West Entire length from service road to
Pratt Avenue
Nelson Road [Added
9-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016]
East and
west
From the property line between
House Nos. 621 and 623 to the dead
end
North Baldwin
Street
West Corner of Harry L. Drive
North Broad Street West House No. 195
North Hudson Street East Harry L. Drive
North Hudson Street West 51.1 feet to Harry L. Drive
Oakdale Road East Business No. 721 Harry L. Drive
Oakdale Road East North of Box 621 to the Village line
Oakdale Road West From the Village border to Harry L.
Drive
Overbrook Road
[Added 4-4-2000]
North Entire length from Reynolds Road to
Oakdale Road
Ozalid Road East House No. 19
Park Place North West of Hudson Street
Park Place South From east of Hudson Street to Corliss
Avenue
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-89
237:596
Name of Street Side Location
Park Place South From the UHS Parking entrance to
Corliss Avenue
Park Place South House No. 56
Park Street West Entire length from Main Street to
dead end
Pearl Avenue East From Harry L. Drive to north of
Utility Pole 1A-1
Pleasant Avenue North Entire length
Plymouth Street East House No. 50
Plymouth Street West Entire length
Reynolds Road East From Harry L. Drive to the High
School
Reynolds Road West From House No. 817 to Harry L.
Drive
Riale Avenue
[Added 9-19-2017
by L.L. No. 8-2017]
Both 30 feet west of Riverside Drive
Riverside Drive East From the Village line to the circle
Riverside Drive West From south of Chrisfield Avenue to
the Village line
Roberts Street East From Floral Avenue to House No. 55
Rogers Street East Entire length from C.F.J. Boulevard to
dead end
Sanford Street North Entire length
Sanford Street South West of House No. 26
Second Street East 46.5 feet to Main Street
Second Street East House No. 32
Shelby Street South East of Riverside Drive
Spring Street East Entire length
Spring Street South Across from House No. 34
St. Charles Street East Around the curb to Park Place
St. Charles Street West Entire length from Grand Avenue to
the dead end
St. John Parkway South Entire length
St. John Parkway North Entire length
Sunset Knoll Avenue South 60.2 feet to Riverside Drive
Theron Street South Entire length from Boland Drive to
Route 201
§ 264-89 STORM SEWERS § 264-89
237:597
§ 264-90. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with provisions of § 264-24, no person shall park a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or :
Name
of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Academy Street West 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./School days
93.5 feet north of Harry
L. Drive
Albert Street
[Amended
9-2-2003]
West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All
From Corliss Street
north for 435 feet
(along the C. Fred
School property)
Arch Street West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
Meter No. AS8
Avenue B West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
34.6 feet north of Main
Street
Avenue C West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
Utility Pole 1632-2
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street East Entire length
Thomas Street South Entire length from Boland Drive to
Route 201
Thomas Street South Entire length from Route 201 to Lusk
Street
Ukranian Hill Road West Entire length
Virginia Avenue East From Harry L. Drive to House No. 76
Virginia Avenue East House No. 76
Wells Avenue East Entire length
Wells Avenue West Entire length
Willow Street East From Grand Avenue to Main Street
Willow Street East House No. 191
Willow Street West From Corliss Avenue to Grand Avenue
Zoa Avenue [Added
7-17-2018 by L.L.
No. 11-2018]
West Entire length from Hillside Street to
Harry L. Drive
Zoa Avenue
[Repealed
7-17-2018 by L.L.
No. 11-2018]
§ 264-89 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-90
237:598
Name
of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cleveland Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All
From Grand Avenue to
Main Street Terrace
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by
L.L. No. 6-2017]
Harrison Street West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
South of Utility Pole
No. L1620-E8
Harry L. Drive South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./All
Apt. Building 220
Hudson Street West 10:00 a.m. to 10:30
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
2:30 p.m./All
Entire length
Isabelle Place East 1:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m./All
44.6 feet north of Main
Street
Main Street North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
St. James Church
Main Street North 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.;
2:00 p.m. to 2:30
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
Entire length of St.
James parking lot
Main Street North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Light Pole No. 87
to the Village line
Main Street South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
Midway between Albert
Street and Allen Street
North Arch Street [Repealed 9-2-2003]
Second Street West 2:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./All
North of Main Street
Second Street West 2:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./All
House No. 31
§ 264-91. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-25, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 264-90 STORM SEWERS § 264-92
237:599
§ 264-92. Schedule XVII: No Parking or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-26, no person shall park or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Corliss Avenue
[Added
4-19-2016 by
L.L. No.
3-2016]
South 12:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
Between 214 feet east of
Arch Street and 42.5 feet
west of Willow Street
Grand Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
East of Utility Pole No.
22-L1540-1951 to Utility
Pole No. L1540-53-24
Grand Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Lusk Street to
Business No. 222
Grand Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Business No. 192 to
Willow Street
Harry L. Drive North 10:00 a.m. to
10:15 a.m. and
1:00 p.m. to 1:15
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
Between Academy Street
and Jay Street
Laurel Street
[Added
4-19-2016 by
L.L. No.
3-2016]
South 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
only
From Lester Avenue to the
property line at 24 Laurel
Street
§ 264-93. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-27, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Side Location
Burbank Avenue 2 hrs.; All/All East Business No. 61
Burbank Avenue 1 hr.; All/All East South of Utility Pole No.
1565-10-111
Custer Avenue 2 hrs.; All/All North House Nos. 19 through
27
§ 264-92 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-93
237:600
Name of Street
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Side Location
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Grand Avenue 2 hrs.; All/All South House No. 454
Grand Avenue 2 hrs.; All/All North House No. 457
Grand Avenue 2 hrs.; All/All North House No. 485
Harry L. Drive
(Silvanic Printing)
[Added 1-22-2002]
20 mins.; All/
All
-- House No. 337
Main Street [Added
6-14-2011 by L.L.
No. 6-2011]
3 hrs.; All/All Both Between Arch Street
and Avenue A
Main Street 2 hrs.; All; All North Business No. 415
Municipal parking lots
[Added 6-14-2011
by L.L. No. 6-2011]
3 hrs.; All/All -- All municipal parking
lots
Municipal parking lots
[Added 4-19-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
— permit
parking only
-- All municipal parking
lots (except Willow
Street lot)
North Harrison Street 20 mins.; All/
All
East Business No. 84
Old Harry L. Drive
[Added 12-7-2004]
2 hrs.; All/All -- Between Business No.
80 and Old Harry L.
Drive
Willow Street [Added
4-19-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
-- Willow Street Lot
Zoa Avenue 15 mins.; All/
All
East 59.1 feet to Harry L.
Drive
§ 264-94. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-28, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
§ 264-93 STORM SEWERS § 264-94
237:601
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
C.F.J. Boulevard South 45 From Lester Avenue to
Rogers Street
Corliss Avenue
[Added 5-19-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
North 45 From Arch Street to Baldwin
Street
§ 264-95. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-29, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Avenue D West House No. 11
Avenue D West House No. 7
Baldwin Street West North of Crosswalk Hospital
entrance (no stopping)
Baldwin Street West South of Meter No. BS03 (no stopping)
Baldwin Street
[Added 2-5-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
West Between 128.0 feet north of Utility
Pole NYSEG 1560/9 NYT 102 and 33.0
feet north of UHS entrance crosswalk
(no stopping/medi-vans only)
Broad Street West North and south ends of HCA Building
(handicapped loading and unloading
only)
Corliss Avenue North East of Broad Street (handicapped
loading and unloading only)
Corliss Avenue South Between House Nos. 228 and 232 (no
standing)
Corliss Avenue South House No. 236 (no standing)
Harrison Street East 57.8 feet to Grand Avenue (8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday)
Harrison Street East South of Utility Pole No. 105-1 (8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday)
Harry L. Drive North 85.1 feet to North Arch Street (no
parking)
§ 264-96. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-30, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
§ 264-94 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-96
237:602
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 264-97. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-31, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Arch Street West In front of Business No. 301
Baldwin Street East North of crosswalk
Baldwin Street West Grand Avenue
Baldwin Street West Hospital entrance (crosswalk)
Boland Drive East Grand Avenue
Boland Drive East North of Theron Street
Boland Drive East River Terrace Island
Boland Drive West South of Utility Pole No. 11A
Boland Drive West Utility Pole No. 13
Boland Drive West Utility Pole No. 18
Brocton Street North Between exit and entrance to Senior
Citizen Center
Brocton Street North Corner of Concord Street
Brocton Street North West of 159 Lester Avenue
Brocton Street South Lester Avenue
Brocton Street South West of Diment Street
Burbank Avenue East Floral Avenue
C.F.J. Boulevard South Across from House No. 57
Chrisfield Avenue North Boland Drive
Chrisfield Avenue South 31.5 feet to Riverside Drive
Chrisfield Avenue South House No. 44
Corliss Avenue
[Added 4-19-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
South 157 feet east of Arch Street
Corliss Avenue
[Added 4-19-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
South 214 feet east of Arch Street
Corliss Avenue South 2 signs east of Business No. 48
Division Street North 57.3 feet west of Burbank Avenue
Division Street South 72.11 feet east of Burbank Avenue
Floral Avenue North Burbank Avenue
§ 264-96 STORM SEWERS § 264-97
237:603
Name of Street Side Location
Floral Avenue North Corner of Helen Street
Floral Avenue North East of Cook Street
Floral Avenue North East of Harrison Street
Floral Avenue North East of Willow Street
Floral Avenue North House No. 267
Floral Avenue North Utility Pole No. 43E
Floral Avenue South Across from Harrison Street
Floral Avenue South Burbank Avenue
Floral Avenue South New York Avenue
Floral Avenue South Utility Pole No. 280-27-5
Floral Avenue South West of Ackley Avenue
Gannett Drive
[Added 8-17-2010
by L.L. No. 5-2010]
West 54 feet north of Pavilion Road
Grand Avenue North East of Riverside Drive
Grand Avenue North West of St. Charles Street
Grand Avenue North West of Utility Pole No. 49-20
Grand Avenue North West of Utility Pole No. L1540-43-15
Grand Avenue South Corner of Helen Street
Grand Avenue South Corner of Lusk Street
Grand Avenue South East of Riverside Drive
Grand Avenue South West of Baldwin Street
Grand Avenue South West of Riverside Drive
Grand Avenue South West of St. Charles Street
Harry L. Drive Both Next to and across from Utility Pole No.
1638-197-1973
Harry L. Drive North 124.5 feet to Zoa Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 15.8 feet to Pearl Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 210.7 feet to Airport Road
Harry L. Drive North 24.4 feet to Myrtle Avenue
Harry L. Drive North 38.11 feet to North Arch Street
Harry L. Drive North 94.6 feet to Virginia Avenue
Harry L. Drive North Corner Jay Street
Harry L. Drive North East of Small Mall entrance
Harry L. Drive North East of Utility Pole No. 1638-197-1973
Harry L. Drive North Southeast of Utility Pole No.
1638-184-1957
§ 264-97 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-97
237:604
Name of Street Side Location
Harry L. Drive North Utility Pole No. 204-80490-1980
Harry L. Drive South 118.7 feet to Town of Dickinson line
Harry L. Drive South 118 feet east of Valley Plaza
Harry L. Drive South 63.3 feet west of Oakdale Road
Harry L. Drive South East of Giant Plaza exit
Harry L. Drive South East of Utility Pole No. 1638-107-1944
Harry L. Drive South East of Valley Plaza
Harry L. Drive South Jerry Street
Harry L. Drive South Lester Avenue
Harry L. Drive South Utility Pole No. 141-15-1
Harry L. Drive South Utility Pole No. 155-30
Harry L. Drive South Utility Pole No. 1638-145-1919
Harry L. Drive South Utility Pole No. 1638-15-1936
Harry L. Drive South West of Airport Road
Main Street North 78.6 feet to Third Street
Main Street North Business No. 229
Main Street North Business No. 257
Main Street North Business No. 415
Main Street North East of Avenue A
Main Street North First Street
Main Street North Village line at Arch Street
Main Street North West of Post Office exit
Main Street North Your Home Library
Main Street South Allen Street
Main Street South Baker Street
Main Street South Baldwin Street
Main Street South Business No. 130
Main Street South Business No. 200
Main Street South Business No. 256
Main Street South Hudson Street
Main Street South West of Meter No. M13
North Broad Street East House No. 192
North Broad Street East Under 17C Bridge
North Broad Street West House No. 195
North Broad Street West Under 17C Bridge
Oakdale Road East Field Street
§ 264-97 STORM SEWERS § 264-97
237:605
Name of Street Side Location
Oakdale Road East House No. 162
Oakdale Road East House No. 172
Oakdale Road East South of Azon Road
Oakdale Road West Across Evert Street
Oakdale Road West North of Business No. 117
Oakdale Road West South of Valley Plaza
Pavilion Road
[Added 8-17-2010
by L.L. No. 5-2010]
South At Gannett Drive
Riverside Drive East Ackley Avenue
Riverside Drive East Brewster Street
Riverside Drive East Columbus Place
Riverside Drive East Elfred Street
Riverside Drive East Ethel Street
Riverside Drive East House No. 499
Riverside Drive East Margaret Street
Riverside Drive East Utility Pole No. E201
Riverside Drive West Across from Margaret Street
Riverside Drive West Across from Utility Pole No. E201
Riverside Drive West Banks Avenue
Riverside Drive West Entrance to Practical. Bible College
Riverside Drive West House No. 216
Riverside Drive West Riale Avenue
Riverside Drive West Utility Pole No. 13
Riverside Drive West Utility Pole No. 8
§ 264-98. Schedule XXIII: Handicapped Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-32, the following described
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking areas:
Name of Street Side Location
Arch Street [Added
7-16-2002]
-- Meter No. 51
Baldwin Street West Meter Nos. 04 and 05
Broad Street East 63.5 feet to Corliss Avenue
Broad Street West Meter No. BR11
C.F.J. Boulevard Southeast Lester Avenue
§ 264-97 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-98
237:606
Name of Street Side Location
Harrison Street West Meter Nos. 13 and 14
Isabelle Place West Meter Nos. 8 and 9
Main Street
[Amended
7-16-2002]
North Meter Nos. 57 and 61
Nassau Street
[Added 8-1-2017
by L.L. No. 1-2017]
East House No. 46
Virginia Avenue
[Added 12-20-2016
by L.L. No. 8-2016]
West House No. 83
§ 264-99. Schedule XXIV: Alternate-Side Parking.
In accordance with § 264-33A, where authorized signs to that effect are
displayed, no person shall, during the periods set forth in Schedule XXIV
below, park a vehicle on any highway at the side and between the limits set
out in Schedule XXIV below during the prohibited times or days of each and
every week or month set out in said schedule for a longer period than that
set out in said schedule.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 264-100. Schedule XXV: Red-Line Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-33B, the following streets or
parts of streets* shall be considered red-line streets. "Red-line streets" are
those which are designated by signs as only allowing one-side parking.
Alternate-street parking regulations shall not supersede posted parking
regulations:
Name of Street
* Part of street is red line.
Albany Avenue*79
Arthur Avenue* [Added 3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Baker Street*
Balch Street
Baldwin Street*
Bennett Avenue80
79.Editor's Note: The former entry for Allen Street, which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 12-4-2001.
§ 264-98 STORM SEWERS § 264-100
237:607
Name of Street
* Part of street is red line.
Bernice Street [Added 3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Beverly Place
Boland Drive
Brocton Street*
Burbank Avenue*
Burns Street*
Carhart Avenue
C.F.J. Boulevard
Cherry Street
Chrisfield Avenue*
Coleville Avenue*
Concord Street
Corliss Avenue*
Crocker Avenue
Custer Avenue
East Bernice Street
East Theron Street
East Thomas Street
Faatz Alley
Fairfax Avenue
Fairview Street*
Farr Avenue
First Street81
Grand Avenue*
Greenridge Street*
Harrison Street*
Harry L. Drive*
High Street [Added 3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Hillside Street
Hudson Street* [Amended 6-20-2000]
80.Editor's Note: The former entry for Bernice Street, which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010.
81.Editor's Note: the former entry for Floral Avenue, which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 7-18-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017. The former entry for Franklin Street, which
immediately followed the entry for Floral Avenue, was repealed 3-7-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017.
§ 264-100 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-100
237:608
Name of Street
* Part of street is red line.
Lester Avenue
Main Street Terrace
Margaret Street
Mildred Avenue
Miller Street [Added 3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Miriam Street
Nassau Street
Newark Avenue [Added 3-2-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
North Broad Street* [Added 12-21-1999 by L.L. No. 7-1999; amended
3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
North Hudson Street*
Oakdale Road*
Overbrook Road [Added 1-16-2001]
Ozalid Road
Park Place*
Park Street
Pearl Avenue*
Pleasant Avenue
Plymouth Street
Richard Street*
River Terrace
Riverside Drive*
Roberts Street
Rogers Street
Sanford Street
Second Street
Service Road
Sherman Street*
Spring Street*
St. Charles Street*
Sunset Knoll Avenue
Taber Street*
Theron Street
Thomas Street
Virginia Avenue*
§ 264-100 STORM SEWERS § 264-100
237:609
Name of Street
* Part of street is red line.
Wells Avenue
Willow Street
Zoa Avenue*
§ 264-101. Schedule XXVI: Parking Prohibited Between December
1 and March 31. [Amended 3-7-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-32, parking shall be prohibited
between December 1 and March 31 on the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bernice Street [Added
1-19-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
South Entire length
§ 264-102. Schedule XXVII: Fire Lanes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-35, parking, stopping and
standing shall be prohibited in the following described fire lanes:
Name of Lot or Plaza Limits
(Reserved)
§ 264-103. Schedule XXVIII: Snow Emergency Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-39D, the following described
locations are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Side Location
Ackley Avenue Both Entire length
Baldwin Street East From Floral Avenue to Corliss Avenue
Baldwin Street West From Main Street to Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue East From Riverside Drive to Floral Avenue
Burbank Avenue West Entire west side
Floral Avenue North Entire north side
Floral Avenue
[Repealed
7-18-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Grand Avenue North Entire north side
Grand Avenue South Entire south side
§ 264-100 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-103
237:610
Name of Street Side Location
Harry L. Drive North Entire north side
Harry L. Drive South Entire south side
Lester Avenue East Utility Pole No. 19-15
Lester Avenue West House Nos. 205 and 167
Oakdale Road East Entire east side
Oakdale Road West Entire west side
Robinson Hill Road North Entire length from Oakdale Road to the
Village line
Robinson Hill Road South Entire length from Oakdale Road to the
Village line
All streets or portions thereof identified in § 264-100, Schedule XXV: Red-
Line Streets
§ 264-104. Schedule XXIX: School Speed Zones.82 [Added
8-11-2003]
In accordance with § 264-6, the following are established as school speed
zones:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Columbia Drive (Johnson
City K--8 School)
15 From 450 feet northeast of the
school entrance on Columbia Drive
to 300 feet southeast of the
entrance
§ 264-105. Schedule XXX: Police Only Parking. [Added 8-7-2012 by
L.L. No. 7-2012]
In accordance with the provisions of § 264-28.1, the following are
established as police only parking:
Name of Street Location
Arch Street [Added
5-15-2018 by L.L.
No. 5-2018]
West side of roadway starting 139 feet from Faatz
Alley to 183 feet from Faatz Alley, containing 2
parking spaces
Avenue C North side of roadway starting 28 feet from
beginning of western apron to the Police
Department parking lot and ending 3 feet away from
the already established crosswalk
82.Editor's Note: Former § 264-104, Overnight Metered Parking Restricted, was repealed
12-17-2002.
§ 264-103 STORM SEWERS § 264-105
237:611
Chapter 270
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 200. Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 222.
§ 264-105 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 264-105
237:612
Part 1
[Adopted 8-20-1G9e7n3e rAasl CPhro. v2i0si Oonf sThe 1973 Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 270-1. Purpose.
§ 270-2. Regulations to constitute part of contract.
The following regulations set forth in this Part 1 shall be considered as part
of the contract of the Water Department by and on behalf of the Village of
Johnson City and binding upon every person who takes water supplied by
the Department.
§ 270-3. Amendments.
The regulations set forth in this Part 1 may be amended, revised or repealed
from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Johnson City in
the manner provided by law.
§ 270-4. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT — The owner of property or his or her agent applying for water
service.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE — Provision of water to premises where the
customer is engaged in trade.
CUSTOMER — The owner of real property receiving water services from
the Department.
DATE OF PRESENTATION — The date upon which a bill or notice is mailed
or delivered personally to the customer.
DEPARTMENT — The Water Department of the Village of Johnson City.
A. It is recognized that a water utility must employ standards and a system
of practices to serve the public in an orderly and effective manner.
B. The supplying of water to a populace from a common pipe system is a
communal function. The water utility and the individual consumer are
involved in business transactions and other obligations which mutually
affect not only the individual and the utility but also all others in a
community.
C. The purpose of this Part 1 is twofold: First, to define the authority and
responsibility of all Department personnel in their relations with the
consuming public; and second, to provide the consuming public with a
written statement of conditions under which water service will be
furnished and continued by the Department.
§ 270-1 STORM SEWERS § 270-4
237:613
DOMESTIC SERVICE — Provision of water for household residential
purposes, including water for sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery,
watering livestock, washing vehicles and other similar and customary
purposes.
FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES — Provision of water to premises for
automatic fire protection.
FLAT RATE SERVICE — Provision of water in unmeasured quantities.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE — Provision of water to a customer for use in
manufacturing or processing activities.
IRRIGATION SERVICE — Provision of water for agricultural, floricultural or
horticultural use.
MAIN EXTENSIONS — Extension of distribution pipelines, exclusive of
service connections, beyond existing facilities.
MAINS — Distribution and transmission pipelines located in streets,
highways or public ways which are used to serve the general public.
METER RATE SERVICE — Provision of water in measured quantities.
MUNICIPAL OR PUBLIC USE — Provision of water to a municipality or
other public body.
PREMISES — The integral property or area, including improvements
thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.
SERVICE AREA — That area in which service is or will be furnished,
as prescribed and approved by the Water Resources Commission,
Conservation Department, State of New York, in a decision dated May 15,
1934, as the same may have been or may be amended from time to time.
The sale of water by the village to purchasers outside thereof is carried on
under provisions of the Village Law.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The pipe, valves and other facilities by means of
which water is conducted from distribution mains to the curb stop or curb
shutoff valve.
TARIFF SCHEDULE — The entire body of effective rates, rentals, charges
and regulations.
TEMPORARY SERVICE — A service of circuses, bazaars, fairs, construction
work, irrigation of vacant property and similar uses where, because of their
nature, consumption or use will not be regular or permanent.
§ 270-5. Description of service.
A. Supply. The Department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to
deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to a customer at a
proper pressure and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery.
The Department has, however, the right to limit the amount of water
furnished.
§ 270-4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-5
237:614
§ 270-6. Classes of services.
All services installed by the utility shall be classified as follows:
§ 270-7. Types of service available.
The types of service available from the Department are:
§ 270-8. Application for water service.
B. Quality. The Department will endeavor to furnish a safe and potable
water for human consumption at all times.
A. Residential.
B. Commercial.
C. Industrial.
D. Irrigation.
E. Municipal or public use.
F. Fire protection.
A. Flat rate.
B. Metered rate.
C. Temporary.
A. Form. All applications for the use of water must be made in writing on
forms provided by the Department.
B. Acceptance to constitute contract. On acceptance by the Department,
the application shall constitute a contract between the Department and
the applicant, obligating the applicant to pay the Department its
established rates and to comply with its rules and regulations.
C. Existing main prerequisite to acceptance. Applications will be accepted
subject to there being an existing main in a street or right-of-way
abutting on the premises to be served, but acceptance shall in no way
obligate the Department to extend its mains to serve the premises
excepting as hereinafter provided.
D. Separate application required for each premises. A separate application
must be made for each premises. The word "premises," as used herein,
shall be defined as follows:
(1) A building under one roof owned or leased by one customer and
occupied as one residence or one place of business.
§ 270-5 STORM SEWERS § 270-8
237:615
§ 270-9. Plumbing plan to be submitted.
Where service is desired for a multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial
use, a detailed plumbing plan showing service supply, fixtures and
equipment and any other water use facilities must be submitted at the time
of application.
§ 270-10. Effect of application.
The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the
applicant to take service for any particular length of time nor does it bind
the Department to give service except under reasonable conditions.
§ 270-11. Changes in owner's equipment or operation.
§ 270-12. Special contracts for water service.
(2) A combination of buildings owned or leased by one customer in one
common enclosure, occupied by one family or one corporation or
firm as a residence or place of business.
(3) Each unit of a multiple house or building separated by a solid
vertical partition wall, occupied by one family or one firm as a
residence or place of business.
(4) A building owned or leased by one customer having a number of
apartments, offices or lofts which are rented to tenants and using in
common one hall and one or more means of entrance.
(5) A building one or more stories high under one roof, owned or
leased by one customer having an individual entrance for the
ground floor occupants and one for the occupants of the upper
floors.
(6) Garden apartments owned by one individual or firm and located in
one common enclosure.
A. Notice to Department. Customers making any material change in the
size, character or extent of the equipment or operation utilizing water
service or whose change in operation results in a large increase or
decrease in the use of water shall immediately give the Department
written notice of the nature of the change and, if necessary, amend the
application.
B. Cost. The owner will be responsible for cost of any change of
installations brought about by such change in demand
A. Conditions under which granted. Contracts, other than or in addition to
applications, may be required prior to service under the following
conditions:
(1) When construction of special extension facilities is necessary.
§ 270-8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-12
237:616
§ 270-13. Responsibility for installation and maintenance of
equipment; property damage.
The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install
and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required
for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the Department
shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper
installation of any such water equipment or the negligence, want of care
or wrongful act of the customer or any of his or her tenants, agents,
employees, contractors, licensees or permittees in installing, maintaining,
using, operating or interfering with such equipment. The Department shall
not be responsible for damage to property caused by spigots, faucets, valves
and other equipment that are open when water is turned on originally or
when the water is turned on after a temporary shutdown.
§ 270-14. Customer liable for damage to Department property.
The customer shall be liable for any damage to a meter or other equipment
or property owned or maintained by the Department which is caused by an
act of the customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors,
licensees or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by
the customer or others on or near a meter or any damage to a meter that
may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater or frozen meter
on the customer's premises. The Department shall promptly be reimbursed
by the customer for any such damage within five days after receipt of bill.
§ 270-15. Department's right of entry.
The Department or its duly authorized agents shall at all reasonable times
have the right to enter on the customer's premises for any purpose properly
connected with the service of water to the customer.
§ 270-16. Interruptions in service.
The Department shall not be liable for damage resulting from an
interruption in service. Temporary shutdowns may be resorted to by the
Department for improvements and repairs. Whenever possible and as time
permits, all customers affected will be notified prior to such shutdowns.
(2) For temporary service.
(3) For standby service or fire service.
(4) For service to premises at elevations higher than that at which the
existing system will adequately furnish 30 pounds per square inch
(psi). at the ground floor.
B. Change; modifications. Each contract for water service will contain the
following provisions: "This contract shall at all times be subject to such
changes or modifications by the Department as said Department may
from time to time direct in the exercise of its jurisdiction."
§ 270-12 STORM SEWERS § 270-16
237:617
Where possible, repairs or improvements shall be prosecuted rapidly and at
such times as will cause the least inconvenience to customers.
§ 270-17. Notices to customers.
Notices from the Department to a customer will normally be given in writing
and either delivered to him or her or mailed to him or her at his or her
last known address. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the
Department may resort to notification either by telephone or messenger.
§ 270-18. Notices from customers.
Notice from the customer to the Department may be given by him or her or
his or her authorized representative orally or in writing.
§ 270-19. Resale of water prohibited.
Resale of water is not permitted.
§ 270-20. Pressure reducers.
§ 270-21. Cross-connections prohibited.
There shall be no physical connection between the public potable water
system and any other system without written permit from the Department.
Any connection must meet the requirements of Chapter 5 of the New York
State Health Department Sanitary Code.
§ 270-22. Ground-wire attachments.
A. Required. Where working pressures at the water main adjacent to a
property exceeds 90 pounds per square inch, it is recommended and
required that the customer install and maintain a suitable pressure
reducing valve.
B. Location of valve. Such valve shall be located on the inlet side of the
first valve or control point within the premises and prior to the water
meter. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Size and type of valve. The pressure reducing valve is to be suitable in
size and type for the service required and installed with proper controls
to facilitate maintenance.
A. Responsibility for attachments. All ground-wire attachments to any
plumbing which is or may be connected to a service connection or main
belonging to or maintained by the Department shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner or consumer of water service.
B. Liability for damage. The consumer shall be liable for any damage to
Water Department property occasioned by such ground-wire
attachments, and the presence of such attachments shall not be
deemed a waiver of any of the rights of the Water Department.
§ 270-16 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-23
237:618
§ 270-23. Fire hydrants.
§ 270-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Any person violating any provision of this Part 1 shall be punished as
provided in § 1-15 of Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, of this Code.
A. Use of and damage to hydrants. No person or persons, other than those
designated and authorized by the Department, shall open any fire
hydrant, attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or
tamper with it. No person shall place any obstruction that would
prevent free access to any fire hydrant. Any violation of this regulation
will be prosecuted according to law.
B. Cost for changes. If a property owner desires a change in the size, type
or location of a hydrant, such property owner shall bear all costs
concerning such changes.
§ 270-23 STORM SEWERS § 270-24
237:619

ARTICLE II
Service Connections and Meters
§ 270-25. Department to stipulate size, type and location of
connections and meters.
The Water Department reserves the right in all cases to stipulate the size,
type and locations of service and metering to be used.
§ 270-26. Installation of lines and connections.
The Department shall not be required to install any service lines or service
connections between November 15 and April 15 except by special
arrangement, in which case the customer shall pay for any excess over
normal costs.
§ 270-27. Circumstances prohibiting installation of lines and
connections.
The Department shall not be compelled to proceed with the installation of
service lines and service connections under the provisions of this Article,
when circumstances beyond the control of the Department prohibit such
construction. Such circumstances include but shall not be limited to delays
in delivery of materials, weather conditions, strikes and acts of God.
§ 270-28. Piping installation from main to curb stop and box;
expense.
The installation of all service piping from the water main to and including
the curb stop and curb box shall be made by the Department at the expense
of the owner of the premises served. Charges for services and meters
are payable in advance and at rates established from time to time by the
Department.
§ 270-29. Services to be constructed at right angles to main.
All water services shall be constructed at right angles to the main for their
entire length into the premises.
§ 270-30. Pipe specifications. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
A. For services of 3/4 inch through two inches in diameter: Type K, soft
copper, or P.E. 3408-SDR 9 water tubing and fittings, including
Municipex, as approved by the American Water Works Association shall
be used.
B. For services over two inches in diameter, a minimum of four-inch
ductile iron pipe shall be used and installed per specifications of the
American Water Works Association. The connection at the main shall be
installed by the Department at the owner's expense.
§ 270-25 STORM SEWERS § 270-31
237:621
§ 270-31. Laying of pipe. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 270-32. Department to maintain pipe and connections from main
to curb shutoff; exception.
The Department at its expense will maintain the service pipe and service
connection from the main to and including the curb shutoff; exception: fire
protection service.
§ 270-33. Service on applicant's property.
A. Service pipes will be required to be laid at a depth of not less than five
feet or more than six feet below finished grade for their entire length,
and not permitted to be laid within five feet of a sewer, gas, steam,
electrical or other conduit for any part of the distance from the main to
the building.
B. Service pipes shall be installed in one piece from the curb box to inside
the building with no splices, fittings, soldering, brazing, or other
modifications of a similar nature.
A. Piping installation and maintenance from curb box shutoff to premises;
expenses; performance of work. At his or her own expense, the
applicant shall install the service pipe from the curb box shutoff to the
premises and a valve to be located preferably just inside the building
wall, permitting control of the water supply by the customer. At the
expense of the customer, this property shall be maintained and when
necessary replaced. For this installation and maintenance thereof, the
customer shall see to it that all work is performed in a manner
satisfactory to the Department.
B. Size of piping; material; construction, etc. The minimum size, materials,
depth of cover and method of construction shall be the same as
specified in this Article for a service pipe installed by the Department.
C. Defects in workmanship or materials. If any defects in workmanship or
materials are found or if the customer's service pipe has not been
installed in accordance with such specifications or with the
Department's requirements, water service either will not be turned on
or will be discontinued if such defects are not remedied.
D. Pipes to lead directly into premises; extensions under cellar floors. All
service pipes shall lead directly into the premises and shall not be
extended under cellar floors except beyond a point where the water is
controlled and metered.
E. Maintenance of piping and fixtures from curb stop to premises. The
owner of the property into which water is introduced by a service pipe
will be required to maintain in proper order at his or her own cost and
expense said service pipe from the curb stop into the premises,
together with all fixtures for delivering or supplying water for any
purpose.
§ 270-31 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-33
237:622
§ 270-34. Department to meter services and apply metered rate.
The Department reserves the right to meter any service and apply the
established metered rates.
§ 270-35. Meters to remain property of village.
All meters and meter connections shall at all times be the sole property of
the Village of Johnson City and shall not be interfered with in any respect.
§ 270-36. Separate meters required.
An individual meter shall be required for each premises and for each
separate water service connection to a premises.
§ 270-37. Removal, testing and substitution of meters.
§ 270-38. Defective meters. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
When a meter is found to be defective, it shall immediately be replaced.
F. Separate service lines required generally. A separate service is required
for each premises supplied with water equipped with a curb stop under
the control of the Department.
G. Effect of violation by persons using joint service lines. Where two or
more premises are now supplied with water through one service pipe
under the control of one curb stop, if any of the parties so supplied shall
violate any of the regulations of this chapter, the Department reserves
the right to apply its shutoff regulations to such joint service line.
Except where the health and welfare of others is of more pressing
consequence, such action shall not be taken until the innocent
customer, who is not in violation of the regulations, has been given a
reasonable opportunity to attach his or her pipe to a separately
controlled service connection.
H. Frozen service lines. The service pipe from the main to the curb having
been installed to the proper depth, the Department shall not be
responsible in case such service lines freeze. If the Department assists
in thawing them, such costs shall be borne by the property owner.
A. Prior to installation, each meter will be tested. Every meter shall
perform to accuracies equal to or exceeding those established by the
Public Service Commission of the State of New York before being
placed in service.
B. The Department reserves the right to remove and test any meter at any
time and to substitute another meter in its place.
§ 270-33 STORM SEWERS § 270-39
237:623
§ 270-39. Meter specifications. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Every water meter shall be provided with a shutoff valve on each side.
All meters two inches or larger in diameter shall be fitted with suitable
metered bypass and furnished with a valve under the control and seal of the
Department and installed per its approval.
§ 270-40. Sealing of meters.
All meters shall be sealed by the Department at the time of installation, and
no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized employees
or agents.
§ 270-41. Location and installation of meters.
§ 270-42. Maintenance of meters.
All meters will be maintained by and at the expense of the Water
Department so far as ordinary wear and tear is concerned, but the customer
will be held responsible for damage due to freezing, hot water or other
external causes. In case of damage, the Department will repair the meter,
if necessary replacing it with another meter, and the costs shall be paid by
the customer. The Department recommends that the customer install at his
or her expense suitable equipment properly located to prevent backflow of
hot water which may cause damage to the meter or other damage to the
customer's plumbing.
§ 270-43. Changes in size of meters; costs.
Permanent changes in the size of meters on existing services will be made
at the request of the customer if reasonable or at the discretion of the
A. Generally. The customer shall provide a place acceptable to the
Department for the location of the meter. The customer shall install the
necessary piping, fittings, valves and pipe couplings to receive the
meter.
B. Setting near property line. In all cases, irrespective of meter size,
where the distance from the property line to the front wall of the
premises is greater than 75 feet, the Department may require that the
meter be set at or near the property line.
C. Setting within street. When, due to special circumstances, it is
necessary to set any meter within the territorial limits of the public
street, all expenses incurred by the Department in connection with its
proper housing shall be reimbursed to the Department by the customer.
D. All meter pits shall be precast concrete construction, and shall be four
feet by four feet in width and five feet in depth. Entryways will be a
minimum of 30 inches square or diameter. [Added 3-15-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
§ 270-39 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-43
237:624
Department if of sufficient capacity. Such costs shall be charged the
customer on the basis of difference in cost of meters changed and time and
material involved.
§ 270-44. Expense of changes in location of meters and services.
Meters or services relocated for the convenience of the customer will be
relocated at the customer's expense.
§ 270-43 STORM SEWERS § 270-44
237:625

ARTICLE III
Rates and Charges
§ 270-45. Charges for service connections and meters. [Amended
12-8-1980 by L.L. No. 11-1980; 4-15-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986;
5-18-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 12-2-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
The following uniform service charges, being less than the average actual
cost of installation, are hereby adopted. Such charges shall be payable in
advance. Where sizes larger than indicated are desired, an advance deposit
shall be made by the customer in the amount of the cost as estimated by the
Department.
Service Connections
Size Fee
3/4-inch service to curb At cost
1-inch service to curb At cost
Larger sizes At cost
Meters
Size Fee
5/8-inch by 3/4-inch meter At cost
3/4-inch meter At cost
1-inch meter At cost
Larger sizes At cost
§ 270-46. Metered service rates. [Amended 5-17-1976 by L.L. No.
2-1976; 2-14-1977 by L.L. No. 3-1977; 12-8-1980 by L.L. No.
11-1980; 4-15-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986; 5-18-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991; 6-2-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 6-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
5-27-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003; 5-30-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006;
3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013; 4-15-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014;
5-15-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
A. The following metered service rates shall be applicable for general
metered purposes in the service area, including residential,
commercial, industrial, irrigation, water district and other municipal
customers. Charges are for three months of service in arrears and are
payable in accordance with Article IV of this Part 1.
§ 270-45 STORM SEWERS § 270-46
237:627
§ 270-47. Deposit required for fire protection service connections.
A deposit is required to cover the estimated connection costs contracted by
the Department.
§ 270-48. Fire protection service rates. [Amended 5-18-1991 by L.L.
No. 4-1991; 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The following charges shall be payable quarterly for service in arrears:
§ 270-49. Requested meter test charges. [Amended 5-18-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991]
Water Rent Schedule Quarterly Rates
Effective with Billings Beginning July 1, 2018
Fee
Amount
(cubic feet) Inside Village Outside Village
First 1,000 or less $40 $50
All over 1,000 $4.25 per 100 cubic
feet
$5 per 100 cubic feet
B. The minimum charge shall be $40 for inside the Village and $50 for
outside the Village. In addition, if any bill remains unpaid for 30 days
beyond the billing date, there shall be due and payable an additional fee
in the amount of 12% of the amount of the bill.
C. All fees in this section shall remain in effect until June 30, 2019.
Thereafter the fees can be increased or decreased by action of the
Village Board from time to time. [Added 12-4-2018 by L.L. No.
17-2018]
A. Customer-owned hydrant within Village: $7.50.
B. Customer-owned hydrant outside Village: $17.
C. Department-owned hydrant outside Village: $22.50.
A. Charges for meter tests made upon request shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-19-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
Size Charge
1-inch or less $50
1 1/4-inch through 2-inch $100
2-inch or larger At cost
B. Such deposit shall be refundable pursuant to §§ 270-65 and 270-66 of
these department regulations.
§ 270-46 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-50
237:628
§ 270-50. Charges for outside meter reading devices. [Amended
4-15-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986; 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
If an outside reading device is installed in place of a radio read meter, the
charge shall be at the Department's cost.
§ 270-51. Charges for temporary service.
§ 270-52. Service charges not otherwise specified.
§ 270-53. Charges for restoration of service. [Amended 12-8-1980
by L.L. No. 11-1980; 4-15-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986; 3-15-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
§ 270-54. Pools and tanks. [Amended 9-2-1975 by L.L. No. 17-1975]
A. Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection
shall be at the established rates for other customers.
B. The applicant for temporary service will be required to:
(1) Pay the Department in advance the estimated cost of installing and
removing all facilities necessary to furnish such service.
(2) Deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during the
entire period such temporary service may be used.
(3) Deposit with the Department an amount equal to the value of any
equipment loaned by the Department to such applicant for use on
temporary service.
A. Deposit required. Where charges are not otherwise specified, a deposit
shall be required, based on estimated costs. Such amounts will be held
by the Department without interest.
B. Application of deposit to costs. On completion of such work or service,
the actual costs will be billed and the deposit shall be applied to such
cost. Any surplus will be returned to the customer and any deficiency
the customer shall pay.
A. Whenever water service has been discontinued by the Department for
reasons specified in Articles IV and VIII of this chapter, the payment of a
service charge of $150 is required prior to restoration of service.
B. In the event that charges or violations of Articles IV and VIII have not
been satisfied by or prior to the date of the turnoff notice, and an
employee or agent of the Department arrives at the premises for this
purpose though the service is not actually shut off, a service charge of
$50 is likewise required.
A. In the event that a resident of the Village of Johnson City or a resident
outside of the limits of the Village of Johnson City is desirous of
obtaining an abnormally large quantity of water for the filling of a
§ 270-50 STORM SEWERS § 270-54
237:629
§ 270-55. Charge for drilling machine. [Added 12-8-1980 by L.L. No.
11-1980; amended 5-18-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Rate charges for drilling machine shall be as follows:
Size of Cut
(inches) Charge
1 1/2 or 2 $40
4 $80
6 $120
8 $160
§ 270-56. Charge for private fire line. [Added 5-18-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991; amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The following charges for private fire lines connected to sprinkler systems
shall be payable quarterly for service in arrears:
Size
(inches) Charge
2 $25
4 $50
6 $75
8 $100
swimming pool or for other purposes, arrangements for the same shall
be made with the Water Department prior to the taking of said water.
Authorization for the taking of such water in unusual quantities will
be given only if the same can be safely delivered through the Water
Department's facilities and alleviating the possibility of other
consumers being inconvenienced.
B. The Water Department Superintendent and the Chief of the Fire
Department of the Village of Johnson City are authorized to comply with
requests for filling swimming pools, conditioned upon a charge being
made to the residents of the Village of Johnson City at the regular rate
for such water used and an additional charge for labor for two men at
the prescribed rate during working hours and 1 1/2 the rate for
overtime.
C. For non-village residents, the charge for water shall be 1 1/2 times the
charge to village residents.
§ 270-54 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-56
237:630
ARTICLE IV
Billing and Collection Procedures
§ 270-57. Bills payable in accordance with service classification.
[Amended 9-11-1978 by L.L. No. 8-1978]
All bills are payable in accordance with the terms of the applicable service
classification specified in § 270-6. All water bills shall be rendered on a
combination bill, together with the sewer bill for the applicable property.
§ 270-58. Proration of charges.
For new services installed at any time during the billing period, the
minimum charge and the amount of water allowed thereunder will be
prorated according to the number of days remaining to complete the billing
period after the service has been placed in use by the owner.
§ 270-59. Meter reading and billing.
Meters will be read biannually, quarterly or monthly and customers will be
billed biannually, quarterly or monthly at the Department's option, subject
to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 270-60. Determination of quantity of water used.
The quantity recorded by the meter shall be considered the amount of water
passing through the meter, which amount shall be conclusive on both the
customer and the Department except where it appears that the meter has
ceased to register or has registered inaccurately.
§ 270-61. Meters to be read separately.
Each meter on a customer's premises will be considered separately, and
readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless specifically
provided for in the rate schedule or unless the Department's operating
convenience requires the use of more than one meter or of a battery of
meters.
§ 270-62. Estimated bill; manner of determination.
In cases where it is found that the meter has ceased to register, an
estimated bill for the billing period immediately preceding the date when
such meter was found defective and for the period from said date to the
date of replacement of the meter may be rendered the customer. The
estimated bill shall be based upon the amount of water consumed in the
corresponding period in prior years, except where it appears that there has
been a change in occupancy of the premises or in the use of water or where
no prior experience exists, by the average registration of an operating
meter in subsequent periods or by equitable adjustment, whichever method
is representative, in the Department's opinion, of the conditions existing
during the period in question.
§ 270-57 STORM SEWERS § 270-63
237:631
§ 270-63. Bills due and payable when rendered; failure to receive
bill. [Amended 9-11-1978 by L.L. No. 8-1978]
All bills are due and payable when rendered. The customer shall be
responsible for all bills. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse payment.
No partial payments will be accepted.
§ 270-64. Delinquent bills. [Amended 9-11-1978 by L.L. No. 8-1978;
12-8-1980 by L.L. No. 11-1980; 2-23-1981 by L.L. No. 6-1981]
In any case any water bill or charges provided for in and by this Part 1 shall
not be paid with 30 days following the rendering of the bill, such bill shall be
delinquent and shall bear a twelve-percent service charge thereafter. Such
water rent together with the additional fee shall be payable on or before
the 30th day of April in any year. On and after the 30th day of April in any
year, all unpaid water rents together with penalties shall be certified by the
collecting officer to the Village Clerk and levied against the real estate as a
part of the annual village tax levy, in accordance with the General Municipal
Law.
§ 270-65. Disputed bills.
§ 270-66. Adjustment of bills for meter error.
A. Rereading meter; rechecking account. Customers who may dispute the
correctness of a water bill or who claim to be overcharged may, by
applying to the Department, have the meter reread and the account
rechecked. The Department will render every reasonable assistance in
determining the reason for any high or unusual bill.
B. Testing meter to determine if defective. A customer may, by giving
reasonable notice, request the Department to test the meter serving his
or her premises. The Department requires that the test shall be made in
the presence of the customer or his or her representative. The
Department will require a deposit to cover such costs. This deposit will
be refunded if the test reveals an overcharge, and the bill correction
will be made as provided in § 270-66A.
A. Fast meters. When, upon test, a meter is found to be registering more
than 4% fast under conditions of normal operations, the Department
will refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge based
upon corrected meter readings for the period, not exceeding one year
that the meter was in use.
B. Slow meters. When, upon test, a meter used for domestic or residential
service is found to be registering more than 25% slow, the utility may
bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon
corrected meter readings for the period not exceeding one year that the
meter was in use.
§ 270-63 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-66
237:632
C. When upon test, a meter use for other than domestic or residential
service is found to be registering more than 5% slow, the Department
may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon
corrected meter readings for the period not exceeding one year that the
meter was in use.
§ 270-66 STORM SEWERS § 270-66
237:633

ARTICLE V
Main Extensions
§ 270-67. Ownership of extensions.
Ownership of the extension shall always be vested in the Water Department
regardless of the circumstances. The Department shall prescribe the plan,
extent, location, methods, workmanship and material and have full control
of such extensions, including the right to connect additional customers
without the consent of other parties.
§ 270-68. Extensions of mains into subdivisions.
§ 270-69. Methods of financing.
The Water Department shall select one of the following methods or a
variation or combination of methods that, in its judgment, most
appropriately implements the policy stated in § 270-68:
A. All distribution system extensions shall be financed at the expense of
the benefiting property owners and based upon the installed cost of an
eight-inch main, complete with customarily installed valves, hydrants,
etc.
B. The Water Department shall share 1/2 the per-front-foot cost of a main
extension traversing an existing road where the adjacent frontage is or
has been subdivided prior to April 23, 1963.
A. Extensions into subdivisions.
(1) When a real estate owner or developer desires and applies for a
main extension into a subdivision, such applicant shall submit a
subdivision map, approved by proper authorities, together with
such other engineering information as the Department may
request.
(2) Such main extension as the Department may approve shall meet
specifications as prescribed by the Department and be constructed
at the applicant's expense. The actual construction may be
performed by the Department or by the owner or owner's agent at
the option of the Department.
(3) Should construction be by the Department, the owner must deposit
the estimated cost of construction prior to the work. Should
construction be by the owner, a performance bond is required and
the work shall conform to Department's specifications and
inspections prior to being accepted by the Department.
B. Extensions into existing subdivided area. Upon appropriate action by
the Board of Trustees, the Department may extend existing water
mains, with the expense of such extension or a portion thereof as
specified in § 270-68 to be assessed upon the benefited property. Such
§ 270-67 STORM SEWERS § 270-69
237:635
§ 270-70. Limitations on extension.
Any subdivision or main extension which cannot be functionally supplied
with an existing plant and system will require special arrangements.
§ 270-71. Further extensions.
The Department shall have the right to make additional main extensions
beyond or laterally from the original. Further main extensions shall not be
considered additional connections and shall not be a basis for consideration
to the original promoters.
§ 270-72. Pipe size.
The Department shall determine the size and type of pipe. Should larger
than eight-inch size be required for the traversed territory, such excess cost
shall be borne by the Department.
procedure shall be followed only within the boundaries of the Village of
Johnson City.
C. Other extensions. Circumstances that do not conform to either
Subsection A or Subsection B above or that are located outside the
village and in the franchised area will require a special ruling from the
Water Department.
D. Extension at Department expense. The Department reserves the right
to construct such mains and service improvements as it may judge
beneficial to the system. Such construction or improvement shall not
obviate any of the conditions of this Article.
§ 270-69 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-72
237:636
ARTICLE VI
Fire Services
§ 270-73. Fire service connection to be furnished.
An automatic fire service connection will be furnished subject to the
adequacy of the existing distribution mains and only if adequate provision is
made to prevent the use of water from such service for purposes other than
fire extinguishing.
§ 270-74. Submission of plans for fire services.
Original installation plans and any later revisions which fully meet fire
underwriter's requirements must be submitted to the Department.
§ 270-75. Application required.
An applicant will be required to sign an application form that will be
furnished upon request.
§ 270-76. Effect of violation.
If water is used from a fire service in violation of this Article, the
Department may, at its option, discontinue and remove the service.
§ 270-77. Installation to be at applicant's expense. [Amended
3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Department will connect the fire service to the main, including the
valve, at the applicant's expense.
§ 270-78. Installation of detector check.
In all instances of fire services over two inches in size and of a distance
greater than 75 feet from the main to the premises, a detector check will
be installed. No charge will be made for water used to extinguish accidental
fires.
§ 270-79. Installation of detector check bypass to handle leakage;
damage caused from leakage.
The owner must provide and install a detector check bypass or similar
device acceptable to the Department which will suitably handle fire flows
and leakage. Owners must pay for maintenance, leakage and any damage
caused by leakage of the fire service.
§ 270-80. Control and operation of fire service.
The service shall be controlled by a valve located in a manhole or a valve
box as the Department may prescribe and located outside the premises and
to be operated only by persons authorized by the Department.
§ 270-73 STORM SEWERS § 270-81
237:637
§ 270-81. Loss or damage from lack of pressure and supply.
The Department assumes no responsibility for loss or damage because of
lack of water or pressure and merely agrees to furnish such quantities and
pressure as are available in its general distribution system. The service
is subject to shutdowns and variations required by the operation of the
system.
§ 270-82. Water for fire storage tanks.
Occasionally water may be obtained from a private fire service for filling
a tank connected with the fire service, but only if written permission is
secured from the Department in advance and an approved means of
measurement is available. The rates for general use will be applied.
§ 270-83. Costs of water lost through leakage or testing.
Water lost through leakage or in testing or used in violation of the
regulations shall be paid for by the applicant at double the rate charged for
general use.
§ 270-81 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-83
237:638
ARTICLE VII
Temporary Service
§ 270-84. Conditions under which temporary services will be
provided.
Application of contractors, builders and others for temporary water service
will be accepted and temporary water service will be supplied, provided
that it does not interfere with use of water for general purposes.
§ 270-85. Reimbursement of expenses; deposit required.
Customers requiring temporary water service shall reimburse the
Department for all its expenses in connection with the necessary temporary
service connections, and a deposit in an amount specified by the
Department will be required in every instance.
§ 270-86. Temporary service supplied through fire hydrant; permit
required.
If temporary service is supplied through a fire hydrant, a permit for the
use of the hydrant shall be obtained from the proper authority and the
Department.
§ 270-87. Determination of quantity of water used.
The quantity of water taken for temporary purposes shall be determined
either by meter or by estimate and paid for in accordance with the rate
schedule applicable to metered general purposes.
§ 270-88. Time limitation on temporary service.
Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within
six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted, in
writing, by the Department.
§ 270-89. Damage to meter or other loaned facilities.
Any customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter
or to any other loaned facilities of the Department which are involved in
furnishing the temporary service from the time they are installed until they
are removed. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making
repairs shall be paid by the customer.
§ 270-84 STORM SEWERS § 270-89
237:639

ARTICLE VIII
Discontinuance of Service
§ 270-90. Customer's request for discontinuance.
§ 270-91. Discontinuance by Department.
The Department may refuse or discontinue service for any of the following
reasons:
A. Notice to Department. A customer may have his or her water service
discontinued by notifying the Department at least 48 hours in advance
of the desired date of discontinuance. Water charges to that date will be
billed the owner at the next regular billing date.
B. Effect of failure to notify Department. If the Department is not made
aware of such discontinuance of service, the owner will be required to
pay the customary and usual charges covering a time period to the date
the Department may reasonably terminate service following
notification.
A. Nonpayment of bills or charges: any bill or charge due the Department
becomes delinquent. [Amended 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Willful waste; use of unsafe equipment, etc.: for willful waste or where
apparatus, appliances or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe
or not in conformity with laws or ordinance. The Department does not
assume liability for inspecting apparatus on customer's property. The
Department does reserve the right of inspection, however, if there is
reason to believe that unsafe apparatus is in use.
C. Excessive demand: where demand is greatly in excess of past average
or seasonal use and where such excessive demand by one customer is
or may be deemed detrimental or injurious to service furnished other
customers.
D. Use of water through branch connections, etc.: for use of water other
than requested in the application or through branch connections on the
street side of a meter.
E. Damage to Department equipment: for damaging any service pipe, seal,
meter or other appurtenance owned or maintained by the Department.
F. Cross-connections: for cross-connections with pipe carrying water
supplied by the Department with another source of supply or with
apparatus which may endanger the quality of the public water supply or
for any violation of the Sanitary Code of the State of New York.
G. Refusing access to property: for refusal of reasonable access to the
property for the purposes of inspection of fixtures or piping or for
reading, testing or removing meters.
H. Submetering or reselling water: for submetering or reselling water.
§ 270-90 STORM SEWERS § 270-91
237:641
§ 270-92. Notice. [Added 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-201683]
I. Protection of Department: to protect the Department against fraud and
abuse.
J. Wasteful or negligent use of water: where water is wastefully used or
negligently used on a customer's premises, seriously affecting the
general use.
K. Failure to comply with Part 1 regulations. The Department may, unless
otherwise provided, discontinue water service to a customer for
noncompliance with any of the regulations established in this Part 1 if
the customer fails to comply with such regulations within five days after
receiving written notice. If such noncompliance affects matters of
health and safety and conditions warrant, the Department may
discontinue water service immediately and without notice.
A. Nonemergency situations. In the event of shutoff for nonpayment or
violation of these rules and regulations not constituting an emergency,
written notice shall be sent, prior to shutoff, by certified mail to the
owners of the premises as shown by the latest assessment rolls of the
Village of Johnson City. Notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the
front door of the building. Each notice shall be postmarked and posted
not less than 15 days prior to shutoff. The notice shall include the
anticipated date the water will be shutoff, the reason for the shutoff,
and it shall notify the property owners and tenants of their right to
request a hearing. The Village may in its discretion provide additional
notice, but failure to do so does not preclude shutoff. It is understood
and agreed, however, the Village is not liable for any damage which may
result to any person or premises from the shutting off of the water from
any main or service for any purpose whatsoever, even in cases where no
notice is given.
B. Emergency situations. In the event of shutoff for nonpayment or
violation of these rules and regulations constituting an imminent
danger to the health, safety and welfare of those residing or utilizing
the premises, or to the water supply or water system, in the
Department's reasonable discretion, written notice shall be sent as
soon as practicable after shutoff, by certified mail, to the owners of the
premises as shown by the latest assessment rolls of the Village of
Johnson City. Notice shall also be conspicuously posted as soon as
practicable after shutoff on the front door of the building. The notice
shall include the Department's basis for its determination of an
imminent danger, the reason for the shutoff, and it shall notify the
property owners and tenants of their right to request a hearing. The
Village may in its discretion provide additional notice, but failure to do
so does not preclude shutoff. It is understood and agreed, however, the
Village is not liable for any damage which may result to any person or
83.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former § 270-92 as § 270-96.
§ 270-91 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-92
237:642
§ 270-93. Right to hearing. [Added 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Upon receiving a shutoff notice either through the mail or posted on the
front door of the building, a property owner or tenant of the premises may
request a hearing in writing and sent by certified mail to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer within the periods indicated herein.
§ 270-94. Hearing. [Added 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Village Mayor shall designate a hearing officer who will conduct the
hearing and make a decision, in writing, as to whether the shutoff at the
premises shall go forward or continue, as the case may be. The hearing shall
be scheduled by the hearing officer within 30 days of the date the Village
receives the hearing request. Written notice of the hearing date shall be
provided to the party requesting the hearing, and shall also be provided to
the property owner, if different. The hearing officer shall not be bound by
the technical rules of evidence. The parties shall have the right to submit
relevant evidence, which shall be afforded the appropriate weight by the
hearing officer. The hearing officer shall have discretion to make decisions
on a case-by-case basis. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision
that must be sent regular class mail within 15 days from the date of the
hearing to the property owner and tenants who appeared at the hearing.
In a nonemergency situation, in the event that the decision is to move
forward with the water shutoff, the decision shall provide a date when the
Department will shut off the water at the property, and a new shutoff date
will be posted at the property.
§ 270-95. Compliance with rules required before service
restoration. [Added 3-15-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Whenever the water supply has been shut off for a failure to comply with
these rules and regulations, it shall not again be turned on, except by the
Department, until compliance is made with these rules and regulations
in the matter leading to shutoff, and/or payment of all sums owed and
outstanding is made to the Department.
premises from the shutting off of the water from any main or service for
any purpose whatsoever.
A. Nonemergency situation: not less than five days prior to the shutoff
date listed on the notice.
B. Emergency situation: within 10 days of the notice's posting on the front
door of the building.
§ 270-92 STORM SEWERS § 270-95
237:643

Part 2
[Adopted 8-20-P1a9y7m3 eAnst SOufb Wpaartte rK S Oysf tPeamr tB Io Onfd Tshe 1973 Code]
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 270-96. Levy and assessment of taxes for payment.
If the Village of Johnson City has heretofore issued or shall hereafter
issue bonds for the purpose of paying the cost of constructing in said
village a water system or a portion thereof, the Board of Trustees may,
notwithstanding that any part of the expense of constructing such water
system has theretofore been assessed upon lands benefited, determine and
order that any portion of such cost, not exceeding in amount the aggregate
amount of such bonds then outstanding, shall be assessed upon the lands
benefited by the construction of such water system in the manner provided
in this section. Any such resolution shall determine the aggregate amount
of such bonds which shall then be outstanding and unpaid and shall fix the
portion of each installment of maturities of said bonds which is thereafter
to be assessed upon lands benefited in the manner provided in this section.
Any such resolution shall be subject to a permissive referendum. Prior to
the first day of May in each year, the Board of Trustees shall compute the
aggregate amount of the portion of the principal of said bonds to become
due during the ensuing fiscal year which is required by said resolution to
be assessed upon the lands benefited, and also the interest on such portion
of said bonds to become due during such fiscal year, and shall assess such
amount on the lands within said village in proportion as nearly as may be
to the benefit which each lot or parcel will derive from the construction of
said water system. After making such apportionment, the Board of Trustees
shall serve on the owner of each such lot or parcel of land a notice of the
completion of such apportionment and that at a specified time and place a
hearing will be held to consider and review the same, by publishing such
notice once a week for two weeks in a newspaper published or circulated in
said village. The Board of Trustees shall meet at the time and place specified
in such notice and hear objections to such apportionment and may modify
and correct the same. The Board of Trustees, upon the completion and
correction of such apportionment, shall forthwith file the same in the office
of the Village Clerk and shall give notice of the filing of such completed and
corrected apportionment in the manner provided for by § 29 of the Tax Law
as to towns. The apportionment shall then be deemed final and conclusive,
unless an appeal is taken therefrom as hereinafter provided within 15 days
after the filing thereof. The Board of Trustees shall, in the annual tax levy
for such fiscal year, levy upon each such lot or parcel of land the sum so
apportioned to such lot or parcel of land, and the amount so levied shall be
collected in the same manner as other village taxes. In the event that any
such resolution shall become effective, any lot or parcel of land assessed
by any previous assessment or apportionment of any part of the cost of
constructing such water system shall be freed from the lien of such former
assessment or apportionment, except to the extent that any part of such
cost so apportioned to such lot or parcel of land shall have been included in
§ 270-96 STORM SEWERS § 270-96
237:645
the annual tax levies of said village. The powers conferred by this section
shall be in addition to the powers conferred by any other law, including any
general or special law, and such powers may be exercised without regard to
the restrictions contained in any other law other than the Village Law.
§ 270-96 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 270-96
237:646
Chapter 272
WELLHEAD, AQUIFER RECHARGE AND WATERSHED
PROTECTION ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 274.
§ 270-96 STORM SEWERS § 270-96
237:647

ARTICLE I
Statement of Intent
§ 272-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose and intent of establishing the Wellhead, Aquifer Recharge and
Watershed Protection Zones described below are to minimize the potential
for contamination of the aquifer which currently supplies or in the future
may supply water to the residents of the Village of Johnson City. In
promoting the general intent of these regulations, the specific intent is to:
A. Protect and maintain groundwater quality in the protection districts
tributary to the wells that supply water to the residents of the Village of
Johnson City.
B. Protect the general health and safety of the residents of the Village of
Johnson City.
§ 272-1 STORM SEWERS § 272-1
237:649

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 272-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER — A saturated permeable subsurface geologic unit that can
transmit an economic quantity of water under ordinary hydraulic gradients.
AQUIFER DISTRICT — A combination of the Watershed Zone, Aquifer
Recharge Zone and Wellhead Protection Zone as defined below.
AQUIFER RECHARGE ZONE — Those land areas outside the Aquifer
Protection Zone (Zone I) through which a large volume of precipitation or
surface runoff flows directly or indirectly into the Clinton Street/Ballpark
aquifer. This area is designated on the official Village of Johnson City
Aquifer Protection Map as "Zone II." 84
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The depression produced in a water table or
other piezometric surface by the extraction of water from a well at a given
rate. The volume and area extent of the cone varies with the rate and
duration of withdrawal of water.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Shall have the meaning
set forth in 6 NYCRR 360, Solid Waste Management Facilities.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate that includes, but is not limited to, the construction of buildings,
tanks or other materials storage facilities, the renovation of structures,
dredging, grading, land filling, commercial excavation or the installation of
pipelines and wastewater treatment facilities.
GROUNDWATER — The subsurface water that occurs below the water table
in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.
INJECTION WELL — A dug hole or a bored, drilled or driven shaft whose
depth is greater than its largest surface dimension through which
subsurface emplacement of fluids occurs.
PERSON — Denotes a single individual, a group of individuals, an
association, a company or a corporation.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste that includes, but
is not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, junk cars,
dead animals, commercial wastes, medical wastes and industrial wastes.
SUBSTANTIALLY MODIFIED —
An existing storage facility that is modified in one or more of the
following ways:
(1) A new stationary tank is added to the site.
A.
84.Editor's Note: The Aquifer Protection Map is on file in the village offices.
§ 272-2 STORM SEWERS § 272-2
237:651
TANK — A container or other holding vessel designed to store a toxic or
hazardous substance which is constructed of nonearthen materials which
provide support.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance listed in regulations
promulgated under the authority of the federal Resource, Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA), the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) or New York State Environmental
Conservation Law Article 27, 37 or 40 as now enacted or hereinafter
amended.
TOWN OF UNION WELLHEAD ADVISORY COMMITTEE — An advisory
board with representatives from the Town of Union, Villages of Johnson City
and Endicott, and business/industry. The Board shall be composed of five
members. The membership shall include one member each from the Town
of Union and the Villages of Johnson City and Endicott. Two of the members
shall be representatives from business and industry. Each member shall be
appointed for three years. Each municipality shall appoint one member of
the Wellhead Advisory Board from their respective jurisdictions with the
approval of the local Town or Village Board. The additional two members
shall be appointed by the Town of Union Board with recommendations from
the Villages of Johnson City and Endicott.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES — Any one or combination of
tanks, including any associated piping or ancillary equipment, at least 10%
of which is situated beneath the surface of the ground that is used for the
purpose of material transmission, storage or containment, except those for
public water or sewer.
WATER BODY — Any river, stream, spring, pond, lake, reservoir or channel
of water or any man-made culvert which flows directly into the
aforementioned.
WATERSHED ZONE — The land surface that is hydraulically tributary to
the Aquifer Recharge Zone (Zone II). This area is designated on the official
Village of Johnson City Aquifer Protection Map as "Zone III." 85
WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE — The land areas that extend from the
municipal wells to the outermost limits of their cones of depression. This
area is designated on the official Village of Johnson City Aquifer Protection
Map as "Zone I." 86
An existing stationary tank is replaced, reconditioned or
permanently closed.
(2)
(3) A leaking tank is replaced, repaired or permanently closed.
The repair, replacement or installation of the piping system or ancillary
equipment is not considered a substantial modification unless such
repair, replacement or installation is due to a release of 1% of flowthrough
plus 130 gallons on a monthly basis and is coupled with an
annual tightness test.
B.
85.Editor's Note: The Aquifer Protection Map is on file in the village offices.
§ 272-2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 272-2
237:652
86.Editor's Note: The Aquifer Protection Map is on file in the village offices.
§ 272-2 STORM SEWERS § 272-2
237:653

ARTICLE III
Overlaying of Zoning Districts
§ 272-3. Interpretation; construal of provisions.
Zones I, II and III of the Aquifer Protection District shall be considered
as overlaying all other zoning districts within the Village of Johnson City.
Any uses permitted in the districts so overlaid shall be permitted only
subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter. Nothing contained in
the Aquifer Protection District regulations shall be construed to reduce
or amend provisions contained in the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Johnson City.87
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 274, Zoning.
§ 272-3 STORM SEWERS § 272-3
237:655

ARTICLE IV
General Requirements
§ 272-4. Adherence to state standards; regulations governing water
supply or monitoring wells.
§ 272-5. Aquifer permits.
Any development within the Village of Johnson City Aquifer District that
meets or exceeds the following criteria shall be allowed only upon obtaining
a special permit from the Village of Johnson City Planning Board:
§ 272-6. Application for aquifer permit; fee.
Applicants for a permit to develop in the Village of Johnson City Aquifer
District shall submit the following:
A. No person shall perform any act which may result in the contravention
of water quality standards contained in New York State Public Health
Law (10 NYCRR 5) or New York State Environmental Conservation Law
(6 NYCRR 703).
B. Owners of nonresidential water supply or monitoring wells shall
provide the Village of Johnson City with a map showing their location
and a description of their use. The description shall include information
on pumping capacity (if applicable), well depth, what the well is used
for and its status (active or inactive). Water supply or monitoring wells
not in use for a period of three or more years must be decommissioned
in a manner satisfactory to the Village of Johnson City.
A. Any use of property or change in use of property of any residence,
business, industrial or intermunicipal operation which uses, distributes
or stores petroleum products, toxic materials or hazardous materials
when such distribution, storage or use exceeds 25 gallons per month or
220 pounds, whichever is less.
B. Any activity requiring a permit from the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
C. Any existing underground storage facility that has been substantially
modified.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all the corporate officers and directors.
C. Plans prepared by a professional engineer or architect licensed to
practice in the State of New York which demonstrate that sufficient
measures have been taken to prevent petroleum products, toxic
§ 272-4 STORM SEWERS § 272-6
237:657
§ 272-7. Nonconforming uses.
§ 272-8. Issuance of aquifer permit.
The Planning Board may grant the permit, deny the permit or grant the
permit with stated conditions. In the event that a permit is granted or
granted with stated conditions, it shall be a requirement that the applicant
use the best available means to prevent contamination of groundwater in
the Aquifer District. The Village of Johnson City shall maintain continuing
jurisdiction and the Planning Board shall have the power and authority to
require the applicant to make such provisions as are necessary to update
the development in order that it may be used in accordance with the then
prevailing state of technology. Prior to action on the permit, the application
shall be referred to and a recommendation received from the Town of Union
Wellhead Advisory Committee.
§ 272-9. Change in use or ownership.
The applicant is responsible for amending an existing permit if petroleum
products, hazardous or toxic materials not listed in the original permit are
subsequently used or stored at the site or if there is a change in ownership.
materials or hazardous materials from contaminating the groundwater
system.
D. Copies of any permits and applications to the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
E. One completed original and two copies of the Village of Johnson City
Groundwater Protection Form.88
F. Any other information that the Village of Johnson City Planning Board
shall request so as to have all the facts before it prior to making its
decision.
G. An aquifer permit fee of $50.
A. The lawful use of any development, or the use of any land existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued, although such
use may not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
B. When a nonconforming use has ceased for a period of one year after the
adoption of this chapter, any future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
88.Editor's Note: A copy of the Aquifer District Groundwater Protection Form is on file in the
village offices.
§ 272-6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 272-9
237:658
ARTICLE V
Watershed Zone (Zone III)
§ 272-10. Specific regulations.
A. The discharge or disposal of construction and demolition debris as
defined by 6 NYCRR 360, refuse, toxic or hazardous materials,
petroleum products or radioactive substances on or below the surface
of the ground is prohibited.
B. The uncovered outdoor storage of agricultural chemicals, pesticides,
herbicides, fungicides and fertilizers, except compost, is prohibited.
C. The uncovered outdoor storage of more than 100 pounds of chloride
salt is prohibited.
D. The uncovered outdoor storage of more than 500 pounds of manure is
prohibited.
E. The construction of Class Five underground injection wells as defined
by the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 and subsequent amendments is
prohibited.
§ 272-10 STORM SEWERS § 272-10
237:659

ARTICLE VI
Aquifer Recharge Zone (Zone II)
§ 272-11. Specific regulations.
In addition to the regulations below, the rules and regulations under Zone
III are also applicable.89
A. The siting of storage areas for junk vehicles or salvage metals is
prohibited.
B. The aboveground discharge, land application or disposal of any septic
sludge, animal wastes or animal remains is prohibited.
C. The drilling, construction or installation of all individual or private
water supply wells shall comply with the requirements and standards of
the New York State Department of Health.
D. Owners of nonresidential water supply or monitoring wells shall
provide the Village of Johnson City, with a map showing their location
and a description of their use. The description shall include information
on pumping capacity (if applicable), well depth, what the well is used
for and its status (active or inactive). Water supply or monitoring wells
not in use for a period of three or more years must be decommissioned
in a manner satisfactory to the Village of Johnson City.
89.Editor's Note: See § 272-10.
§ 272-11 STORM SEWERS § 272-11
237:661

ARTICLE VII
Wellhead Protection Zone (Zone I)
§ 272-12. Specific regulations.
In addition to the regulations below, the rules and regulations under Zones
II and III are also applicable.90
A. Excavations not subject to the New York State Mineral Resources Act
that intersect the water table at its seasonal high level and remain open
for a period of time exceeding six months are prohibited.
B. The installation of any underground storage facility for toxic or
hazardous materials or petroleum products is prohibited.
C. The establishment of any solid waste management or waste treatment
facility that would require a 6 NYCRR 360 permit is prohibited.
90.Editor's Note: See §§ 272-10 and 272-11.
§ 272-12 STORM SEWERS § 272-12
237:663

ARTICLE VIII
Public Hearing
§ 272-13. Hearing required; notice.
A public hearing shall be held in regards to the granting of an aquifer
permit. Notice of this public hearing shall be published in accordance with
Article 21 of the Village Law.
§ 272-13 STORM SEWERS § 272-13
237:665

ARTICLE IX
Zone Boundary Designation Procedure
§ 272-14. Zones I, II and III.
A. Zone I: The Village of Johnson City shall establish Zone I boundaries on
its Aquifer Protection Map using available hydrogeologic
characteristics of the Clinton Street/Ballpark Aquifer, computer
modeling data and water supply well pump test data.
B. Zone II: The Village of Johnson City shall establish Zone II boundaries
on its Aquifer Protection Map using available hydrogeologic
characteristics of the Clinton Street/Ballpark Aquifer.
C. Zone III: The Village of Johnson City shall establish Zone III boundaries
on its Aquifer Protection Map using available topographic data on areas
contributing stream flow or overland runoff to Zones I and II.
§ 272-14 STORM SEWERS § 272-14
237:667

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 272-15. Responsibilities of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for enforcement of
this chapter.
B. Inspections may be made to ensure that these rules and regulations are
being complied with.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue cease-and-desist
orders whenever violations of this chapter are noted.
§ 272-15 STORM SEWERS § 272-15
237:669

ARTICLE XI
Violations
§ 272-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. The owner of any development found not in compliance with the
provisions of this section or any other person who commits or permits
acts in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
to have committed an offense and shall be liable for any such violation
and the penalty therefor.
B. For every violation of any provision of this section, the person violating
the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each week's
continued violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Any person violating this section shall also be subject to a civil penalty
enforceable and collectible by the village in the amount of $1,000 for
each such offense. Such penalty shall be collectible by and in the name
of the village for each week that such violation shall continue.
D. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishments, the Town
Board may also commence an action or proceeding in the name of the
town and in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance
with or restrain by injunction the violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 272-16 STORM SEWERS § 272-16
237:671

ARTICLE XII
Variances
§ 272-17. Requirements for variances.
A. An owner who experiences unnecessary hardship as a consequence of
the literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter may request a
hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Johnson City.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance of the requirements of this
chapter if the Board finds that the health, welfare and safety of the
public will be protected.
B. Applications for a variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of
Appeals and shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and interest in the subject property,
or the owner's name and address, if different from the applicant,
and the owner's signed consent to file the application.
(2) The protection zone location, along with the street address and
legal description of the subject property.
(3) A narrative description of the proposed use or action together with
any other pertinent information that may be necessary to
adequately review the application.
(4) A plan illustrating all proposed site alterations, all structures
existing on the site, site contours and drainage patterns.
(5) A statement articulating the hardship imposed by the enforcement
and administration of this chapter, with specific reference to the
factors listed in this section.
(6) A statement by a professional architect or engineer licensed to
practice in the State of New York assessing the potential impact on
groundwater quality of the use or activity to be authorized by the
variance.
§ 272-17 STORM SEWERS § 272-17
237:673

ARTICLE XIII
Severability
§ 272-18. Severability of provisions.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such validity shall not affect
the other provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be
implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application, and to this
end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 272-18 STORM SEWERS § 272-18
237:675

ARTICLE XIV
Zoning Ordinance Amendment; Aquifer Protection Map
§ 272-19. Inclusion of zones in Zoning Ordinance; adoption of map.
A. The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Johnson City, Broome County,
New York, Chapter 300, Article 34, § 34.1, refers back to former §
274-25 of the Johnson City Code which is hereby amended to include:
[Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
District Abbreviation
Zone I Z1
Zone II Z2
Zone III Z3
B. Zone districts are shown, defined and bounded on a map entitled
"Village of Johnson City Aquifer Protection Map," adopted
contemporaneously with this chapter and certified by the Village Clerk,
which accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby made a part of this chapter.91
91.Editor's Note: The Aquifer Protection Map is on file in the village offices.
§ 272-19 STORM SEWERS § 272-19
237:677

ARTICLE XV
Repealer
§ 272-20. Repeal of inconsistent local laws, ordinances and
resolutions.
Any other local law, ordinance or resolution inconsistent herewith is hereby
repealed.
§ 272-20 STORM SEWERS § 272-20
237:679

ARTICLE XVI
Effective Date
§ 272-21. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its filing with the Secretary of State in
accordance with § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 272-21 STORM SEWERS § 272-21
237:681
Chapter 274
(RESERVED)
Part III: Consolidated Legislation
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Antennas — See Ch. 100.
Building Code administration — See Ch. 114.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 144.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 156.
Historic Preservation Districts — See Ch. 164.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 176.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 226.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 238.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 256.
Wellhead, aquifer recharge and watershed
protection zones — See Ch. 272.
§ 272-21 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 272-21
237:682
Part 1
Introductory Provisions
ARTICLE 10
Legal Framework
§ 300-10.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Consolidated Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Union, Village of Johnson City, and Village of
Endicott, New York." For convenience, it is referred to throughout this
chapter as the "Zoning Ordinance" or "Zoning Code."
§ 300-10.2. Effective date.
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance become effective on June 1, 2011,
except as otherwise expressly stated.
§ 300-10.3. Authority.
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and
limitations imposed by legislation of the State of New York.
§ 300-10.4. Applicability.
The regulations of this Zoning Ordinance apply to all development, public or
private, within the corporate limits of the Town of Union and the Villages of
Endicott and Johnson City unless otherwise expressly stated in this Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 300-10.5. Purposes.
There is hereby established a new comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for
the Town of Union and the Villages of Johnson City and Endicott, which
is set forth in the text, tables, illustrations and map that constitute this
chapter. The Zoning Ordinance is adopted to promote and protect the
public health, safety and general welfare and provide for solar access. The
Zoning Ordinance implements the goals and objectives of the 2008 Unified
Comprehensive Plan, which include:
A. Providing a wide variety of living environments for all socioeconomic
groups in the population and a diversity of housing densities and types,
ranging from rural low density to urban high density.
B. Providing a sound commercial base, offering convenience, choice and a
wide variety of goods and services.
C. Improving the economy by promoting new and expanded industrial
enterprises, retaining existing enterprises and redeveloping existing
industrial facilities in order to further diversify the economic base and
to provide for increased employment on a permanent basis.
§ 300-10.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-10.5
237:683
§ 300-10.6. Provisions deemed to be minimum requirements;
compliance with other applicable regulations.
§ 300-10.7. Conflicting provisions.
D. Providing a transportation network which is capable of moving people
and goods efficiently and safely.
E. Maintaining the infrastructure at a level needed to continue adequate
services to Town and Village residents.
F. Enriching the lives of all citizens by striving to improve the quality of
the environment.
G. Accommodating solar energy systems, equipment and access to
sunlight.
A. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are the minimum requirements
deemed necessary to carry out the Zoning Ordinance's stated purpose
and intent.
B. In addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, all uses and
development must comply with all other applicable Village, Town, state,
and federal regulations.
C. All references in the Zoning Ordinance to other Village, Town, state, or
federal regulations are for informational purposes only and do not
constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do not
imply any responsibility for the Town or Villages to enforce state or
federal regulations.
A. Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal
government, the more restrictive provision will control, to the extent
permitted by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes
greater restrictions or more stringent controls.
B. Conflict with other Town or Village regulations. If the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict
with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the
Town or Villages, the more restrictive provision will control. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or
more stringent controls.
C. Conflict with private agreements and covenants. This Zoning Ordinance
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement,
covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties.
If the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance impose a greater restriction
than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance will control. If the provisions of a valid, enforceable private
agreement impose a greater restriction than this Zoning Ordinance, the
§ 300-10.5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-10.7
237:684
§ 300-10.8. Severability.
If any portion of this Zoning Ordinance is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be
deemed severed from the Zoning Ordinance, and in no way affects the
validity of the remainder of the Zoning Ordinance.
provisions of the private agreement will control. The Town and Villages
do not enforce or maintain a record of private agreements.
§ 300-10.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-10.8
237:685

ARTICLE 11
General Rules of Language and Interpretation
§ 300-11.1. Meaning and intent.
The language of the Zoning Ordinance must be read literally. Regulations
are no more or less strict than stated. Words defined in Article 71 (General
Terms) have the specific meaning assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not defined in Article 71 have
the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
§ 300-11.2. Tenses and word usage.
§ 300-11.3. Conjunctions.
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, conjunctions have the
following meanings:
§ 300-11.4. Fractions.
The following rules apply to fractional number unless otherwise expressly
stated.
A. Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is
also true.
C. The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory.
D. The word "may" is permissive, and "should" is advisory, not mandatory
or required.
E. When used with numbers, "up to X," "not more than X" and "a maximum
of X" all include X.
A. "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
B. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
A. Minimum requirements. When a regulation is expressed in terms of a
minimum requirement, any fractional result of 0.5 or more must be
rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. For example, if a
minimum requirement calling for one tree to be provided for every 30
linear feet of frontage is applied to a fifty-foot dimension, the resulting
fraction of 1.67 is rounded up to two required trees.
B. Maximum limits. When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum
limits, any fractional result will be rounded down to the next lower
whole number. For example, if a maximum limit of one dwelling unit for
every 5,000 square feet is applied to a lot of 12,500 square feet, the
§ 300-11.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-11.4
237:687
§ 300-11.5. Headings and illustrations.
Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference
only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this Zoning
Ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this Zoning Ordinance and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or
illustration, the text controls.
§ 300-11.6. Current versions and citations.
All references to other Village, Town, county, state, or federal regulations
in the Zoning Ordinance refer to the most current version and citation
for those regulations, unless expressly indicated otherwise. When the
referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other
regulations, Zoning Ordinance requirements for compliance are no longer
in effect.
§ 300-11.7. Lists and examples.
Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that use
"including," "such as," or similar terms are intended to provide examples
only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
§ 300-11.8. Delegation of authority.
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or
another officer or employee of the Town or Villages to perform an act or
duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department head
or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance expressly prohibit such a delegation.
§ 300-11.9. Public officials and agencies.
All employees, public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are
made are those of the Town of Union or the Villages of Johnson City or
Endicott unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 300-11.10. Commentaries.
Commentaries are sometimes included in the Zoning Ordinance as a means
of clarifying certain provisions or providing supplemental information. Text
marked as "Commentary" has no regulatory effect. It is intended solely as
a guide for administrative officials and the public. Commentaries may be
added to the Zoning Ordinance by the Planning Director without the need
for a formal ordinance amendment.
resulting fraction of 2.5 is rounded down to two (allowed dwelling
units).
§ 300-11.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-11.10
237:688
Commentary: When commentaries appear they will appear in this
manner.
§ 300-11.10 STORM SEWERS § 300-11.10
237:689

ARTICLE 12
Zoning Map
§ 300-12.1. Establishment.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
Zoning Ordinance are shown on a zoning map maintained by the Planning
Director and the Town and Village Boards. The Planning Director will be
responsible for keeping the Zoning Map up-to-date. The Official Zoning
Map, together with all notations, references, data and other information
shown on the Map, is adopted and incorporated into this Zoning
Ordinance.92 It is as much a part of this Zoning Ordinance as if actually
depicted within its pages.
§ 300-12.2. Maintenance and updates.
The Planning Director is responsible for directing revisions to the Official
Zoning Map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective
date of Zoning Map amendments (rezonings). No unauthorized person may
alter or modify the Official Zoning Map. The Planning Director may
authorize printed copies of the Official Zoning Map to be produced, and
must maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the Official
Zoning Map for historical reference.
§ 300-12.3. District boundaries.
When the ordinance establishing a zoning boundary identifies the boundary
as following a particular feature, or reflects a clear intent that the boundary
follows the feature, the boundary will be construed as following that feature
as it actually exists. The Official Zoning Map must note any such
relationship between a zoning boundary and other mapped feature on the
Zoning Map when entering the zoning boundary.
§ 300-12.4. Interpretations of district boundaries.
Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning boundary, the actual location
of the boundary will be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals using
the following rules of interpretation:
A. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately following a
river, stream, lake or other watercourse will be construed as following
the actual center line of the watercourse. If, subsequent to the
establishment of the boundary, the center line of the watercourse
should move as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion,
sedimentation, etc.), the boundary will be construed as moving with the
center line of the watercourse.
B. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately following a
ridgeline or topographic contour line will be construed as following the
92.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-12.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-12.4
237:691
actual ridgeline or contour line. If, subsequent to the establishment of
the boundary, the ridgeline or contour line should move as a result of
natural processes (erosion, slippage, subsidence, etc.), the boundary
will be construed as moving with the ridgeline or contour line.
C. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately following a lot
line or parcel boundary will be construed as following the lot line or
parcel boundary as it actually existed at the time the zoning boundary
was established.
D. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately following a
street or railroad line will be construed as following the center line of
the street or railroad right-of-way.
E. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately following the
boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following that
boundary.
F. A boundary shown on the Zoning Map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be
construed as being actually parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.
§ 300-12.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-12.4
237:692
ARTICLE 13
Transitional Provisions
§ 300-13.1. Applications submitted before effective date.
Development applications that were submitted in complete form and are
pending approval before June 1, 2011, may be reviewed wholly under the
terms of the Zoning Ordinance in effect immediately before June 1, 2011,
or they may be reviewed wholly under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.
Whether such review takes place under the provisions of the previous
Zoning Ordinance or under this Zoning Ordinance is the applicant's option.
The applicant's decision about which ordinance applies, once submitted,
may not be changed. All development applications submitted on or after
June 1, 2011, will be reviewed wholly under the terms of this Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 300-13.2. Permits issued before effective date.
Any building, development or structure for which a building permit was
issued before June 1, 2011, may be completed in conformance with the
issued building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even
if such building, development or structure does not fully comply with
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. If building is not commenced and
diligently pursued within the time allowed under the original permit or
any extension granted, then the building, development or structure must
be constructed, completed and occupied only in strict compliance with the
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
§ 300-13.3. Continuation of violations.
Any violation of the previous Zoning Ordinance will continue to be a
violation under this Zoning Ordinance and be subject to penalties and
enforcement under Town and Village Law. If the use, development,
construction or other activity that was a violation under the previous
ordinance complies with the express terms of this Zoning Ordinance,
enforcement action will cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties
for violations that occurred before the effective date specified in § 300-13.1.
The adoption of this Zoning Ordinance does not affect nor prevent any
pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the
previous ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in
§ 300-13.1.
§ 300-13.4. Nonconformities.
Any nonconformity under the previous Zoning Ordinance will also be
nonconformity under this Zoning Ordinance, as long as the situation that
resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous regulation
continues to exist. If, however, a nonconforming situation under previous
zoning regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this
Zoning Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment to it, then the situation
§ 300-13.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-13.4
237:693
will no longer be considered a nonconformity. A situation that did not
constitute a nonconforming situation under the previously adopted Zoning
Ordinance does not achieve nonconforming status under this Zoning
Ordinance merely by repeal of the previous Zoning Ordinance.
§ 300-13.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-13.4
237:694
Part 2
Base Zoning Districts
ARTICLE 20
Residential Districts
§ 300-20.1. Establishment.
§ 300-20.2. District purposes.
A. The residential districts are listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to residential or R zoning districts, it is referring to one of the
following:
Table 20-1
Residential Districts
District Name Map Symbol
Rural Residential RR
Urban Single-Family USF
Suburban Single-Family SSF
Urban Two-Family UTF
Urban Multifamily UMF
Suburban Multifamily SMF
B. The residential district names and map symbols are intended to provide
a general indication of what is allowed in the district by denoting the
residential densities (urban, suburban, or rural) and dominate housing
type (single-family, two-family, or etc.).
A. Rural Residential. The purpose of the Rural Residential District is to
balance residential development with the preservation of rural
character and farming activities within the Town and to support the
goals and objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. This
district will promote suitable placement of buildings and accessory
structures in relation to the site and surrounding areas in order to
minimize the potential for loss of productive agricultural resources and
the disruption of environmentally sensitive areas.
B. Urban Single-Family. The purpose of the Urban Single-Family District is
to preserve the traditional village neighborhoods within Endicott,
Johnson City, and Endwell and to support the goals and objectives
contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. These neighborhoods are
generally characterized by owner-occupied, single-family, detached
homes placed on lots approximately 4,000 square feet in size. The USF
District is established to maintain the character and lifestyle offered by
these single-family neighborhoods. The USF District is intended for
areas with access to public water and sanitary sewer service.
§ 300-20.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-20.2
237:695
§ 300-20.3. Uses. [Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 5-20-2014
by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Uses are allowed in residential or R zoning districts in accordance with
Table 20-2.
C. Suburban Single-Family. The purpose of the Suburban Single-Family
District is to preserve the traditional village neighborhoods within the
Villages and the Town and to support the goals and objectives contained
in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. These neighborhoods are generally
characterized by owner-occupied, single-family, detached homes placed
on lots 9,000 square feet in size or larger. The SSF District is
established to maintain the character and lifestyle offered by these
single-family neighborhoods. The SSF District is intended for areas with
access to public water and sanitary sewer service.
D. Urban Two-Family. The purpose of the Urban Two-Family District is to
provide neighborhoods that offer one- and two-family living
opportunities and to support the goals and objectives contained in the
Unified Comprehensive Plan. These neighborhoods are generally
characterized by single- and two-family homes that provide an
environment that has traditional design elements, such as unobstructed
front yards, front porches, and pedestrian friendly streetscapes. The
UTF District is established to maintain the character and lifestyle
offered by these single- and two-family neighborhoods. The UTF
District is intended for areas with access to public water and sanitary
sewer service.
E. Urban Multifamily. The purpose of the Urban Multifamily District is to
provide the broadest range of residential living opportunities within
Endicott, Johnson City, and Endwell and to support the goals and
objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. These
neighborhoods may contain a mix of single- or two-family homes as well
as higher-density developments, such as apartments or townhouses, on
lots that may be as small as 4,000 square feet in size. Developments in
this district shall employ techniques to minimize negative impacts
(including circulation, parking, glare, noise, etc.) on existing residential
areas.
F. Suburban Multifamily. The purpose of the Suburban Multifamily
District is to provide the broadest range of residential living
opportunities within the Town and to support the goals and objectives
contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. These neighborhoods
may contain a mix of single- or two-family homes as well as higherdensity
developments, such as apartments or townhouses, on lots that
may be as small as 7,000 square feet in size. Developments in this
district shall employ techniques to minimize negative impacts
(including circulation, parking, glare, noise, etc.) on existing residential
areas.
§ 300-20.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-20.3
237:696
A. Uses identified with a "P" in Table 20-2 are permitted as-of-right in the
subject zoning district, subject to compliance with all other applicable
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Uses identified with a "SP" in Table 20-2 may be allowed if reviewed and
approved in accordance with the special permit procedures contained
in Article 66.
C. Uses not listed and those identified with a "-" are expressly prohibited.
Table 20-2
Permitted and Specially Permitted Uses
P = Permitted
SP = Specially Permitted
— = Prohibited
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Residential
Single-family
detached
P P P P P P
Single-family
attached
P P P — P P
Two-family P P SP — P P
Multifamily P P — — — —
Group care facilities SP SP — — — —
Boardinghouse/
rooming house
SP SP — — — —
Mobile or
manufactured home
— — — — — P
Accessory uses P P P P P P
Home occupation P P P P P P
Institutional
Educational
institution
P P SP SP SP P
Church or religious
institution
P P P P P P
Hospital or health
care facility
SP SP — — SP SP
Public utility SP SP SP SP SP SP
Public or municipal
use
P P SP P P P
§ 300-20.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-20.3
237:697
§ 300-20.4. Lot, area, and setback requirements. [Amended
3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
The following lot, area, and setback requirements shall apply to the
residential districts within the Town and Villages.
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Telecommunications
facilities
SP SP SP SP SP SP
Commercial
Professional offices — — — — — —
Medical/dental office — — — — — —
Banks and financial
institutions
— — — — — —
Nursery schools SP SP SP SP SP SP
Day-care center
(youth or adult)
SP SP — — SP SP
Funeral home — — — — — —
Private club SP SP — — — —
Parks, playground,
outdoor
SP SP SP SP SP SP
Cemetery SP SP — — — SP
Private kennel — — — — — P
Open field
agriculture
— — — — — P
Nursery or
greenhouse
— — — — — P
Stable or riding
academy
— — — — — SP
Animal husbandry — — — — — SP
Agribusiness
operations
— — — — — SP
Camps — — — — — SP
Parking lot,
multifamily
SP — — — — —
§ 300-20.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-20.4
237:698
Table 20-3
Residential Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Minimum lot size (with
public water and sewer)(1)
Single-family detached
(square feet)
4,000 7,000 4,000 9,000 4,000 15,000
Single-family attached
(square feet per dwelling
unit)
2,500 3,000 3,000 NA 2,500 4,000
Two-family (square feet
per dwelling unit)
2,500 3,000 3,000 NA 3,000 10,000
Multifamily (square feet
per dwelling unit)
2,500 3,000 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(square feet)
4,000 7,000 10,000 10,000 7,000 15,000
Minimum lot size (no public
water and/or sewer)(1)
Single-family detached
(square feet)
NA 40,000 NA 40,000 NA 40,000
Single-family attached
(square feet)
NA 40,000 NA 40,000 NA NA
Two-family (square feet) NA 40,000 NA NA NA 40,000
Multifamily (square feet) NA 40,000 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(square feet)
NA 40,000 NA 40,000 NA 40,000
Minimum lot width (with
public water and sewer)
Single-family detached
(feet)
40 60 40 60 40 100
Single-family attached
(feet per dwelling unit)
25 35 25 35 25 NA
Two-family (feet per
dwelling unit)
25 35 25 NA 25 60
Multifamily (feet per
dwelling unit)
25 40 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
40 60 60 80 40 100
Minimum lot width (no
public water and/or sewer)
§ 300-20.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-20.4
237:699
Table 20-3
Residential Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Single-family detached
(feet)
NA 100 NA 100 NA 100
Single-family attached
(feet per dwelling unit)
NA 60 NA 60 NA NA
Two-family (feet per
dwelling unit)
NA 60 NA NA NA 60
Multifamily (feet per
dwelling unit)
NA 60 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
NA 100 NA 100 NA 100
Minimum front setback
Single-family detached
(feet)
20 25 25 30 25 35
Single-family attached
(feet)
20 25 25 30 25 NA
Two-family (feet) 20 25 25 NA 25 35
Multifamily (feet) 20 25 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
20 25 25 30 25 35
Minimum side setback
Single-family detached
(feet)
5 5 5 6 5 20
Single-family attached
(feet)
5 5 5 5 5 NA
Two-family (feet) 5 10 5 NA 5 20
Multifamily (feet) 10 10 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
10 10 20 20 20 20
All accessory uses (feet) 5 5 5 5 5 10
Minimum rear setback
Single-family detached
(feet)
25 25 25 25 25 60
Single-family attached
(feet)
25 25 25 25 25 NA
Two-family attached
(feet)
30 30 25 NA 30 60
§ 300-20.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-20.4
237:700
Table 20-3
Residential Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Multifamily (feet) 30 30 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
30 30 40 40 40 60
All accessory uses (feet) 5 5 5 5 5 10
NOTES:
(1) Or the most common lot size on the block in which the lot is located.
§ 300-20.5. Bulk requirements. [Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
The following bulk requirements shall apply to the residential districts
within the Town and Villages
Table 20-4
Residential Bulk Requirements
Zoning District
Land Use UMF SMF USF SSF UTF RR
Maximum building height
Single-family detached
(feet)
35 35 35 35 35 35
Single-family attached
(feet)
35 35 35 35 35 NA
Two-family (feet) 35 35 35 NA 35 35
Multifamily (feet) 45 45 NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses
(feet)
45 35 35 35 35 35
All accessory uses (feet) 18 18 18 15 18 25
Maximum building
coverage
Single-family detached 50% 40% 30% 25% 35% 20%
Single-family attached 50% 40% 30% 25% 35% NA
Two-family 50% 40% 30% NA 35% 30%
Multifamily 50% 40% NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses 40% 30% 25% 25% 25% 20%
§ 300-20.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-20.6
237:701
§ 300-20.6. Additional requirements.
The applicable specific use requirements (Part 4) and development
standards (Part 5) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the UMF, SMF,
USF, SSF, UTF and RR Districts.
§ 300-20.6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-20.6
237:702
ARTICLE 21
Commercial Districts
§ 300-21.1. Establishment.
§ 300-21.2. District purposes.
A. The commercial districts are listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to commercial, central business, office, or C zoning districts, it is
referring to one of the following:
Table 21-1
Commercial Districts
District Name Map Symbol
Neighborhood Commercial NC
Central Business CB
General Commercial GC
Commercial Office CO
B. The district names and map symbols are intended to provide a general
indication of what is allowed in the district by denoting the commercial
or office orientation of the district.
A. Neighborhood Commercial. The purpose of the Neighborhood
Commercial District is to encourage smaller-scaled commercial
development, compatible with the scale and intensity of adjacent
residential and noncommercial sites, and to support the goals and
objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. This district
allows for commercial operations along collector and arterial type
streets offering convenience shopping and services for adjacent
residential areas.
B. Central Business. The purpose of the Central Business District is to
foster a concentration of small-scale, mixed use activity and to support
the goals and objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan.
The CB District is established to maintain and enhance the traditional
mix of retail, office, civic and residential uses within the core of the
Villages. Development in this district should reinforce compact,
pedestrian-oriented development and preservation of traditional
historic character.
C. General Commercial. The purpose of the General Commercial District is
to encourage commercial development and to support the goals and
objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. The GC
District is established to provide areas for intensive commercial
activities that primarily depend upon a large volume of vehicular traffic
and serve the daily shopping needs of the community-at-large and
surrounding areas. This district encourages the application of site
§ 300-21.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-21.2
237:703
§ 300-21.3. Uses. [Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
Uses are allowed in commercial and office zoning districts in accordance
with Table 21-2.
design and buffering techniques to mitigate the impacts of commercial
operations and traffic on adjacent uses and the traveling public.
D. Commercial Office. The purpose of the Commercial Office District is to
accommodate office and nonretail activity in a manner that protects and
enhances existing residential neighborhoods. The CO District permits a
mix of residential and office type uses along primary and secondary
thoroughfares that may not be suitable for single-family living due to
increasing traffic volumes. These volumes create an environment
suitable for certain multifamily and office uses that can exist in close
proximity to neighborhoods without adversely affecting the residential
environment.
A. Uses identified with a "P" in Table 21-2 are permitted as-of-right in the
subject zoning district, subject to compliance with all other applicable
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Uses identified with a "SP" in Table 21-2 may be allowed if reviewed and
approved in accordance with the special permit procedures contained
in Article 66.
C. Uses not listed and those identified with a "-" are expressly prohibited.
D. Other commercial or business uses, except those expressly prohibited,
shall be permitted in the General Commercial and Central Business
Districts under the following circumstances: [Added 12-4-2018 by
L.L. No. 14-2018]
(1) Upon the finding by the Planning Board that such use is of the same
general character as those permitted and will not be detrimental to
the other uses within the district or to the adjoining land uses;
(2) Upon issuance of a special permit pursuant to Article 66; and
(3) Upon issuance of a site plan approval pursuant to Article 63.
Table 21-2
Permitted and Specially Permitted Uses
P = Permitted
SP = Specially permitted
— = Prohibited
§ 300-21.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-21.3
237:704
Zoning District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Commercial
Professional, medical or
dental office
P P P P
Dance, art, or music studio P P P —
Bank or financial institution P P P P
Retail or personal service
store or shop
P P P —
Shopping center SP — P —
Veterinary clinic P SP P SP
Kennel — — SP —
Mortuary or funeral home SP SP SP SP
Laundromat or dry cleaning
outlet
P — P —
Dry cleaning facility — — P —
Drinking establishment or
tavern
P SP P —
Fast-food restaurant P — P —
Sit-down restaurant P SP P —
Take-out restaurant P SP P —
Dance hall, theater, private
club
P SP P —
Bowling alley P — P —
Indoor recreation facility SP — P —
Outdoor recreation facility — SP SP —
Adult uses — — SP —
Lodging P P P —
Conference/meeting center SP — P —
Gasoline station — SP SP —
Car wash — — SP —
Auto sales or rental — — SP —
Auto repair establishment — — SP —
Motor vehicle parking lot P SP P SP
Outdoor sales or display SP — P —
Stand alone drive through
establishments
— — P —
§ 300-21.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-21.3
237:705
§ 300-21.4. Lot, area, and setback requirements.
The following lot, area, and setback requirements shall apply to the
commercial districts within the Town and Villages.
Table 21-3
Commercial Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Minimum lot size (with public water
and sewer)
Residential uses (square feet) SPR(4) 7,000 15,000 10,000
Nonresidential uses (square feet) SPR(4) 7,000 15,000 20,000
Zoning District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Drive-through in
conjunction with a
permitted use
SP SP P SP
Mix of permitted uses P SP P SP
Accessory use P P P P
Institutional
Educational institution SP SP P SP
Nursery school P P P P
Church or religious
institution
P P P P
Hospital or health care
facility
SP SP SP SP
Public utility P P P P
Public or municipal use SP SP P P
Telecommunications
facilities
SP SP SP SP
Day care (adult and youth) — P P —
Residential
Single-family dwelling — P P P
Apartment over commercial P P P —
Multifamily dwelling P P P P
Boarding- or rooming house P — — —
Group care facility — — SP —
§ 300-21.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-21.4
237:706
Table 21-3
Commercial Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Minimum lot size (no public water
and sewer)
Residential uses (square feet) NA 40,000 40,000 40,000
Nonresidential uses (square feet) NA 40,000 40,000 40,000
Minimum lot width (with public water
and sewer)
Residential uses (feet) NA 40 40 40
Nonresidential uses (feet) SPR(4) 50 80 80
Minimum lot width (no public water
and sewer)
Residential uses (feet) NA 100 100 100
Nonresidential uses (feet) NA 100 100 100
Minimum front setback
Residential uses (feet) 0 20(1) 30 20
Nonresidential uses (feet) 0 20(1) 30 20
Maximum front setback
Residential uses (feet) 5 NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses (feet) 5 NA NA NA
Minimum side setback
Residential uses (principal use or
structure)(2) (feet)
SPR(4) 5/15 20/30 5/15
Residential uses (accessory use or
structure) (feet)
SPR(4) 10 10 15
Nonresidential uses (principal use
or structure)(3) (feet)
SPR(4) 5/15 20/30 5/15
Nonresidential uses (accessory
use or structure) (feet)
SPR(4) 10 10 10
Minimum rear setback
Residential uses (principal use or
structure)(2) (feet)
SPR(4) 20 20/40 20
Residential uses (accessory use or
structure) (feet)
SPR(4) 10 10 15
Nonresidential uses (principal use
or structure)(3) (feet)
SPR(4) 20 20/40 20
§ 300-21.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-21.4
237:707
Table 21-3
Commercial Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Nonresidential uses (accessory
use or structure) (feet)
SPR(4) 10 10 15
NOTES:
(1) Or average of front setbacks on the two adjacent lots, whichever is
less.
(2) The first number represents the required setback if the lot is located
adjacent to a commercially zoned property or use. The second number
is the required setback if the lot is adjacent to a residential property.
(3) The first number represents the required setback if the lot is located
adjacent to a commercially zoned property or use. The second number
is the required setback if the lot is adjacent to a residential property.
(4) SPR indicates that these requirements will be determined through the
site plan review process.
§ 300-21.5. Bulk requirements.
The following bulk requirements shall apply to the commercial districts
within the Town and Villages.
Table 21-4
Commercial Bulk Requirements
District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Maximum building height
Residential uses (principal use or
structure) (feet)
65 30 50 35
Residential uses (accessory use or
structure) (feet)
15 15 20 15
Nonresidential uses (principal use
or structure) (feet)
40 30 50 35
Nonresidential uses (accessory
use or structure) (feet)
18 18 20 18
Maximum building coverage
Residential uses 90% 50% 40% 50%
Nonresidential uses 90% 50% 40% 50%
Maximum building footprint
§ 300-21.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-21.5
237:708
Table 21-4
Commercial Bulk Requirements
District
Land Use CB NC GC CO
Residential uses (principal use or
structure)
NA NA NA NA
Residential uses (accessory use or
structure)
NA NA NA NA
Nonresidential uses (principal use
or structure) (square feet)
NA 8,000 NA NA
Nonresidential uses (accessory
use or structure) (square feet)
NA 1,000 NA NA
§ 300-21.6. Additional requirements.
The applicable specific use requirements (Part 4) and development
standards (Part 5) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the CB, NC, GC,
and CO Districts.
§ 300-21.5 STORM SEWERS § 300-21.6
237:709

ARTICLE 22
Industrial Districts
§ 300-22.1. Establishment.
§ 300-22.2. District purposes.
The purpose of the Industrial District is to encourage a wide range of
industrial, manufacturing, and distribution activities in order to support
the goals and objectives contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan.
Developments in this district shall employ techniques to minimize negative
impacts (including traffic, parking, glare, noise, etc.) on adjacent
nonindustrial uses, especially established residential districts and
environmentally sensitive areas. New residential uses are not permitted in
this district.
§ 300-22.3. Uses. [Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Uses are allowed in the industrial zoning district in accordance with Table
22-2.
A. The industrial district is listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to industrial, manufacturing, or I zoning districts, it is referring
to the following:
Table 22-1
Industrial District
District Name Map Symbol
Industrial I
B. The district name and map symbol are intended to provide a general
indication of what is allowed in the district, with the "I" denoting the
industrial or manufacturing uses.
A. Uses identified with a "P" in Table 22-2 are permitted as-of-right in the
subject zoning district, subject to compliance with all other applicable
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Uses identified with a "SP" in Table 22-2 may be allowed if reviewed and
approved in accordance with the special permit procedures contained
in Article 66.
C. Uses not listed and those identified with a "-" are expressly prohibited.
D. Other commercial or business uses, except those expressly prohibited,
shall be permitted in the Industrial District under the following
circumstances: [Added 12-4-2018 by L.L. No. 14-2018]
(1) Upon the finding by the Planning Board that such use is of the same
general character as those permitted and will not be detrimental to
the other uses within the district or to the adjoining land uses;
§ 300-22.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-22.3
237:711
(2) Upon issuance of a special permit pursuant to Article 66; and
(3) Upon issuance of a site plan approval pursuant to Article 63.
Table 22-2
Permitted and Specially Permitted Uses
P = Permitted
SP = Specially permitted
— = Prohibited
Zoning District
Land Use I
Industrial
Lumberyard SP
Warehousing and enclosed storage P
Food processing, baking, and packaging
plants
P
Enclosed assembly of previously
manufactured goods and services
P
Contractor's and building material
storage yard
SP
Printing and publishing of books and
newspapers
P
Enclosed research, development,
experimental or testing lab
P
Laundries and dry cleaning plants SP
Extractive and mining operations SP
Enclosed processing of raw materials SP
Transportation and freight terminal
facilities
SP
Enclosed fabric and clothing production
facilities
P
Outdoor operations and storage SP
Self-service storage facility P
Manufacturing (not including handling of
waste products)
P
Manufacturing: waste products or
materials
SP
Junkyard SP
Commercial
Wholesale trade P
§ 300-22.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-22.3
237:712
§ 300-22.4. Lot, area, and setback requirements.
The following lot, area, and setback requirements shall apply to the
industrial district within the Town and Villages.
Table 22-3
Permitted Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
District
Land Use I
Minimum lot size (with public water and sewer)
(square feet)
10,000
Minimum lot size (no public water and sewer)
(square feet)
40,000
Minimum lot width (with public water and sewer)
(feet)
100
Minimum lot width (no public water and sewer)
(feet)
100
Zoning District
Land Use I
Bulk sales and rental SP
Enclosed motor vehicle repair P
Motor vehicle sales or rental
establishments
SP
Retail and personal service
establishments
SP
Bank, medical/dental, professional and
business office
P
Motor vehicle parking lot or garage P
Kennel SP
Indoor recreation and entertainment
venues
P
Outdoor sales, display, or storage SP
Stand alone drive through establishments SP
Drive through in conjunction with a
permitted use
SP
Institutional
Public utility P
Public or municipal use P
Telecommunications facilities SP
Religious institution SP
§ 300-22.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-22.4
237:713
Table 22-3
Permitted Lot, Area, and Setback Requirements
District
Land Use I
Minimum front setback(1) (feet) 20
Minimum side setback(2)
Principal use or structure (feet) 10/25
Accessory use or structure (feet) 10
Minimum rear setback(2)
Principal use or structure (feet) 20/40
Accessory use or structure (feet) 20
NOTES:
(1) Or average of front setbacks on the two adjacent lots, whichever is
less.
(2) The first number represents the required setback if the lot is located
adjacent to a commercially zoned property. The second number is the
required setback if the lot is adjacent to an residential property.
§ 300-22.5. Bulk requirements.
The following bulk requirements shall apply to the Industrial District within
the Town and Villages.
Table 22-4
Industrial Bulk Requirements
District
Land Use I
Maximum building height
Principal use or structure (feet) 65
Accessory use or structure (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage 60%
§ 300-22.6. Additional requirements.
The applicable specific use requirements (Part 4) and development
standards (Part 5) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the Industrial
District.
§ 300-22.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-22.6
237:714
Part 3
Overlay And Special Purpose Districts
ARTICLE 30
Office Overlay (OO) District
§ 300-30.1. Purpose.
The Office Overlay District protects and enhances the existing residential
neighborhoods in close proximity to commercial and institutional activity
centers and along major thoroughfares. The existing activity level and
traffic volumes in these areas provide an environment suitable for certain
small-scale office uses that can exist in close proximity to neighborhoods
without adversely affecting the residential environment. The OO District
permits mixed residential and limited small-scale office-type uses on
properties that are large enough to accommodate sufficient off-street
parking and screening requirements. The preservation and rehabilitation of
sound residential structures while accommodating increased use options is
the primary function of the district. The OO District is to be overlaid upon
the existing residential zoning district.
§ 300-30.2. Permitted and specially permitted uses.
§ 300-30.3. Lot, area, and bulk requirements.
A. The following uses and structures are permitted in the OO District in
existing structures only. The initial conversion is subject to site plan
approval:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the underlying district.
(2) Commercial uses when limited to the following:
(a) Professional office.
(b) Medical or dental office.
B. The following uses are allowed as specially permitted uses in the OO
District in existing structures only. The initial conversion is subject to
site plan approval:
(1) Specially permitted uses allowed in the underlying district.
A. The lot, area and yard requirements of the OO District shall conform to
the underlying district.
B. The building requirements of the OO District shall conform to the
underlying district.
§ 300-30.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-30.3
237:715

ARTICLE 31
Hooper Road Overlay (HRO) District
§ 300-31.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Hooper Road Overlay District is to encourage smallerscaled
commercial development that reflects the scale and character of
adjacent residential neighborhoods, and to support the goals and objectives
contained in the Unified Comprehensive Plan. This district allows for
conversions of residential properties to neighborhood commercial
operations along Hooper Road.
§ 300-31.2. Permitted and specially permitted uses.
§ 300-31.3. Lot, area, and bulk requirements.
§ 300-31.4. Additional requirements.
A. Permitted uses: uses that are permitted in the underlying
Neighborhood Commercial District.
B. Specially permitted uses. There are no specially permitted uses within
the HRO District.
A. The lot, area and yard requirements of the HRO District shall conform
to the underlying Neighborhood Commercial District.
B. The building requirements of the HRO District shall conform to the
underlying Neighborhood Commercial District.
A. Parking between the principal building and the street is prohibited.
B. Internally lit signs are prohibited.
C. Building design. All development within the HRO District shall employ
building and site design standards to ensure compatibility with
adjacent residential development. To the maximum extent practicable,
development shall employ the following techniques:
(1) Ensure that all buildings are residential in scale. An enlargement of
existing buildings beyond a fifty-percent expansion of the existing
footprint is prohibited.
(2) Roof shapes must incorporate traditional residential designs, such
as peaked or hipped roofs. Flat roofs are prohibited.
(3) Exterior materials are limited to traditional residential siding
materials, such as horizontal clapboard, brick, or stone. Metal
siding is prohibited.
§ 300-31.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-31.4
237:717

ARTICLE 32
Open Space (OS) District
§ 300-32.1. Purpose.
The Open Space (OS) District preserves and enhances the Town's and
Villages' open spaces and recreational areas by protecting these natural
amenities and restricting development that does not respect these
environmentally sensitive areas and does not conform to the Unified
Comprehensive Plan. Open Space Districts are intended to apply to all
publicly owned or accessible parks, squares, recreational areas, natural
wildlife areas, the waterfront and cemeteries.
§ 300-32.2. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted uses:
§ 300-32.3. Specially permitted uses.
The following uses are specially permitted uses:
A. Publicly owned parks, squares, recreational areas, natural wildlife
areas and other open areas.
B. Cemeteries, including associated facilities, such as mausoleums,
columbariums, crematories and chapels, provided that no such
structure shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district
boundary line.
C. Botanical gardens, arboretums and conservatories.
D. Public marinas, boat launches, boat docks and fishing docks.
E. Outdoor recreational facilities, such as hiking and bicycle trails, greens
and commons, sitting areas and picnic areas.
A. Active recreational facilities, such as ball fields, soccer fields and the
like.
B. Band shells and outdoor theaters, not including drive-in theaters.
C. Boat rental.
D. Commercial facilities incidental to the operation of public recreational
uses, such as refreshment stands, small concessionaire shops
dispensing sporting goods, miniature golf and similar amusement and
recreational facilities.
E. Cultural facilities, such as museums and observatories.
F. Golf courses, including par-three courses and driving ranges.
G. Lighting of all outdoor recreational activity areas for nighttime use.
§ 300-32.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-32.3
237:719
§ 300-32.4. Lot, area, and bulk requirements.
H. Parking lots of 10 or more spaces.
I. Public recreation centers, including enclosed and semi-enclosed
buildings.
J. Public schools.
K. Public utilities, subject to the additional requirements for specified uses
in § 300-40.17.
L. Water collection, storage and distribution uses, such as reservoirs,
tanks, dams, water treatment plants, pumping stations and drainage
channels.
M. Zoos.
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot frontage: not applicable.
(2) Minimum lot area: not applicable.
(3) Maximum building coverage: not applicable.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: not applicable.
B. Yard requirements.
(1) Minimum front yard setback: average front yard depth of
building(s) along the block or 35 feet if no buildings are within 500
feet of the proposed building.
(2) Minimum side yard setback: not applicable unless adjacent to a
residential district, in which case the side yard shall be the same as
the required side yard setback in the residential district.
(3) Minimum rear yard setback: not applicable unless adjacent to a
residential district, in which case the side yard shall be the same as
the required rear yard setback in the residential district.
(4) Special setbacks: any area intended for concentrated outdoor
activity shall be located at least 30 feet from any residential lot or
district and shall be so screened as to provide visual privacy to such
lot or district.
C. Building height.
(1) Maximum building height, principal use or structure: 25 feet.
(2) Maximum building height, detached accessory use or structure: 15
feet.
§ 300-32.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-32.4
237:720
ARTICLE 33
Mobile Home Park (MHP) District
§ 300-33.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide residents of the Town of Union
with a housing alternative and, at the same time, protect and preserve the
property of the Town of Union and its inhabitants by regulating mobile
homes and mobile home parks.
§ 300-33.2. Procedures and requirements.
A. The process (general overview) shall be as follows:
(1) The applicant submits a rezoning petition to the Town Clerk.
(2) The applicant submits preliminary plans to the Planning Board.
(3) Upon approval of the preliminary plans by the Planning Board, the
plans will be sent to the Town Board. The Town Board will then
consider the request to rezone to Mobile Home Park District.
(4) Provided that the Town Board approves the change of zone request,
final plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
(5) Provided that the final plans are approved by the Planning Board,
construction may commence after the necessary permits are
issued.
B. Initiation of procedures. The procedures for the MHP District are the
same as for the Planned Unit Development District; see Article 65.
C. Town Board action on development plans. The procedures for the MHP
District are the same as for the Planned Unit Development District; see
Article 65.
D. Submission of final plans to the Planning Board. The procedures for the
MHP District are the same as for the Planned Unit Development
District; see Article 65.
E. Construction of utilities, roads and subdivision of lots. The
requirements for the MHP District are the same as for the Planned Unit
Development District; see Article 65.
F. Revision of development plans. All proposed changes to an approved
MHP shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. The
following changes are deemed significant and require a public hearing
to be held by the Town Board and approval by the Town Board in
addition to approval by the Planning Board:
(1) Any changes which require additional roads or utilities or will
cause any changes in the SEQR determination.
(2) An increase of 20% or more in the number of mobile homes.
§ 300-33.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-33.2
237:721
§ 300-33.3. Required documents.
G. Sanitary facilities.
(1) Water. All mobile home parks shall be served by an approved water
supply.
(2) Sewer system. All mobile home parks shall be connected to an
approved public sanitary sewer system. The system shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Town of Union
Subdivision Regulations93 and design standards.
H. Electrical distribution system and individual electrical system.
(1) General requirements. Every mobile home park shall contain an
electrical wiring system consisting of wiring fixtures, equipment
and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the local electric power company's specifications
and regulations. All wiring fixtures and connections must have the
New York Board of Underwriters approval or other authority as
designated by the Town.
(2) Each mobile home lot shall be supplied with not less than a onehundred-
ampere service. If the mobile home is to be heated
electrically, then a one-hundred-fifty-ampere service shall be
required.
(3) Electrical distribution lines shall be placed underground.
(4) All grounding wire shall be maintained.
I. Other requirements.
(1) Skirts. Each mobile home owner shall be required, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, to enclose the bottom portion
of the mobile home with either a metal or wooden skirt or other
similar permanent material. The skirting shall allow proper
ventilation.
(2) Common open space. Each mobile home park shall have a minimum
of 20,000 square feet of recreation area for the common use of the
people living within the mobile home park.
A. The required documents for the MHP District are the same as for the
Planned Unit Development District; see Article 65.
B. In addition to the above-required documents, plans for tie-down
provisions for mobile homes located in the floodplain, in accordance
with the Floodplain Management District, shall be provided.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 181, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of Union.
§ 300-33.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-33.3
237:722
ARTICLE 34
Aquifer Recharge and Watershed Protection Areas
§ 300-34.1. Specific requirements.
Refer to Chapter 272 of the Johnson City Code, Chapter 74 of the Town of
Union Code, and Chapter 242 of the Village of Endicott Code.
§ 300-34.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-34.1
237:723

Part 4
Specific Use Requirements
ARTICLE 40
Supplementary Use Requirements
§ 300-40.1. Adult entertainment and uses.
A. Purpose. The establishment of certain adult entertainment businesses
in the Town and Villages will tend to result in the blighting and
deterioration of the community. Accordingly, it is necessary that these
businesses be regulated in such a manner as to prevent the erosion of
the character of the Town and Villages. It is necessary to regulate the
establishment of such adult entertainment businesses within close
proximity to residentially zoned areas, schools, churches, parks,
playgrounds and amusement arcades so as to minimize the proliferation
of criminal activity and a blighting and degrading effect upon
surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Prohibition.
(1) No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the
following adult entertainment businesses, as defined in this
chapter hereof within 500 feet of any building containing
residential dwelling or rooming units or within 1,000 feet of any
church, school, park, playground, amusement arcade or existing
adult entertainment businesses: adult bookstore, adult cabaret,
adult mini-motion-picture theater, adult motion-picture arcade or
adult motion-picture theater.
(2) The establishment of an adult entertainment business shall include
the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of
such business or the conversion of an existing business location to
any of the uses described in this chapter.
(3) No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner
that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas from any public way or from any property not registered as
an adult entertainment business. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window, screen or other opening.
C. Measurement of distances. For the purposes of this section,
measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises for an adult
entertainment business to the nearest property lines of a building
containing a residential dwelling or rooming unit, a church, school or
amusement arcade or to the nearest boundary of a park or playground.
§ 300-40.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.1
237:725
§ 300-40.2. Automotive sales.
§ 300-40.3. Automotive service station, motor vehicle repair shops,
gasoline stations, or gasoline service stations.
Gasoline stations, service stations, motor vehicle repair shops, motor
vehicle sales agencies, and drive-in businesses shall comply with the
following:
D. Penalties for offenses. Any person violating any provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Town and
Village Law.
A. The sale of new or used vehicles may be allowed by special use permit,
provided the following:
(1) The sales area shall be paved, suitably graded and drained, and
maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
(2) The number of cars that may be for sale on the premises must be
specified on the special use permit. An increase in the number of
cars to be sold shall require a new permit.
(3) A spill prevention plan is provided.
B. All maintenance, service and repairs of motor vehicles shall be
performed fully within an enclosed structure. No motor vehicle parts or
partially dismantled motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an
enclosed structure or screened area.
C. No vehicles shall be displayed for sale within 10 feet of the property
line.
D. The retail sales of fuel shall not be permitted.
E. Landscaping (Article 54), signage (Article 52), and lighting (Article 55)
shall meet the requirements of their respective sections.
A. No such use shall be located within 150 feet from any lot or parcel
occupied by a hospital, library, school or church. Measurement shall be
made between nearest respective lot lines.
B. Any such use shall be buffered from adjacent uses by no less than 10
feet.
C. The entire site area that is traveled by motor vehicles shall be hardsurfaced
(i.e., asphalt, concrete, or any other dust-free surface).
D. Rubbish, oil cans, tires, discarded motor vehicle parts and components
and other waste materials may be stored up to one month in a
completely fenced-in opaque enclosure adjacent to the building,
provided that the area of such enclosure shall not exceed 5% of the area
§ 300-40.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.3
237:726
of the principal service station building. There shall be no storage of
any items, at any time outside of such enclosure or building.
E. Landscaping (Article 54), signage (Article 52), and lighting (Article 55)
shall meet the requirements of their respective sections.
F. Motor vehicle repair shops and service stations shall comply with the
following regulations:
(1) The number of vehicles that can be accommodated on site for
repair and storage is to be determined by the Planning Board.
(2) Motor vehicle repair garages shall not be used for the storage, sale,
rental or display of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes,
boats, snowmobiles or other vehicles.
(3) All maintenance, service and repairs of motor vehicles shall be
performed fully within an enclosed structure. No motor vehicle
parts or unlicensed motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an
enclosed structure.
(4) A spill prevention plan is provided.
(5) No vehicle in for repair may remain outside longer than 10 days.
G. Gasoline stations shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) In addition to the information required for site plan review, the plan
shall also indicate the location, number, capacity, and type of fuel
storage tank, the number of pumps to be installed, and the depth to
the tanks.
(2) Gas stations may include retail sales of food, convenience items,
and minor automotive supplies or liquids, provided that the sales of
such items are within an enclosed structure and are an accessory
use. Sales areas outside of the primary structure may be displayed
on the pump islands or the building island only.
(3) Gasoline stations shall be under the control of an attendant at all
times during the hours of operation.
(4) Fuel pumps shall be located no closer than 20 feet from the public
right-of-way or 50 feet from any other property lines.
(5) All storage facilities for fuel, oil, gasoline or similar substances
shall be underground and shall be at least 25 feet from any
property line. Tanks shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with all state and federal standards as well as the
following specified standards:
(a) Prior to installation, the Administrative Officer shall be
provided with a copy of the specifications and the date of the
proposed installation. No tank shall be covered until inspected
and approved.
§ 300-40.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.3
237:727
§ 300-40.4. Camps.
(b) If at any time a leak is detected, the owner shall immediately
make the necessary repairs. If, at the discretion of the
Administrative Officer, the condition results in a threat to
public safety, the gasoline service station may be shut down
until repairs are made.
(c) For the purpose of required yards and setbacks, pumps and
canopies shall be considered structures and shall not be
located in any required yard.
(6) In the event that a service station is abandoned, as determined by
the Administrative Officer, the owner shall comply with the Fire
Prevention Code, Abandonment or Removal of Underground Tanks.
The owner shall also remove all signs and lighting poles and
provide adequate protection against unlawful entry into buildings
and onto the property and shall close all vehicular entrances to the
property. A service station shall be deemed abandoned if it is not in
active operation for a period of 12 consecutive months.
A. Any campsite shall be located and maintained only in those districts as
permitted in this chapter and in accord with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
B. All existing campsites of record shall be exempt from this chapter,
except that they shall comply with this section whenever and wherever
any addition, expansion or alteration of the use or operation is
proposed.
C. Before a special permit for a campsite is issued, the Planning Board
shall determine that the proposed use is designed and arranged in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Site. The campsite shall be located on a well-drained site which is
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and be free at all times
from stagnant pools of water.
(2) Lots. Each campsite shall be marked off into lots. The total number
of lots in such campsite shall not exceed 12 per acre. Each lot shall
have a total area of not less than 2,500 square feet, with a minimum
dimension of 30 feet. No more than one recreational vehicle shall
be permitted to occupy any one lot.
(3) Setbacks. All recreational vehicles, tents and the like shall not be
located nearer than a distance of:
(a) At least 25 feet from an adjacent property line, except
residential property.
(b) At least 100 feet from any adjacent residential property line.
§ 300-40.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.4
237:728
(c) At least 100 feet from the right-of-way of a public street or
highway.
(d) At least 10 feet from the nearest edge of any roadway location
within the park or camp.
(4) Recreational vehicle stand. Each recreational vehicle lot shall have
a stand of sufficient size and durability to provide for the placement
and removal of recreational vehicles and for the retention of each
recreational vehicle in a stable condition. The stand shall be
suitably graded to permit rapid surface drainage.
(5) Accessibility. Each campsite shall be easily accessible from an
existing public highway or street, with entrances and exits
designed and strategically located for the safe and convenient
movement into and out of the campsite and with minimum conflicts
with the movement of traffic on a public highway or street. All
entrances and exits shall be at right angles to existing public
highways or streets, and all entrances and exits shall be of
sufficient width to facilitate the turning movements of recreational
vehicles.
(6) Street system.
(a) Each campsite shall have improved streets to provide
convenient access to all lots and other important facilities
within the campsite or camp.
(b) The street system shall be so designated to permit safe and
convenient vehicular circulation within the campsite or camp.
(c) All streets shall intersect at right angles.
(d) All streets shall have the following minimum widths:
[1] One-way traffic movement: 12 feet.
[2] Two-way traffic movement: 20 feet.
(e) Except in cases of emergency, no parking shall be allowed on
such streets.
(f) An improved driveway shall be provided for each lot. This
driveway shall have a minimum width of nine feet.
(7) Utilities. All sewer and water facilities provided in each campsite
shall be in accordance with the regulations of the New York State
Department of Health and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
(8) Open space. Each campsite designed for 20 or more sites shall
provide a common open area suitable for recreation and play
purposes. Such open space shall be conveniently located. The open
§ 300-40.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.4
237:729
§ 300-40.5. Car washes.
Car washes shall comply with the following additional regulations:
§ 300-40.6. Drive-through facilities.
space area shall be 10% of the gross land area of the campsite but
not less than one acre.
(9) Improvements. Lighting, landscaping and buffer areas may be
required by the Planning Board and shall be in keeping with
surrounding development, the unique features of the site and the
health and safety of occupants of the campsite.
(10) Management. Every campsite shall be managed from an office
located on the premises. The manager shall maintain the campsite
in such a manner so as to protect the health, safety and comfort of
all persons accommodated in the campsite and so as to preserve
the campsite in a clean and attractive manner.
(11) Removal of wheels. Unless special consent is given by the Planning
Board, it shall be unlawful to remove wheels from any recreational
vehicle or otherwise permanently affix such travel trailer to the
ground. Such removal shall be grounds for the revocation of the
permit for such campsite.
(12) Landscaping (Article 54), signage (Article 52), and lighting (Article
55) shall meet the requirements of their respective sections.
A. All washing facilities shall be completed within an enclosed building.
B. Vacuuming facilities may be outside of the building but shall not
interfere with the free flow of traffic on or off the site.
C. Where gasoline stations are either a principal use with or an accessory
use to the car wash, the requirements of the gasoline station shall also
be adhered to.
D. Discontinuance of use. In the event a car wash is abandoned, as
determined by the Building Official, the owner shall immediately
remove any outdoor vacuums, all signs and lighting poles. The owner
shall also provide adequate protection against unlawful entry into the
building and onto the property and shall close all vehicular entrances to
the property. A car wash shall be considered abandoned if it is inactive
for a period of 12 consecutive months.
A. Drive-through facilities, including any protective canopies, signage,
drive-through travel lanes, or other associated elements, shall meet the
setback requirements for the property.
B. Within the Central Business Zoning District, drive-through facilities
must be placed to the rear of the structure in order to ensure that their
presence does not obstruct pedestrian access to the building and along
§ 300-40.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.6
237:730
§ 300-40.7. Eating and drinking establishments.
Eating and drinking establishments that are adjacent to residential uses
or districts shall be buffered or screened to minimize visual and auditory
impacts in a method approved by the Planning Board and in accordance
with the regulations set forth in Part 5, especially pertaining to landscaping,
outdoor lighting, and parking.
§ 300-40.8. Farm stands.
A farm stand may be permitted as a seasonal accessory use within the RR
District and sell agricultural and horticultural products produced on the
premises or produced by the owner of a local farm, subject to the following
regulations:
§ 300-40.9. Home occupations.
the public right-of-way. A detached facility may be used to accomplish
this.
C. Drive-through facilities with an amplified audio/visual system shall be
setback a minimum of 30 feet from the property line. These facilities
shall not be located adjacent to residential uses or districts.
D. Stacking space for these facilities shall not impede on- or off-site traffic
movements. The stacking space shall be delineated from other internal
areas through the use of pavement markings.
A. No more than one structure of a temporary and movable nature shall be
permitted and shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in total floor space.
B. The ground display area shall be immediately adjacent and secondary
to the farm stand and shall not exceed 1,600 square feet in area.
C. The farm stand shall be permitted only during the recognized season
for the production or harvest of such products, and sales shall occur
between dawn and dusk.
D. A farm stand shall be located at least 20 feet from any public rights-ofway.
E. An off-street parking area for at least two vehicles shall be provided.
F. No products other than homegrown fruits, vegetables, dairy products,
nursery stock, or value-added products produced on-site from other
products grown on-site may be sold or offered for sale at such stands.
G. One sign shall be permitted. The sign must be removed when the stand
closes for the season.
A. Permitted home occupations include, but shall not be limited to, the
following uses: lawyer, accountant, author, doctor, engineer, dentist,
architect, consultant, realtor, insurance agent/broker, counselor, artist,
§ 300-40.6 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.9
237:731
§ 300-40.10. Keeping of livestock. [Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
The keeping, sheltering, or maintenance of livestock and/or poultry, within
an agricultural farming operation located in a county agricultural district,
shall be subject to New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
The keeping, sheltering, or maintenance of livestock and/or poultry, not
within an agricultural farming operation located outside of a county
agricultural district, shall be permitted only in the Rural Residential District
and is subject to the following standards:
teacher, tutor, beautician, barber, tailor, dressmaker and repairman,
excluding the repair of motor vehicles.
B. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
building and shall not cover more than 1/3 of the floor area.
C. Not more than one person outside the family shall be employed in the
home occupation.
D. There shall be no exterior display or storage of materials and no other
exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the principal building with the exception of a
permitted sign. The sign shall be placed in accordance with Article 52
of this chapter.
E. No offensive, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, light, or glare
shall be produced.
F. Use of property as a drop-off point for merchandise not produced by
such home occupation is prohibited.
G. Selling of merchandise not produced by such home occupation is
prohibited.
H. Parking for home occupations shall be permitted in accordance with the
parking regulations in Article 51. A maximum of two off-street parking
spaces shall be provided.
I. The home occupation shall not involve wholesaling nor the storage of
automobiles.
J. One freestanding or wall-mounted sign shall be allowed. The maximum
size of the sign shall be two square feet.
A. The minimum parcel size shall be three acres.
B. A maximum of two livestock may be kept, sheltered, or maintained per
three acres minimum.
C. One additional livestock may be kept, sheltered, or maintained for each
additional acre over the three-acre minimum.
§ 300-40.9 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.10
237:732
§ 300-40.10.1. Domesticated chickens. [Added 10-3-2017 by L.L.
No. 10-2017]
Domesticated chickens shall be permitted in the Village of Johnson City by
special permit granted by the Village Board. The minimum parcel size to
allow domesticated chickens shall be 6,000 square feet and shall be limited
to single-family owner-occupied dwellings only. In any application before
the Village Board, the following special regulations shall be instituted:
D. Storage of manure or other odor-producing material or housing for
livestock or poultry shall not be allowed within a minimum of 100 feet of
any residentially zoned lot line or private well.
A. Roosters are not permitted.
B. The business of animal husbandry, where animals are reared or kept in
order to sell the animals or their products, is not permitted.
C. Up to six domestic female fowls (aka hens) as an accessary use may be
kept for use of any property owner. The hens must be confined within
the boundaries of the lot.
D. A fence, of sufficient gauge, construction and height, is required and
must be constructed to confine the hens to the lot or a portion of the
lot.
E. An accessory structure or a covered enclosure (aka coop) must be
included within the fenced-in area.
F. The fenced-in area must be a minimum of 25 square feet.
G. Only one coop to house hens is permitted per lot.
H. Such coop must be a minimum of four square feet per hen.
I. Such coop is not permitted in a front yard or side yards.
J. Such coop must be located at least 20 feet from any lot line, and it must
be located at least 25 feet from any residential structure on any
adjacent lots. The coop must be constructed and placed so as to
minimize odor and noise.
K. The fenced area and coop must be clean, dry, and odor-free, and kept in
a neat and sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not
disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or
other adverse impact.
L. A building permit must be obtained for such coop and fence, wherein
the requirements of this article will be confirmed, including setbacks
and the obligations to minimize odor and noise. A fee shall be set by
resolution.
M. The fenced area and coop combined shall not cover more than 50% of
the rear yard area.
§ 300-40.10 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.10.1
237:733
§ 300-40.11. Kennels.
§ 300-40.12. Mobile and manufactured homes.
For the purposes of this section, any reference to a "mobile home" also
applies to a "manufactured home" as defined in Part 7 of this chapter.
N. Chickens must be provided with access to feed and clean water at all
times; such feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds
and predators.
O. Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken manure.
All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a
roof or lid over the entire structure. All manure not used for composting
or fertilizing shall be removed.
A. The kennel and its operation will not create nuisance conditions for
adjoining properties due to noise or odor in accordance with the
performance standards contained in the local laws of the Town and
Villages.
B. All animals will be confined to the property and housed in an enclosed
structure in humane conditions (i.e., protected from weather, clean and
sanitary, adequate space, nonporous surfaces, well-ventilated, etc.).
C. Animals are to be kept inside an enclosed structure between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. Adequate methods for sanitation and sewage disposal, which may
require a waste disposal plan at the discretion of the Planning Board.
The disposal plan, at a minimum, should outline the approximate
amount of sewage expected, methods to properly dispose of the
sewage, and methods for sanitation for the kennel. Certification by a
licensed, professional engineer and/or the New York State Department
of Health may be required if existing disposal systems are utilized or
new systems installed.
E. Kennels and exterior pens, including dog runs, shall be located at least
20 feet from any lot line and 200 feet from all residential districts
except the Rural Residential District. Landscaping, screening or
buffering may be required by the Planning Board to minimize the visual
and auditory impact to neighboring properties subject to the
regulations in Article 54.
A. Permanent residence. A year-round mobile home is permitted as a
principal use in the Rural Residential District, provided that the
following standards and conditions are met:
(1) The mobile home shall be installed in compliance with the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and shall be
protected from ground frost heaves by one of the following
methods:
§ 300-40.10.1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.12
237:734
§ 300-40.13. Multifamily dwellings.
(a) Footings and the load-carrying portion of the ground anchors
shall extend below the frost line (minimum of 42 inches below
finished grade); or
(b) The mobile home shall be placed on a reinforced concrete slab.
(2) The mobile home shall be skirted with a noncombustible material
so as to enclose the area between the floor of the mobile home and
the ground. Such skirting is to be properly ventilated and must be
completed within 30 days after arrival.
(3) The water supply system and sewage disposal system for the
mobile home shall be approved by the County Health Department.
(4) The mobile home shall have a minimum floor area of 400 square
feet.
B. Mobile homes and trailers may be used as temporary facilities at
construction sites after building permits are issued for the proposed
principal building and mobile home or trailer. The trailer or mobile
home shall be removed upon the expiration of the building permit or
upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the Administrative
Officer.
C. Mobile homes and trailers may be used as temporary facilities for
public construction or other public utility construction and may be
located on any lot or adjacent to the construction site. The mobile home
or trailer may be placed after the acceptance of the contract to start
construction and upon being granted a building permit. The mobile
home or trailer shall be removed upon final payment for the project and
notification by the Administrative Officer.
D. This section does not affect mobile home sales in a designated
Commercial or Industrial District.
A. Driveways for ingress and egress shall be as required by the Planning
Board.
B. Dimensional requirements. The minimum distance between buildings in
a multifamily development shall be 25 feet. No multifamily dwelling or
required recreation area shall be closer than 50 feet to any property
lines. The only exception is within the CB District, where setbacks shall
be determined through a site plan review.
C. Parking areas may be located in any yard other than the front yard, but
no closer than 20 feet from any property line and shall comply with all
other regulations of the district in which the use is located.
D. Each multifamily dwelling development shall provide a recreation area
or areas furnished with suitable equipment at a standard of 400 square
§ 300-40.12 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.13
237:735
§ 300-40.14. Outdoor recreation.
For go-cart tracks for electric or gasoline-powered go-cart rides, similar
vehicular tracks and miniature golf courses, the following restrictions shall
apply:
feet for the first 10 units and an additional 100 square feet for each
additional five units or fraction of five thereafter.
E. Development applications for multifamily dwelling units shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Board in accordance with
Article 63 (Site Plan Review and Approval) of this chapter.
F. All dwelling units and structures shall comply with the NYS Uniform
Code.
G. Stairways to upper floors shall be located inside the building.
A. Gasoline or electric-powered go-cart rides, similar vehicular tracks:
(1) No person shall cause or permit the establishment of a go-cart
track or similar vehicular track within 500 feet of any residentially
zoned district or within 500 feet of any church, school, park,
playground or existing go-cart track, similar vehicular track or
miniature golf course. For the purposes of this section,
measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
property used as a part of the premises for the track and/or course
to the nearest property line of a residentially zoned district, church
or school or to the nearest boundary of a park or playground.
(2) Operating hours shall be limited to the hours between 10:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. daily.
(3) The sale or use of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.
(4) Adequate toilet facilities for employees and customers shall be
provided on site.
(5) A solid wall having a minimum height of six feet, incorporating
noise-absorbing material on the inside, shall be placed on all sides
of the facility that abut residentially occupied property. Noise levels
shall be limited to 65 dB as measured 75 feet outside the wall. The
remaining sides of the property shall be fenced with a fence having
a minimum height of four feet.
(6) Only operator-owned go-carts or other vehicles shall be allowed.
No individually owned go-carts or other vehicles shall be allowed.
(7) Parking requirements for go-carts and other vehicles are three
parking spaces for every one go-cart or similar vehicle.
B. Miniature golf course uses:
§ 300-40.13 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.14
237:736
§ 300-40.15. Outdoor sales and display.
§ 300-40.16. Outdoor storage.
Outdoor storage shall be allowed only in nonresidential districts and shall
be subject to the following requirements. This section does not affect the
storage of trailers, boats and recreational vehicles as regulated in
§ 300-40.19.
(1) Operating hours shall be limited to the hours between 10:00 a.m.
though 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 10:00 a.m.
through 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
(2) The course shall be fenced with a fence having a minimum height of
four feet.
(3) The sale or use of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.
(4) Adequate toilet facilities for employees and customers shall be
provided on site.
A. The display area shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the
primary structure.
B. The display area shall not block automotive traffic, private sidewalks,
fire lanes, or other travel lanes.
C. The items for display are for sale and said area is not used for storage
purposes.
A. Central Business and Neighborhood Commercial Districts.
(1) Outdoor storage shall not be allowed in the front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage shall not occupy more than 10% of the entire lot
area.
(3) All outdoor storage shall be fully screened to ensure the area is not
visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential districts
or uses.
(4) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide the storage from public view.
(5) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide storage from major highways, passenger rail lines and other
public accessways.
(6) All screening shall be maintained in such a manner as to present a
neat and orderly appearance at all times.
B. General Commercial and Industrial Districts.
(1) Outdoor storage shall not be allowed in the front yard setback.
§ 300-40.14 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.16
237:737
§ 300-40.17. Public utilities.
Public utility installations shall comply with the following:
§ 300-40.18. Quarries and excavation facilities.
(2) All outdoor storage shall be fully screened to ensure the area is not
visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential districts
or uses.
(3) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide the storage from public view.
(4) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide storage from major highways, passenger rail lines and other
public accessways.
(5) All screening shall be maintained in such a manner as to present a
neat and orderly appearance at all times.
(6) Contractor storage must be a minimum of 200 feet from a
residential or open space district.
A. Such facility shall be surrounded by a fence approved by the Planning
Board.
B. The facility shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the Planning
Board.
C. To the extent practicable, equipment shall be stored so as not to be
visible from surrounding properties.
D. Any other requirements as determined by the Planning Board through
Site Plan Review.
A. Expansions, closures, or any other alterations of bank earth product
excavation operations shall require a site plan review by the Planning
Board and may be subject to performance standards contained in other
local laws of the Town or Villages.
B. Compliance with New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation regulations for mining if more than 1,000 tons or 750
cubic yards of materials are removed from a site or more than 100 cubic
yards of materials in or adjacent to any body of water. (See
Environmental Conservation Law, Article 15.)
C. During the restoration of a quarry or excavation facility, the following
shall apply:
(1) The surface slope of any excavation shall not exceed one foot of
vertical rise for each 1 1/2 feet of horizontal distance.
§ 300-40.16 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.18
237:738
§ 300-40.19. Trailers, boats and recreational vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park a trailer,
recreational vehicle or boat on any street, alley, right-of-way or other public
place. No trailer, recreational vehicle or boat shall be parked, used or
occupied on any tract or parcel of land except as herein provided:
§ 300-40.20. Transportation or freight terminal facilities.
(2) The finished floor of the excavation shall conform to adjacent
surfaces and be free of holes, water pools, mounds of debris, and
other potential hazards.
(3) The finished excavation shall be surfaced with a minimum of three
inches of topsoil, graded, and seeded.
D. Open excavations along a street or highway, within 10 feet of a walkway
or public right-of-way, shall be enclosed with a substantial guardrail or
fence and are subject to the regulations set forth in Article 54 of this
chapter. Abutting public properties and streets shall be protected by
proper support to prevent damage.
A. Trailers, recreational vehicles and boats may be placed on a residential
lot as an accessory use for the purpose of storage of such trailers,
recreational vehicles or boats but shall not be parked within the
required accessory side or rear setback of the premises, shall maintain
a minimum front setback of 10 feet and shall comply with § 300-53.14,
Visibility at intersections. For the purpose of clarity, storage as defined
in this § 300-40.19A is an accessory use and shall not be permitted
where no primary use exists. [Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
B. This section does not affect trailer, boat and recreational vehicle sales
or rental in a designated Commercial or Industrial District.
A. Repair and service of commercially licensed vehicles may be permitted
with the issuance of a special use permit for motor vehicle repair within
an enclosed building.
B. Loading doors or docks shall not be located adjacent to any residential
use or zone or along street frontage.
C. Any outdoor storage of materials shall be subject to the outdoor storage
requirements specified in § 300-40.16.
D. Idling of vehicles shall be limited to five minutes in any sixty-minute
period, unless required for mechanical or electrical operations and not
for cabin comfort or nonessential equipment or for emergency
operations. Facility owners shall be responsible for compliance (Ref:
Environmental Conservation Law, Part 217-3).
§ 300-40.18 STORM SEWERS § 300-40.20
237:739
§ 300-40.21. Garage sales. [Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012]
The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five items of
personal property on any portion of a lot in any zoning district, whether
within or outside any residential building, shall constitute a garage sale for
purposes of this chapter. Garage sales shall be for a period not exceeding
three consecutive days. Residential dwellings or lots shall be allowed no
more than three garage sales in any one calendar year, and each such
garage sale must be at least one week apart.
E. A fueling station may be allowed as an accessory use with the issuance
of a special permit.
F. Landscaping and buffering may be required by the Planning Board if
the facility is adjacent to less intensive uses, such as retail, residential,
or mixed uses. Any landscaping or buffering required shall conform to
the standards set forth in Article 54 (Landscaping, Screening, and
Buffer Regulations).
G. The Board shall also take into consideration the character of the area,
the traffic impacts, the proximity to arterial roadways suitable for large
trucks, and other pertinent issues.
§ 300-40.20 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-40.21
237:740
Part 5
Development Standards
ARTICLE 50
Noise Limits
§ 300-50.1. Applicability.
The maximum decibel level radiated by any use or facility at any lot lines
shall not exceed the values in the designated octave bands given in Table
50-1. The sound-pressure level shall be measured with a second-level meter
and associated octave-band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed
by the American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound-Level
Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sound, Z24.3-1944, American
Standards Association, Inc., New York, and American Standard
Specifications for an Octave-Bank Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and
Other Sound, Z24.10-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New
York, New York, shall be used.)
§ 300-50.2. Sound levels.
Where any use adjoins a residential or mixed use district at any point at the
district boundary, the maximum permitted decibel levels in all octave bands
shall be reduced by six decibels from the maximum levels set forth in Table
50-1.
Table 50-1
Sound Levels
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-Pressure
Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 69
75 to 150 60
150 to 300 56
300 to 600 51
600 to 1,200 42
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 38
4,800 to 10,000 35
§ 300-50.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-50.2
237:741

ARTICLE 51
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking Regulations
§ 300-51.1. Intent.
The intent of the following standards is to:
§ 300-51.2. Applicability.
For every building hereafter erected, altered, extended or changed in use,
there shall be provided off-street parking spaces at least as set forth below
as a condition precedent to occupancy of all buildings or land. Off-street
parking, loading and stacking facilities conforming to the requirements of
this article shall be provided as follows:
A. Ensure that any parking area or facility is designed to provide proper
circulation, reduce hazards to pedestrians, and protect the users of
adjacent properties from nuisances caused by the noise, fumes, and
glare of headlights which may result from the operation of vehicles;
B. Reduce congestion on the streets;
C. Ensure there are adequate amounts of parking and loading facilities to
serve the use(s) and users of the property; and
D. Encourage alternative parking designs and modes of transportation to
reduce dependence on single-occupancy vehicular trips and improve
efficiency during travel.
A. New or moved buildings and uses. Parking, loading and stacking
facilities, as required, shall be provided for all buildings and uses
constructed, established or moved to new sites.
B. Increase in intensity of use. An increase in the intensity of use of a
building or premises shall mean the addition of dwelling units, gross
floor area, seating capacity or any other unit of measurement used as a
basis for determining required parking, loading and stacking facilities.
Additional parking, loading and stacking facilities, as required, shall be
provided for any such increases in an existing use.
C. Change in use. When the use of any building or premises is changed to
a different use, parking, loading and stacking facilities, as required,
shall be provided for the different use.
D. Nonconformity parking, loading and stacking facilities. A building, use
or occupancy lawfully existing at the time this article or any
amendment thereto becomes effective, but which does not conform to
the off-street parking, loading and stacking requirements, may be
occupied or continued without such facilities being provided. Any such
spaces that may be provided thereafter shall comply with the
requirements of this article. If an existing building, use or occupancy is
altered so that there is an increase in the number of dwelling units,
§ 300-51.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-51.2
237:743
§ 300-51.3. Minimum required parking spaces. [Amended 3-6-2012
by L.L. No. 1-2012; 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
Parking for all uses and structures shall be provided in accordance with
the table below. Where no requirement is designated and the use is not
comparable to any of the listed uses, parking requirements shall be
determined by the Planning Board based upon the capacity of the facility
and its associated uses. The Planning Board may consult with the Town
or Village Engineer or other resources in its determination. The Planning
Board may require off-street parking and loading spaces in addition to those
required by this article for the safety and general welfare of the public.
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Residential
Single-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily, studio to
1-bedroom
1.5 per dwelling unit
Multifamily, 2-to-3-bedroom
units
2 per dwelling unit
Senior housing 1.3 per dwelling unit
Boardinghouses 0.5 per rooming unit
Government/Cultural/Educational
Schools, elementary and
intermediate
1 per employee, plus 2 per classroom
Schools, secondary 1 per 10 students, plus 2 per
classroom plus 1 per employee
School, occupational/skill
training
1 per instructor, plus 1 per 3 students
Place of worship 1 per 3 seats
Community center 6 per 1,000 square feet
seating capacity, employees or floor area, or if the use is changed to
one requiring more off-street parking, loading and stacking spaces, the
number of such spaces shall be provided at least equal to the number
required for the increased area of the building or use in accordance
with all provisions of this article.
E. Existing facilities. Off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities in
existence on the effective date of this article shall not be reduced below,
or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the
requirements for an equivalent new building or use. In no case shall it
be necessary to continue parking, loading and stacking facilities in
excess of those required by this article for equivalent new buildings or
uses.
§ 300-51.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-51.3
237:744
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Library 2 per 1,000 square feet
Auditorium 1 per 4 seats
Private club 8 per 1,000 square feet
Recreational:
Bowling alley 2 per lane
Skating rink 1 per 5 persons (based on capacity)
Swimming pool 1 per 4 persons (based on capacity)
Tennis club 3 per court
Day care or nursery 1 per 6 enrolled, plus 1 per employee
Hospital 1 per bed, plus 1.5 per employee
(during maximum shift)
Medical clinic, medical office 5 per 1,000 square feet
Nursing home 1 per 2 beds, plus 1.5 per employee
(during maximum shift)
Commercial/Retail
General retail 4 per 1,000 square feet
Food store 5 per 1,000 square feet
Convenience store 5 per 1,000 square feet
Home occupations Maximum of 2
Shopping center of more than
3 stores or 3 acres
1 for every 222 square feet of gross
building square footage
Service
Bank 2 per 1,000 square feet
Bar/tavern/nightclub 1.5 per seat
Bed-and-breakfast lodging 1 per guest bedroom, plus 1 per
owner
Barbershop/beauty salon 1.5 per chair
Dry cleaning/laundromat 2 per 1,000 square feet
Hotel/motel 1 per room, plus 1 for every employee
on a single shift
Funeral homes 10 per 1,000 square feet
Office, professional or business 5 per 1,000 square feet
Restaurant, carry-out 2 per 1,000 square feet
Restaurant, with drive-through 1 per employee, plus 4 per 1,000
square feet
Restaurant, sit-down 0.5 per seat
Vehicle related
§ 300-51.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-51.3
237:745
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Vehicle repair/service or gas
station
2 per bay
Vehicle sales 2 per employee
Vehicle rental 1 per 1,000 square feet floor area
Car wash 1 per employee
Industrial/manufacturing
All uses 1 per employee on a single shift
§ 300-51.4. Location of spaces. [Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
All parking spaces and loading spaces shall be on the same lot as the use
they are intended to serve. With Planning Board approval, uses within 400
feet of a municipal parking lot or designated on-street parking may be
wholly or partially exempt from the off-street parking requirements within
the Central Business Zoning District. Parking for a multifamily use within
200 feet of any multiple residential building is permitted in an Urban Family
Zoning District by special permit from the Planning Board.
§ 300-51.5. Shared parking.
§ 300-51.6. General requirements.
Off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities required by this article
serving rooming houses, three or more residential uses on a single lot and/
A. The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more
commercial or industrial buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is
permitted, provided that the total of such facilities shall not be less than
the sum required of the various buildings or uses computed separately,
and further provided that the land upon which the collective facilities
are located is owned or leased by one or more of the collective users.
B. Shared off-street parking for two or more uses that are located on the
same lot or share a common property boundary and have different peak
parking demands or operating hours may be permitted, provided that:
(1) Parking must be located within 400 feet of the buildings/uses it is
intended to serve.
(2) The applicant must demonstrate that the uses have different peakhour
parking demands or that the total parking demand at one time
would be adequately served by the total number of parking spaces
proposed.
(3) A shared parking agreement must be drafted documenting the joint
use and must be reflected in a deed, lease, contract, easement or
other appropriate document.
§ 300-51.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-51.6
237:746
or nonresidential uses, shall conform to the requirements of this article as
follows:
A. Paving. All parking facilities shall have a smooth, all-weather surface.
Such surface shall be permanent and capable of being kept free of
snow, dust, and dirt and of being permanently marked.
B. Bumper guards and wheel stops. In locations where curbing is not
required, bumper guards shall be used. Bumper guards, not less than
two feet in height, or wheel stops shall be provided adjacent to any
building, wall, fence, walkway, landscaped area or property line to
protect people, property and other vehicles. The wheel stops shall not
be less than 18 inches in from the front of the parking space.
C. Curbing. All front yard perimeter landscaping shall include concrete,
masonry or metal barriers to contain and/or protect landscaping
materials.
D. Drainage. Parking facilities and access driveways shall be graded so as
to provide for the proper control of all surface water.
E. Fire lanes. Parking facilities shall conform to the Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Ordinance of the Town and Villages.
F. Marking. All parking facilities and access driveways shall be clearly
marked with a minimum painted strip of four inches in width.
G. Operation and use. Required parking facilities shall be used exclusively
for the temporary parking of passenger vehicles or light trucks of
patrons, occupants or employees of the structure or use to be served.
Required parking facilities shall not be used to satisfy the berth
requirements for loading facilities, or stacking requirements, nor for
the sale, display, rental or repair of motor vehicles.
H. Separation between parking spaces and dwellings served. All parking
spaces in an open parking facility shall be separated from dwelling unit
walls on the same lot, if the walls contain windows, other than garage
windows, which are on the same or approximately the same level as the
parking facility. The separation shall be at least 10 feet in width, at least
1/2 the width of which shall be unpaved.
I. Parking spaces for the handicapped. Parking facilities shall comply with
the requirements of the New York Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
J. Off-street parking areas shall be screened in accordance with the
landscaping, screening and buffer regulations specified in Article 54 of
this chapter.
K. Customer/employee parking should not be located within 10 feet of a
residential district.
§ 300-51.6 STORM SEWERS § 300-51.6
237:747
§ 300-51.7. Design standards.
L. Parking may not be located within 10 feet of street frontage unless
proper screening or decorative fencing is installed.
M. Off-street parking in commercial and industrial districts may be
provided in any yard space, but shall not be closer than 10 feet to any
front property line.
N. In residential districts, parking may be provided in any yard space
except front yard space; however, parking in front yard space shall be
allowed on hard-surfaced driveways, provided that the parking of such
vehicle shall not obstruct the view of oncoming traffic. The term
"vehicle," as used in this section, shall include, but not be limited to
automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, recreational vehicles, campers and
trailers, including recreational and boat trailers.
O. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). All new or upgraded parking
areas must meet the requirements of the ADA. Upgrading of a parking
lot shall include reconstruction or repaving but not sealing an existing
surface.
A. Aisle widths. Aisle widths shall have the following minimum
dimensions, based on the angle of parking.
(1) Ninety-degree parking. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 24 feet.
This aisle can be used for two-way traffic.
(2) Sixty-degree parking. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 18 feet for
one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(3) Forty-five-degree parking. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 13
feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(4) Thirty-degree parking. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 12 feet for
one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(5) Parallel parking. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 12 feet for oneway
traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
B. Size of parking spaces. The size of the parking spaces shall have the
following minimum dimensions, based on the angle of parking, and
shall be separated by six inches from an adjoining space.
(1) Ninety-, sixty-, forty-five-, and thirty-degree parking. The parking
space shall be at least nine feet wide and 18 feet long.
(2) Parallel parking. The parking space shall be at least nine feet wide
and 21 feet long.
C. Access driveways. Access driveway widths shall have the following
minimum dimensions:
(1) Nine feet for all driveways serving one- or two-family dwellings.
§ 300-51.6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-51.7
237:748
(2) Ten feet for any one-way or 20 feet for any two-way residential
driveway serving three or more dwelling units or a rooming house.
(3) Twelve feet for all one-way nonresidential driveways.
(4) Twenty-four feet for all two-way nonresidential driveways.
D. All parking facilities serving three or more residential units, or
nonresidential uses shall be arranged so that any vehicle entering a
public right-of-way shall do so traveling in a forward motion.
E. Maximum driveway widths in residential districts. In residential
districts only one curb cut per driveway is permitted and a driveway for
a residential use shall have the following maximum width measured at
the street property line: [Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
(1) The maximum driveway width for a single-family dwelling shall be
20 feet.
(2) The maximum driveway width for a two-or-more-family dwelling
shall be 24 feet.
F. Off-street loading and maneuvering. For every building, structure or
part thereof having over 5,000 square feet of gross building area
erected and occupied for commerce, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning,
places of public assembly, industry and other similar uses involved in
the receipt and distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and permanently maintained adequate space for
standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets or alleys. No use shall permit
vehicles delivering or picking up material from its site to use the public
streets as waiting, staging or maneuvering areas except in the CB
District.
(1) Every use which complies with the above definition shall be
provided with at least one truck standing, loading and unloading
space on the premises, not less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in
length, and 14 feet in height. One additional truck space of these
dimensions shall be provided for every additional 10,000 square
feet or fraction thereof of gross area in the building.
(2) Off-street loading facilities for separate uses may be provided
jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the
sum of the separate requirements for each use, and provided that
all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in
relation to the use served are adhered to.
(3) Access to a truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be
provided directly from a public street or alley or from any right-ofway
that will not interfere with public convenience and that will
permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
§ 300-51.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-51.7
237:749
(4) Loading space as required under this section shall be provided in
addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
(5) Off-street loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced with a
dustless, durable, all-weather pavement, which shall be adequately
drained, all subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(6) Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located
next to a residential zone, said loading and unloading area shall be
provided with a buffer adequate to provide a screen to comply with
performance standards. (See Article 54.)
(7) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street loading areas shall
comply with Article 55.
(8) Adequate maneuvering space shall be allocated to prevent vehicles
from backing from or onto the public right-of-way.
(9) Maneuvering space shall not be located within the right-of-way of a
public street.
(10)No driveway providing access to an off-street parking area shall be
located closer than 30 feet to the intersection of public streets.
(11) Snow storage areas: for off-street parking areas greater than 20
spaces, provide a dedicated area independent of required parking/
loading spaces for the placing and storage of snow.
(12) Lighting. All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and
driveways serving commercial and industrial uses shall be
illuminated in conformance with the lighting standards in Article
55. Adequate shielding shall be provided by business uses to
protect adjacent residential zones from the glare of such
illumination and from that of automobile headlights.
(13) Stacking standards for drive-through uses, such as, but not limited
to:
(a) Banks/ATMs: four spaces measured from the teller/ATM.
(b) Car washes: five (self-serve) or 10 (automatic) spaces per bay,
measured from the entrance.
(c) Gas station pumps: four spaces per island side, measured from
the pump island.
(d) Pharmacies: four spaces, measured from the window.
(e) Restaurants: six spaces, measured from the order box.
(f) Oil change/quick lube stations: three spaces per bay.
§ 300-51.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-51.8
237:750
§ 300-51.8. Location and areas computed as parking spaces.
[Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Areas which may be considered as off-street parking spaces include any
private garage, carport or other improved area available for parking other
than a street, entrance and exit lanes or a driveway, except that no vehicle
shall be parked or stored in any required fire lane. For single-family, twofamily
and mobile homes, no more than 50% of the lot width for lots under
60 feet in width or 33% for lots equal to or greater than 60 feet may be used
for parking. For all other uses, refer to § 300-51.6.
§ 300-51.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-51.8
237:751

ARTICLE 52
Sign Regulations
§ 300-52.1. Purpose.
The primary purpose of these sign regulations in the Town and Villages is to
identify the location or occupant for a parcel of land while protecting public
health, safety and general welfare. These regulations also serve to:
§ 300-52.2. General requirements.
The following apply to all signs in the Town and Villages which are erected
or installed after the effective date of this chapter:
A. Ensure right to free speech as protected under the Constitution;
B. Protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate and protect the physical appearance of the
community;
C. Provide businesses with effective means of identification while reducing
visual clutter through the prevention of excessive and confusing sign
displays;
D. Reduce traffic conflicts or hazards by minimizing visual distractions or
obstacles in or visible from the public rights-of-way;
E. Minimize the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property;
F. Avoid personal injury and property damage from unsafe or confusing
signs; and
G. Establish a clear and impartial process for those seeking to install
signs.
A. Signs cannot be located on a public right-of-way or public property and
must be located on the property on which the business is located unless
it is a legally established billboard;
B. No sign shall obstruct the view at the intersection of any streets or be
confused with traffic management signs or signals;
C. If the property/structure contains walls facing more than one property
line, the number of signs and the sign areas will be computed
separately for each face of the building facing a different frontage;
D. Any sign that no longer advertises the use of the property must be
removed within 30 days after written notification from the Code
Enforcement Officer; and
E. Temporary signs:
§ 300-52.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.2
237:753
§ 300-52.3. Signs authorized without permit.
The following types of signs may be erected in the Town and Villages
without obtaining a permit. Although permits are not required for these
signs, the signs shall conform to the height, setback and size requirements
detailed in this chapter.
(1) No temporary sign is allowed for more than 30 days with no more
than one thirty-day extension.
(2) Size of temporary signs is regulated by the provisions in these
regulations, but shall not be in excess of the size permitted for any
permanent sign of similar type or configuration within specific
zones.
(3) Any sign requiring electricity must conform to requirements for
permanent signs requiring electricity under this chapter.
A. Official sign, public notice sign, or warning sign supported by federal,
state or local law (Example: New York State inspection station or
authorized repair shop identification.);
B. Any sign within a building not legible from the street or adjacent lots;
C. Any sign within an enclosed outdoor space, such as athletic field, where
the sign is not legible beyond the property lines;
D. Works of art not displaying a commercial message;
E. Banners not displaying a commercial message;
F. Holiday decorations not displaying a commercial message;
G. Construction signs: one sign per construction project, not exceeding 32
square feet in area in residential districts for a residential subdivision,
such sign to be removed after public improvements accepted, or 64
square feet in all other districts, provided that such signs shall be
removed five days after the completion of construction or the placement
of an approved permanent sign. The signs shall be confined to the
construction site. Construction signs for individual residential
construction projects shall be limited to three square feet in area and
cannot be placed before start of construction and must be removed at
completion of work. [Amended 5-7-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
H. Directional signs: signs which provide direction and are located entirely
on the property to which they pertain and do not advertise a business
and do not exceed four square feet in area. Directional signs include
signs identifying public rest rooms, public telephones, walkways or
signs providing direction, such as parking lot entrance and exit signs,
and those of a similar nature. Such directional signs shall be allowed
within the street setbacks and side and rear yards.
I. Drive-in facilities.
§ 300-52.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.3
237:754
(1) Businesses with drive-in facilities may have one sign, not exceeding
24 square feet for each drive-in lane. The sign shall be located
adjacent to the drive-in lane and shall be easily visible to motorists
using the lane. If the drive-in lane or facility is removed or not
operating for a period exceeding 60 days, the sign must be
removed.
(2) Such signs shall only provide information which will assist the
motorist in using the facility. Such signs may include but shall not
be limited to menus, banking instructions, manual car wash
instructions and other signs of a similar character. Advertising is
not permitted on these signs.
J. Flags: the flags, emblems or insignia of any nation, political subdivision
or corporation flag. Flagpoles shall be subject to the height restrictions
imposed by each respective zoning district. Corporate flags shall be
limited to one per lot and shall count against calculation of permitted
wall signage.
K. Gasoline service station price signs: signs not exceeding three square
feet advertising the price of gasoline and indicating self-service or fullservice,
when attached to a gasoline pump or pump service island.
L. Government signs: signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any government function. There are no bulk requirements
for government signs.
M. Home occupation signs: one sign for each dwelling unit, not to exceed
two square feet in area, indicating the name, location or identification
of a home occupation, with a minimum street setback of 10 feet.
N. House numbers and nameplates: house numbers and nameplates, not
exceeding two square feet in area for each dwelling unit.
O. Memorial signs: memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date
of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part
of the building or when constructed of bronze or other similar
noncombustible material; historical markers erected by any
government body or with a government permit. There are no bulk
requirements for memorial signs.
P. "No Trespassing" and "No Dumping" signs: "No Trespassing" and "No
Dumping" signs not to exceed two square feet in area per sign. Such
signs shall be permitted within the street setback and side and rear
yards.
Q. Multifamily retail and subdivision sales signs. One sign shall be
permitted; its purpose is to advertise the availability of rental units,
subdivision lots and houses. The sign may contain information on rent
levels, numbers of bedrooms, housing prices, financing, descriptive
matter and the like. The sign shall be limited to 32 square feet in size.
The sign may be located on any lot within the subdivision or multifamily
§ 300-52.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.3
237:755
project area, but shall not be located upon a public right-of-way. The
sign shall be subject to the restrictions and regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
R. Notice bulletin boards: notice bulletin boards not over 24 square feet in
area for public, charitable or religious institutions where the same is
located on the premises of the institution.
S. Political and campaign signs: political and campaign signs on behalf of
candidates for public office or measures on election ballots, provided
that the signs are subject to the following regulations:
(1) Political and campaign signs are permitted in all zoning districts.
(2) The signs shall not be erected earlier than 30 days prior to a
primary or special election and 60 days prior to a general election.
All signs shall be removed within five days following said election.
(3) The number of signs on any one parcel of land is not restricted, but
the total combined size of the signs shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area and shall not exceed five feet in height from the
surrounding grade. In addition, in residential zoning districts, no
individual sign shall exceed 16 square feet in size. Signs shall not
be erected in such a manner as to constitute a roof sign.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a sign may be
placed upon any legally existing off-premises sign structure, but
not so as to cover an already existing sign.
(4) No signs shall be located within or over a public right-of-way. All
signs shall comply with the provisions of § 300-53.14, Visibility at
intersections.
(5) This section in no way prohibits the display or use of bumper
stickers, cartop signs and signs inside the window of a building.
T. Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted in the following
situations:
(1) New businesses awaiting the erection of a permanent sign, not to
exceed a period of 30 days.
(2) A business which has lost the use of an existing sign by reason of
fire or other catastrophe, not to exceed a period of 30 days.
U. Real estate signs. One real estate sign on any lot or parcel, provided
that such sign is located entirely within the property to which the sign
applies, is not directly illuminated, does not exceed six square feet in
area in a residential district and 16 square feet in area for industrial/
commercial property in a commercial/industrial zoning district and is
removed within seven days after the sale, closing, rental or leasing.
[Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
§ 300-52.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.3
237:756
V. Sandwich board signs. One sandwich board sign is permitted for each
business. Said sign cannot exceed six square feet in area. Said sign
must be removed at the close of each business day. Said sign must
comply with applicable provisions in § 300-52.7 of this article. Said sign
shall not require a sign permit.
(1) Said sign cannot be located on a public right-of-way or public
property and must be located on the property on which the
business is located.
(2) Businesses located within the Central Business Zoning District,
which under normal circumstances would be prohibited from
erecting a sandwich board due to the lack of ownership of sufficient
frontage, may place a sandwich board sign within the public rightof-
way between May 1 and October 31 of each year during business
hours. Said sign cannot be wider than 1/3 the width of the sidewalk
in front of the business and shall be erected in such a place and in
such a fashion as to make it as unobtrusive as possible for
pedestrian traffic. The Villages shall retain the right to request
movement of the sign if it determines that the sign was not erected
in such a fashion and that a different placement would provide less
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. The business must file with the
Village Clerk a certificate of insurance, annually, naming the
Village as an additional insured, certifying that the applicant has
obtained, from a responsible and reputable company, a policy of
public liability insurance with limits of $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 annual aggregate, for personal injury and
property damage combined, covering any claim, demand or action
for damages, either to person(s) or property, which may arise out of
the placement of the sign within the right-of-way.
W. Limited signs.
(1) Signs and notices advertising an open house, garage sale or similar
event may be placed no more than five days prior to the event and
must be removed within three days of the conclusion of the event.
These signs must be placed on the property where the open house,
garage sale or similar event is being held.
(2) Signs or notices advertising events or activities of churches or
other not-for-profit organizations may be placed no more than 15
days prior to the event and must be removed within three days of
the conclusion of the event. These signs must be placed on the
property where the event or activity is being held or on a
commercially zoned property.
§ 300-52.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.4
237:757
§ 300-52.4. Permitted signs.
The Table of Sign Regulations, located in Table 52-1,94 lists the
requirements for different types of permitted signs that might be proposed
for installation in the Town and Villages. The table addresses each type of
sign by zoning category, listing whether each sign type is permitted in each
zone, the number of signs permitted per site, and the information on sign
size, setbacks, and lighting requirements.
§ 300-52.5. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited:
A. Any sign for which no permit was issued or for which a permit has been
revoked;
B. Any sign that has been abandoned/obsolete or is not properly
maintained, considered structurally unsound, hazardous or otherwise
unsafe;
C. Any sign that contains words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic
nature;
D. Any sign that emits audible sounds, odor, or visible matter;
E. Any sign that may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or
device or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or bears
the words "stop" "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or other
similar words or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal or
device;
F. Signs that interfere with official traffic lights or traffic control devices;
G. Flashing, rotating, revolving signs/lights, except barber poles or holiday
decorations; which do not violate Subsection C, D or E above;
H. Any sign with unshielded lighting devices or reflectors placed to outline
or provide the background of a sign;
I. Animated signs;
J. Signs with mirrors;
K. Permanent banner, pennant, windblown or inflated signs. These may be
permitted as a temporary sign to communicate the opening of a new
business for a total of 10 days;
L. Any portable sign attached to or placed on an unregistered vehicle
parked on private property for the primary purpose of being viewed by
motorists within the right-of-way;
M. Pennants, not affixed to the face of a building; and
94.Editor's Note: Table 52-1, Table of Sign Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-52.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.5
237:758
§ 300-52.6. Specific provisions by zoning category.
(See Table of Sign Regulations, for sign allowances.95)
§ 300-52.7. Construction and design standards.
N. Any sign placed on a curb, sidewalk, hydrant, utility pole, trees or other
objects located on or over any street unless otherwise permitted.
O. Full motion or video signs.
A. Residential districts.
(1) Signs advertising for public, quasi-public, nonprofit, church,
schools, hospital or other similar uses shall be located on the same
premises as the use.
(2) Project identification signs for large, multi-unit developments shall
be permitted for a period not to exceed five years or whenever all
the lots have been sold, whichever occurs first.
B. Nonresidential districts.
(1) Two signs per use are permitted for a single business or industry.
Where contiguous businesses or industries are located on a single
lot, such as, but not limited to, industrial centers, or business
parks, each business or industry shall be permitted two signs and
the lot may be permitted one sign.
(2) 96 Malls or plazas. Where groups of two or more contiguous stores
are located together, one sign per use shall be permitted in addition
to a single freestanding sign for the mall or plaza, subject to the
Table of Sign Regulations (Table 52-1).
A. Design considerations.
(1) Location.
(a) All signs must be located on private property and comply with
the dimension and setback requirements contained in the
Table of Sign Regulations (Table 52-1).
(b) No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to
prevent ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire
escape.
(c) Signs projecting over walkways or sidewalks must have a
minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the
ground of nine feet. Signs projecting over a traffic area, such
95.Editor's Note: The Table of Sign Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding maximum areas, was repealed 5-20-2014
by L.L. No. 5-2014. This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
B(3) as Subsection B(2).
§ 300-52.5 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.7
237:759
as a driveway or parking lot aisle must have a minimum
clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground of 15
feet.
(2) Sign area.
(a) The area of a sign will include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols with the background area,
but will not include any supports, framework, or bracing.
(b) The area of a sign applied to a building will include all
lettering, wording and designs/symbols with the background
area.
(c) When a sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached
to or painted on a surface, the area will be considered to be the
smallest rectangle that encompasses all letters/symbols.
[Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
(d) When computing the area of a double-face sign, both sides are
considered to be a single sign.
(3) Signs shall be constructed from weather-resistant and durable
materials (i.e., metal, lumber/wood, plastic, etc.).
(4) Wind pressure and load requirements. All signs and other
advertising structures shall be designated and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square
foot.
(5) Lettering:
(a) Shall be permanently affixed to the sign; or
(b) Changeable copy shall be enclosed and locked.
(c) Digital messages:
[1] Digital messages or graphics are only permitted on
monument style signs in the General Commercial Zoning
District. Digital messages are prohibited on all other sign
types and in all other zoning districts.
[2] The message shall change no more than once per day and
shall consist of a single color.
[3] Digital message signs shall not be located within 500 feet
of a residentially zoned property as measured along the
street line on which the sign is located.
[4] The illumination from a digital message sign shall be
controlled not to be visible from or cast light or shadows
onto adjacent properties or cause unwanted glare in
accordance with Article 55.
§ 300-52.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.7
237:760
[5] The use of any digital messages on a site shall result in an
overall reduction in the allotted sign area of 25%.
B. Construction specifications.
(1) Compliance with the NYS Uniform Code and other applicable codes
and regulations;
(2) Light fixtures and related wiring will comply with the National
Electric Code, and all electrified signs shall bear an approved
testing laboratory label and all electrical connections shall be
approved by an approved inspection agency;
(3) Transformers, wires, and similar items shall be concealed;
(4) All wiring to freestanding signs will be underground;
(5) All signs and related items will be kept in good repair and safe
condition;
(6) A sign may not obstruct a fire escape;
(7) All signs requiring a permit will display the name and operating
telephone number of the person/organization responsible for the
sign; and
(8) No sign shall be located within six feet of an electrical conductor,
light pole, streetlamp, traffic light, or other utility pole.
C. Illumination.
(1) Light sources shall be shielded to avoid glare/light pollution beyond
property lines and to prevent disturbance to motorists;
(2) No illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street
from any residential district, zone or use shall be illuminated
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the use to
which the sign pertains is open for business during those hours;
(3) No flashing, rotating, intermittent or moving light sources are
permitted; and
(4) Messages that display the time and temperature can be displayed
for not less than four seconds.
D. Landscaping.
(1) The area surrounding any freestanding sign will be landscaped
with plant materials to integrate the sign with the development on
the parcel; and
(2) The area surrounding any freestanding sign will be free from
weeds, rubbish, and flammable material.
§ 300-52.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.7
237:761
§ 300-52.8. Nonconforming signs.
E. Maintenance and removal of signs. [Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
(1) Maintenance and repair. Every sign shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural condition at all times by the
replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting and other acts
required for the maintenance of the sign.
(2) Abandoned signs. Any sign which is located on a property which
becomes vacant for a period of three months or more shall be
deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a
business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership
or management of the business shall not be deemed abandoned
unless the property remains vacant for a period of one year. An
abandoned sign is prohibited, and the sign, including all structural
support to grade level, shall be removed by the owner of the
premises upon which the sign is located.
(3) Dangerous or defective sign. No person shall maintain or permit to
be maintained on any premises one owns any sign which is
dangerous or in a defective condition. Any such sign shall be
removed or repaired by the owner of the premises.
(4) Removal of signs.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause to be removed any
sign, including all structural support to grade level, that
endangers the public safety, such as abandoned, dangerous or
defective signs, signs for which no permit has been issued and
is required or a sign posted on the public right-of-way or on
public property. The CEO shall prepare a notice which shall
describe the sign and specify the violation(s) involved, and
which will state, if the sign is not removed or the violation not
corrected in a set period of time, the sign shall be removed by
the Town of Union or the Village of Endicott or Johnson City. All
notices shall be either personally served or mailed by certified
mail.
(b) For all other signs, the notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the property on which the sign is located.
(c) Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause the immediate removal of a
dangerous sign without notice. For any sign removed by the
Code Enforcement Officer, the cost of the sign removal by the
Town or Villages shall be considered a debt owed to the Town
or Village by the owner of the property and may be recovered
by an assessment against the property.
§ 300-52.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.8
237:762
§ 300-52.9. Permit exceptions.
The following operations shall not be considered as creating a sign insofar
as requiring the issuance of a permit, but the signs shall be in conformance
with all other ordinances and regulations of the Town and Villages:
§ 300-52.10. Required permit information.
All applicants for sign permits shall submit the following:
A. Any sign erected prior to the adoption of this chapter which does not
conform to the provisions of this article is permitted to remain as a
nonconforming sign, provided that the sign:
(1) Was erected under an approved sign permit prior to the adoption of
this chapter; and
(2) Advertises an existing business still in operation.
(3) Replacement of an existing sign face or faces for a new business or
advertiser or change in existing business or advertiser logo without
altering the sign structure is permitted and will not result in a loss
of nonconforming status. [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
B. Loss of nonconforming status. A sign characterized as a nonconforming
sign shall lose its nonconforming status if:
(1) The sign is altered in any way in structure or size (except for
normal maintenance). See § 300-52.9 of this article; or
(2) The sign is relocated; or
(3) The sign structure is replaced. [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
A. Changing the advertising copy or message of an existing approved
painted or printed sign, manually changeable copy sign or similar
approved sign, whether illuminated or nonilluminated painted message
which are all specifically designed for the use of manually replaceable
copy.
B. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign not involving structural changes. Replacement of the plastic
face will be included as an exempt operation, provided that it is due to a
change caused by breakage and/or deterioration of the face, but not for
the substitution of a new or different advertiser.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Location of building or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be
attached or erected.
C. Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign.
§ 300-52.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-52.10
237:763
§ 300-52.11. Expiration of permits.
If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within
90 days of issuance, the permit shall become null and void, unless otherwise
extended in writing by the Code Enforcement Officer, prior to the original
expiration date, for a single ninety-day period.
§ 300-52.12. Permit fees.
The fee for a building permit for any sign requiring a permit is listed in the
adopted Fee Schedule for the Town and Villages.
§ 300-52.13. Notice of violations; time for compliance.
If the Code Enforcement Officer or other designated official shall find that
any sign is unsafe or insecure or constitutes a menace to the public or
has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of this
article or applicable ordinances, he or she shall have the owner of said sign
cited in violation by written notice. From the date of such written notice or
from such date as may be designated, said person in violation shall have 10
days to comply with the requirements of this article or any ordinance.
D. Two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and
methods of construction and attachment to the building or the ground.
E. For signs 150 square feet or more, one copy of stress sheets and
calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and
wind pressure.
F. If the sign is to be illuminated, the lumens.
G. Such other information as the Building Official shall require to show full
compliance with this chapter and any other ordinance of the Town of
Union, Village of Johnson City or Village of Endicott as applicable.
[Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
§ 300-52.10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-52.13
237:764
ARTICLE 53
Setbacks, Yards, and Encroachments
§ 300-53.1. Residential street setbacks.
Where 50% or more of the aggregate street frontage on one side of a
street, as measured 250 feet on each side of the lot and in the same block,
is occupied by buildings, and the average street setback of the existing
buildings is less than the required minimum street setback, the minimum
street setback for any new construction shall be the average setback of the
existing buildings located on the lots within 250 feet of the proposed lot to
be developed. The measurements shall be made in each direction along the
one side of the block.
§ 300-53.2. Minimum lot width at front lot line. [Amended
5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
The minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be no less than the greater
of:
§ 300-53.3. Future street setbacks.
After the planned right-of-way line for future streets, for future extensions
of existing streets or for future street widening (ultimate right-of-way) is
established on the Official Map, buildings shall be set back from such street
line as though it were a street property line.
§ 300-53.4. Street setback encroachments.
The front setback shall be unobstructed except as provided in this section:
A. Half the minimum lot width required by the applicable zoning district;
or
B. Fifteen feet.
A. Uncovered landings shall be permitted, provided that they do not
extend a distance greater than five feet into the street setback.
B. An awning or movable canopy shall not project more than five feet from
a residential building. On a commercial or industrial building, the
marquee or awning may project to the street line, provided that there is
a clear height under the permitted encroachment of 10 feet. [Amended
5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
C. Eaves, gutters, chimneys and bay windows shall not project more than
three feet into the street setback.
D. Open fire escapes shall not project more than four feet into the street
setback.
E. A gatehouse or watchman's post may be permitted by the Planning
Board, as part of site plan review, as an accessory structure to a
§ 300-53.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-53.4
237:765
§ 300-53.5. Side and rear setback encroachment.
Within a designated residential district, eaves, chimneys, gutters and bay
windows shall not project more than three feet into the side and rear
setback.
§ 300-53.6. Obstructions in side and rear yards.
The required side and rear yards, as designated in the Use, Bulk and
Parking Table,97 shall be unobstructed by any buildings or uses, except
for plantings, screening, fencing, driveways and directional signs for the
control of traffic within a parking facility.
§ 300-53.7. Side yard setback requirements for commercial and
industrial districts.
In order to build on the side property line, as permitted in the Use, Bulk and
Parking Table,98 the building shall be of masonry construction, have parapet
walls at least two feet above the highest point of the roof surface and be in
compliance with the New York State Building Code.
§ 300-53.8. Accessory building height and yard requirements.
commercial or industrial use in a designated commercial, industrial or
planned unit development district. The gatehouse or watchman's post
shall not encroach upon the street property line.
F. Expansions.
(1) The expansion shall not encroach into the street setback further
than the existing building.
(2) The expansion shall not encroach into the street setback farther
than 15 feet in from the street property line.
(3) The expansion shall conform to all other bulk requirements.
G. Handicap ramps. Unroofed handicap ramps may extend into the
required front yard setback and shall maintain an eight-foot setback
from the street property line.
A. Accessory use buildings shall be located to the side or rear of the
principal building.
B. Accessory buildings shall comply with the side yard, rear yard and
street setback requirements of the zoning district in which said
accessory use is located.
97.Editor's Note: See Part 2 of this chapter for use and bulk requirements and Article 51 for
parking, loading and stacking requirements.
98.Editor's Note: See Part 2 of this chapter for use and bulk requirements and Article 51 for
parking, loading and stacking requirements.
§ 300-53.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-53.8
237:766
§ 300-53.9. Height exceptions.
§ 300-53.10. Distance between buildings on same lot.
C. Where 50% or more of the aggregate accessory building setbacks on
one side of a street, as measured 250 feet on each side of the lot and in
the same block, is occupied by buildings, and the average setback of the
existing accessory buildings is less than the required minimum
setbacks, the minimum setback for any new accessory building shall be
the average setback of the existing buildings located on the lots within
250 feet of the proposed lot to be developed. The measurements shall
be made in each direction along the one side of the block. [Amended
3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
D. Where the topography is such that the slope of the land exceeds 15%
and, therefore, access to a private garage built back of the front
building line as required by this chapter is, in the approving body's
opinion, impracticable, it shall be permissible to place such garage, not
exceeding 10 feet in height, within the front yard space, but not closer
to the front property line than 18 feet. The approving body for this
provision is the Planning Board if the project is undergoing site plan
review or the Building Official if it is a residential application.
A. No building height limitation contained in this chapter shall restrict the
height of the following buildings or structures:
(1) Barns, silos and other agricultural buildings.
(2) Church spires, cupolas, domes, belfries and flagpoles.
(3) Chimneys, elevator or stair bulkheads, water tanks or cooling
towers.
(4) Radio or television antennas, telecommunications facilities, utility
transmission lines or cables.
(5) Passive and active solar equipment, provided that the placement of
the equipment does not deprive the adjoining properties of access
to solar sky space.
B. None of the exceptions to the height regulations shall be used for
human occupancy.
A. Distance between principal buildings. No detached principal building
shall be closer to another principal building on the same lot than the
average heights of the buildings. For principal buildings set side by
side, the distance between the buildings shall be no less than the
average heights of the principal buildings or the combined side yard
setback of the two buildings as if they were built on separate lots,
whichever is less. In residential districts, where the residential units
are owned through condominium, cooperative or homeowners'
association ownership, the residential unit shall retain all bulk
§ 300-53.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-53.10
237:767
§ 300-53.11. Use of small lots.
Any parcel of land with area or a width less than that prescribed for a lot
in the district in which it is located, which at the time of the adoption of
this chapter was under one ownership and when the owner thereof owns
no adjoining land, may be used as a lot for any purpose permitted in the
district, provided that all other regulations prescribed for the district by this
chapter are complied with. When two or more adjacent lots are in a single
ownership, they shall be considered as being a single lot.
§ 300-53.12. Semiattached and attached residential units.
§ 300-53.13. Maximum contiguous single-family attached units.
There shall be no more than 12 contiguous single-family attached
residential units.
§ 300-53.14. Visibility at intersections.
On corner lots, no obstruction of vision shall be erected, installed, planted,
parked or otherwise placed within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street lines and a straight line adjoining said street lines at
points which are 25 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured
along said street lines. In such area no shrubbery, nor fences of masonry,
wood or other material which creates a solid visual barrier, shall be erected
higher than two feet from the accepted street grade of the abutting top of
curb, or from the crown of the abutting road, if there is no curbing, nor shall
branches or foliage of trees be permitted less than 10 feet from the ground.
An open fence of chain link wire, wrought iron, split, rail or other similar
material which does not screen or obstruct views, light and air may be
permitted in the triangular area, provided that it does not obstruct visibility.
§ 300-53.15. Fences.
requirements of its appropriate district as if there were lot lines for
each unit.
B. Distance between principal building and accessory building. No
accessory building shall be any closer to any principal building or to
another accessory building on the same lot than a distance of eight feet.
Accessory buildings, other than detached accessory garages, shall be
located to the rear of the principal building.
A. In order for a residential building to be considered an attached
structure, units on both sides of the party wall shall be built
simultaneously.
B. Two-family attached buildings shall have only one party wall with
another residential building. The units on both sides of the party wall
shall be built simultaneously.
§ 300-53.10 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-53.15
237:768
§ 300-53.16. Swimming pools.
A. Fences shall not be considered structures under this chapter and, as
such, may be erected in any district, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No fence shall be erected or encroach upon a public right-of-way.
C. Any fence shall have its finished or decorative side facing the adjacent
properties. The fence posts and other supporting structures of the fence
shall face the interior of the area to be fenced.
D. The height of all fences shall be measured from the average finished
grade of the lot at the base of the fence.
E. No solid fences over 24 inches in height shall be permitted in the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight
line joining the street lines at points which are 25 feet in distance from
the point of intersection measured along the street lines. Measurement
of height shall be from the grade of the abutting top of curb or from the
crown of the abutting road, if there is no curbing. Split-rail fences,
cyclone fences or other similarly open fences are permitted in the
triangular area, provided that they do not create a traffic hazard and
block visibility.
F. Except for animal husbandry, stables, riding academies and kennel uses
in an RR District, barbed wire and electrically charged fencing are
prohibited. Barbed wire can also be used in nonresidential districts,
provided that the barbed wire starts at least six feet in height above the
grade.
G. In residential districts, no fences shall be constructed, established or
built in excess of six feet in height, with the exception of tennis or
recreation courts which may be 12 feet in height. In nonresidential
districts, fences may be constructed, established or built up to 10 feet in
height above the average natural grade, provided that they do not
create a traffic hazard.
H. Solid fences shall maintain an eight-foot setback from the street
property line or shall be no greater than three feet in height. If the
fence is to be located on a corner lot, the provisions of Subsection E of
this section shall also apply. Split-rail and similarly open fences are
permitted to be placed in the eight-foot street setback, provided that
they do not create a traffic hazard or block visibility. [Amended
3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
I. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition.
No fence shall be erected which will create a safety problem for people
using the public right-of-way.
A. Noncommercial aboveground or in-ground swimming pools may be
permitted subject to the issuance of a permit by the Code Enforcement
§ 300-53.15 STORM SEWERS § 300-53.16
237:769
Officer, who, when giving such approval, shall certify that the following
regulations are complied with:
(1) All swimming pools shall meet the minimum side and rear yard
requirements of the district in which they are located.
(2) A plot plan indicating elevations with dimensions drawn to scale
shall be submitted for approval. The plot plan shall also show:
(a) Pool dimensions, depth and volume in gallons.
(b) Type and size of filtering system.
(c) Location of filtering system and motor.
B. Safeguards: aboveground pool. Any artificial pool or structure intended
for wading, bathing or swimming purposes which is so constructed as
to be above grade and which has a ladder or steps in order to obtain
access to said pool shall be subject to the requirements that whenever
said pool is not attended by a person of suitable age, that said steps or
ladder to obtain access to said pool shall be removed, raised or
screened so that a person may not gain access to said pool.
C. Any aboveground swimming pool whose structure is less than four feet
in height must be safeguarded with a permanent protective fence, said
fence to be installed so as to encompass the entire perimeter of the
swimming pool. Said fence shall be structurally sound, durable and
must be maintained in such a condition. Said fence shall be a minimum
of 48 inches in height and shall be of wooden or metal construction. All
openings in said fence shall be so constructed as to prohibit the passage
of a two-inch-diameter sphere. The entrance gate or gates shall have a
self-latching device and, except for ingress and egress to and from the
swimming pool area, must be kept closed at all times.
D. Safeguards: in-ground pool. No person or persons, association or
corporation shall maintain an in-ground swimming pool, as defined
herein, without first safeguarding such swimming pool with a
permanent protective fence, said fence to be installed so as to
encompass the entire perimeter of the swimming pool. Said fence shall
be structurally sound, durable and must be maintained in such
condition. Said fence shall be a minimum of 48 inches in height. All
openings in said fence shall be so constructed as to prohibit the passage
of a two-inch-diameter sphere. The entrance gate or gates shall have a
self-latching device and, except for ingress and egress to and from the
swimming pool area, must be kept closed at all times.
§ 300-53.16 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-53.16
237:770
ARTICLE 54
Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Regulations
§ 300-54.1. Intent.
The following standards are intended to implement the Town and Villages
long-term planning goals by assuring an acceptable degree of buffering
between land uses, particularly between residential and nonresidential
uses, including agricultural operations, providing a balance between
developed uses and open space, enhancing the visual and aesthetic
appearance of the community and encouraging preservation of existing
natural features. Specifically, these regulations are intended to:
§ 300-54.2. General requirements.
A. Provide natural visual screening of parking areas and along property
boundaries to protect the existing visual quality of adjacent lands.
B. Reduce surface runoff and minimize soil erosion through the natural
filtering capability of landscaped areas.
C. Provide natural buffers that reduce glare and noise, provide wildlife
corridors and protect wildlife habitats, wetlands, stream corridors and
other significant environmental features.
D. Moderate the microclimate of parking areas by providing shade,
absorbing reflected heat from paved surfaces and creating natural wind
breaks.
E. Enhance the overall visual quality of the community by surrounding
developed areas with a variety of plant materials that are consistent
and compatible with the existing natural vegetation of the area.
A. Development activities requiring site plan approval shall submit, as
part of such approval, a landscaping plan in accordance with Article 54
of this chapter. This shall include, but not be limited to, commercial,
retail, industrial, multifamily residential, and institutional uses.
B. Existing site vegetation and unique site features, such as stone walls,
shall be incorporated into landscaping plans to the maximum extent
feasible. Existing healthy trees which are retained shall be credited
against the requirements of these regulations in accordance with their
size and location.
C. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall require completion of
lot grading, seeding and required landscaping, or posting of a
performance guaranty acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer if
the applicant cannot perform the work due to seasonable
impracticalities. In this case, all landscaping work shall be completed
by June 30th of the year following the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
§ 300-54.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-54.2
237:771
§ 300-54.3. Landscaping standards.
All plant materials must conform to the most current edition of the
American Nursery and Landscape Association's American Standard for
Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1 — 2004). Applicants are required to design and
install landscaping that shall be tolerant of typical environmental conditions
of this region (USDA Hardiness Zone 5). Proper trees shall be chosen where
any height restrictions (i.e. power lines) exist to minimize conflicts and
improper pruning techniques.
D. All required landscaping shall be of healthy stock and planted
according to accepted horticultural practices. Landscaping plans may
also include a landscape maintenance plan as required in Article 54 to
clearly indicate who is responsible for plant maintenance during the
first 24 months after planting, and a performance guaranty may be
posted for assuring replacement in kinds of plants which die or become
diseased within that time at the Planning Board discretion.
E. All required landscaping shall be maintained in healthy condition by the
property owner. Failure to maintain such landscaping or to replace
dead or diseased landscaping required by this chapter shall constitute a
violation of these regulations.
F. Where existing conditions make compliance with these regulations not
feasible, the Planning Board, at its discretion, may approve planters,
plant boxes or pots containing trees, shrubs and/or flowers to comply
with the intent of these regulations.
G. Trees for screening shall be of species and stock that will provide a
visual screen from the ground up, at least five feet in height. Species
adequate for the Town and Village can be determined by a registered
landscape architect, landscape consultant, or other professionals or
using resources such as the National Arbor Day Foundation or the local
Cornell Cooperative Extension.
H. Trees shall have minimum caliper of two inches at the time of planting.
Shrubs shall have a minimum height of two feet at the time of planting.
I. Pedestrian access to sidewalks or buildings should be considered in the
design of all landscaped areas.
A. Perimeter landscaping. Landscaping shall be required along the
perimeter of projects, or within the required setbacks, and shall be
provided except where driveways or other openings may be required.
The Planning Board may consider alternatives to the location of
landscaping materials, based on the existing character of the
neighborhood. For large development projects such as shopping
centers, perimeter landscaping shall apply to the full perimeter of the
project, and not to internal property lines. The linear feet guidelines
below are to be used to calculate the number of required plantings; they
do not require that plantings be uniformly spaced. Rather, grouping of
§ 300-54.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-54.3
237:772
plants consistent with accepted landscape practice is encouraged.
Specific requirements are as follows:
(1) At least one tree for each 40 linear feet of the perimeter of the lot;
and
(2) At least one shrub for each 10 linear feet of the perimeter of the
lot.
B. Parking areas. Parking lots containing 20 or more spaces shall be
internally landscaped so as to provide shade and screening and in order
to facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic. The area
designated as required setbacks shall not be included as part of the
required landscaping. Plantings shall be spaced and grouped consistent
with accepted nursery standards, and shall not be located in a manner
that impedes driver visibility. Specific requirements are as follows:
(1) A landscaped buffer at least 10 feet in width must be provided
between a parking lot and the public rights-of-way. In traditional
village settings, this distance may be reduced to be consistent with
existing setbacks;
(2) Shade trees shall be planted along the frontage, parallel to the
frontage road with a spacing not to exceed 40 feet or consistent
with existing tree spacing on neighboring lots when present;
(3) A minimum of one landscaped island, at least 200 square feet in
size, shall be provided for every 20 parking spaces contained within
each single row of parking. Islands shall be planted with trees and
shrubs with a minimum of one tree per 20 parking spaces;
(4) End islands shall be required for all parking configurations entirely
surrounded by drive aisles, provided that such configurations
contain more than five spaces in a single row and 10 spaces in a
double row. End islands shall completely separate the parking
spaces from the drive aisle;
(5) Landscaped parking lot medians, a minimum of 10 feet in width,
shall be used to completely separate driveway entrance aisles from
parking areas;
(6) Landscaped areas shall contain no less than eight feet in average
width;
(7) Trees and shrubs located within or adjacent to paved areas shall be
salt tolerant;
(8) All plant material adjacent to parking areas, loading areas, and
driveways shall be protected by barriers, curbs, or other means to
prevent damage from vehicles.
(9) All landscaped areas shall be planted with vegetative groundcover
or shall be mulched, so that no bare ground exists; and
§ 300-54.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-54.3
237:773
§ 300-54.4. Landscaping plan.
(10) Plantings shall present a clear view of any driving lane within 15
feet.
C. Screening. To reduce headlight glare from parked vehicles, lighting
from a parking or loading area, as well as reduce noise and airborne
particles, the following standards are provided for parking areas,
loading areas, drive-through lanes, and maneuvering areas.
(1) A landscaped barrier at least 10 feet in width shall be provided to
screen vehicular activity.
(2) If there is insufficient space to accommodate a ten-foot landscaped
area, the Planning Board may allow screening to consist of a wall,
fence, berm, hedge, or other plant materials or combinations
thereof no less than five feet high.
(3) Minimum screening requirements shall also be provided, but not
limited to, the following situations:
(a) Multifamily dwellings abutting single-family or two-family
dwellings.
(b) Commercial, industrial, and institutional uses abutting singlefamily
and two-family residential uses.
(c) Manufactured home communities abutting a public right-ofway,
single-family or two-family use.
(d) Outdoor storage areas specified in Article 40 of this chapter.
(e) New residential development adjacent to active farm
operations or vacant, open fields that contain prime
agricultural soils.
A. The Planning Board may determine that the landscaping plan must be
prepared by a licensed landscape architect, landscape designer or
other professional. All landscaping plans shall contain the following
information:
(1) A title block with the name of the project, the name of the person
preparing the plan, a scale, North arrow and date.
(2) All existing, significant plant materials on the site.
(3) Existing and proposed structures.
(4) Topographical contours at two-foot intervals.
(5) Drainage patterns.
§ 300-54.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-54.4
237:774
§ 300-54.5. Landscaping maintenance.
A landscape maintenance agreement shall be required and executed prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for commercial, industrial,
multifamily residential and institutional uses. The agreement shall ensure
the long-term care of the landscape, making the property owner and/or
lessee responsible for maintaining the quality of all plant material, nonplant
landscaping, and irrigation systems used in conjunction with the
landscaping. Improper maintenance shall be determined through periodic
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 300-54.6. Screened dumpster or service area requirements.
In any district, all areas designated, used or intended to be used as
dumpster or service areas for any building or land use, other than onefamily
and two-family dwelling units, shall be screened from view with
either a wall, a solid fence or a combination of fencing and evergreens
creating a solid visual barrier to a height of at least five feet above grade
level on all sides where the adjacent land is in a residential district or a
residential use.
(6) Location, size and description of all landscape materials existing
and proposed, including all trees and shrubs, and shall identify
those existing plant materials that are to be protected or removed.
(7) Landscaping of parking areas, access aisles, entrances, common
open areas, recreation areas, and perimeter buffer areas.
(8) Other information as may be required by the Code Enforcement
Officer and/or the Planning Board.
B. Alternative landscaping plans may be submitted, provided that they
meet the purpose and intent of these regulations.
A. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, weeding,
mowing (including trimming at the base of fencing), fertilizing,
mulching, proper pruning, and removal and replacement of dead or
diseased trees and shrubs on a regular basis.
B. All landscaping and plant material that is missing, dead, decaying, or
injured as of September 30 shall be replaced by June 30 of the following
year at the owner's expense. The replacement shall be of the same
species and size unless otherwise approved.
C. Irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize spray on buildings,
neighboring properties, roads or sidewalks; maintained in proper
operating condition and conserve water to the greatest extent feasible
through proper watering techniques.
§ 300-54.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-54.6
237:775

ARTICLE 55
Outdoor Lighting Regulations
§ 300-55.1. Intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations to allow for outdoor
illumination levels which are appropriate for the use, while promoting
safety and security, and minimizing the undesirable side effects of excessive
illumination such as glare, light trespass, and light pollution. Over time, it
is the intent that this section will allow for reasonably uniform illumination
levels in the community.
§ 300-55.2. Applicability.
This regulation shall apply to all new outdoor lighting fixtures, the
expansion and alteration of existing fixtures, as well as the replacement of
lighting fixtures; except any repair or maintenance.
§ 300-55.3. Approvals required.
For uses which require a site plan review, the Planning Board may require
a lighting site plan to be submitted showing the location, number, type/
style, mounting height, and lighting levels produced on the ground (i.e.,
photometric report). All other uses shall conform to the general
requirements contained herein.
§ 300-55.4. General requirements/standards.
§ 300-55.5. Specific requirements/standards.
A. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be shielded or otherwise contained on
the property from which it originates (known as "light trespass
limitations").
B. Exterior lighting fixtures on commercial, industrial, institutional, and
multifamily properties shall conform to the Illuminating Engineer
Society of North America (IESNA) criteria for full cutoff fixtures. In
addition, the lighting levels shall be designed to meet the minimum
requirements of the latest recommended levels set forth by IESNA.
Where no standard from IESNA exists, the Planning Board shall
determine the appropriate level, taking into account levels for the
closest IESNA activity.
C. To minimize the indiscriminate use of illumination, lighting, except as
required for security, shall be extinguished during nonoperating hours.
Where practicable, lighting installations are encouraged to include
timers, sensors, and dimmers to reduce energy consumption and
unnecessary lighting.
A. Parking lots. Parking lots shall not exceed light levels necessary for
safety and for locating vehicles at night. The lighting plan shall be
§ 300-55.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-55.5
237:777
§ 300-55.6. Exemptions.
The following types of outdoor lighting are exempt from this regulation
unless otherwise specified:
§ 300-55.7. Prohibited lighting.
The following lighting is prohibited:
designed so that the parking lot is lit from the outside perimeter inward
and/or incorporate design features with the intent of eliminating off-site
light spillage.
B. Canopy and roof overhang. Lights installed on canopies or roof
overhangs shall be recessed so that the lens cover is flush with the
bottom surface of the canopy or overhang. Lights shall not be mounted
on the sides or top of the canopy or overhang.
C. Outdoor signs. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor sign shall
be mounted on the top of the sign and shall be shielded or directed in
such a way that the light illuminates the sign only. Internal illumination
of a sign shall be concealed behind opaque, translucent, or other similar
types of glass or plastic.
D. Bottom-mounted or up-lighting. To comply with "dark skies" and
minimize unnecessary lighting, up-lighting shall be only allowed for
flagpoles that display federal, state, and/or local government flags only,
provided that the illumination is directed onto the flagpole only.
E. Security cameras. Facilities which employ security cameras may
employ appropriate lighting to ensure proper function during all times
when such cameras are in use.
A. Street lighting installed by the Town or Villages, Broome County
Highway Department, or the New York State Department of
Transportation.
B. Low-voltage lighting as defined by the National Electric Code (NEC).
C. Holiday lighting.
D. Temporary construction and emergency lighting needed by police,
emergency or highway crews, provided the light is extinguished upon
completion of the work.
E. Hazard warning lights required by a federal or state regulatory agency,
except that all fixtures used must be as close as possible to the federally
required minimum output.
F. Lighting associated with farm or agricultural operations. However,
farm or agricultural operations within 100 feet of an adjacent
residential dwelling shall be shielded to prevent light trespass onto the
adjoining property.
§ 300-55.5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-55.7
237:778
A. Blinking, flashing, strobe or search lights.
B. Exposed strip lighting used to illuminate building facades or signs.
C. Any light that may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device.
§ 300-55.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-55.7
237:779

ARTICLE 56
Nonresidential Design Standards
§ 300-56.1. Purpose.
The nonresidential design guidelines and standards are established for
commercial and industrial areas outside of the Central Business Districts.
The guidelines and standards, through the review and regulation of design
characteristics, preserve and promote the unique character of the Town
and Villages. The guidelines and standards are intended to encourage lively,
pedestrian-friendly and attractive streetscapes where local residents and
visitors enjoy walking, biking, driving and shopping.
§ 300-56.2. General building design.
§ 300-56.3. Facades.
A. The massing and proportion of new front facades shall relate to the
proportion of surrounding buildings.
B. New construction shall respect existing building widths by providing a
horizontal division of the facade into visible building increments no
larger than the average width of existing buildings in the corridor.
Facades may be subdivided through the use of window patterns, slightly
projecting bays, pilasters, or other elements.
C. To the maximum extent practical, all roof-mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be
visible from any public right-of-way or residential district within 150
feet of the subject lot, measured from a point five feet above grade.
D. Alternative energy sources, such as solar panels or shingles, are
encouraged and should be incorporated into the design of the building
so as not to detract from the overall design.
E. Developers and builders are encouraged to utilize roofing materials
that reflect sunlight (i.e., lighter colors) or incorporate vegetated
roofing on at least 50% of the roof area. Methods such as these
decrease heating and cooling needs on a building by reflecting sunlight
rather than absorbing it.
A. Exterior building walls facing streets or pedestrian walkways shall
include windows, building entrances and other architectural features to
create an interesting streetscape and comfortable pedestrian realm.
Appropriate facade articulation includes the use of bays, insets,
balconies, porches, or stoops related to entrances and windows.
B. Along street facades, all new industrial construction shall provide areas
of transparency equal to 20% of the wall area and all new commercial
construction shall provide areas of transparency equal to 40% of the
wall area. The use of mirrored or tinted glass with light transmittance
of less than 40% is prohibited.
§ 300-56.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-56.3
237:781
§ 300-56.4. Transitions to residential uses.
All commercial and industrial development shall employ building and site
design standards to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential
development. To the maximum extent practicable, commercial and
industrial development shall employ a minimum of four of the following
techniques when developed adjacent to a residential use:
C. Along street facades, all exterior building walls and structures shall be
constructed with durable materials, such as masonry, stone, brick,
finished wood, cement fiber clapboard, stucco or glass. Evidence should
be submitted that demonstrates that the exterior building material has
sufficient impact resistance at the pedestrian level to withstand normal
wear.
D. No more than three exterior building materials shall be used on any one
side of a building.
E. Changes in materials shall occur at inside corners. Material changes at
the outside corners or in a plane shall be avoided.
F. On corner lots, the primary facade of commercial buildings shall be
oriented to face the principal street rather than side streets.
G. The front facade and main entrance shall face a public street and shall
have a direct pedestrian connection to the street.
A. Use similar building setback.
B. Use similar building height.
C. Use similar roof form.
D. Use similar exterior materials.
E. Mitigate the larger mass of commercial buildings with facade
articulation.
F. Provide green/open space.
(1) Use small green spaces, courts, squares, parks, plazas, and similar
spaces.
(2) Use existing natural features as transitions, including natural
differences in topography (not retaining walls), streams, existing
stands of trees, and similar features. When existing natural
features are used as transitions, the Town or Villages may still
require that adequate pedestrian connections to adjacent land uses
be accommodated.
§ 300-56.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-56.4
237:782
ARTICLE 57
Central Business District Design Standards
§ 300-57.1. Applicability.
These standards and guidelines shall be applied to nonresidential
development in the Central Business District of the Villages.
§ 300-57.2. Building scale and location.
§ 300-57.3. Facades.
A. New construction shall have a maximum setback of zero to five feet
from the public right-of-way. Relief from this provision may be provided
for pedestrian amenities, such as recessed entries or chamfered
corners.
B. New construction shall extend to both side property lines.
C. New construction shall be or appear to be two stories in height and no
greater than three stories in height.
D. New construction or remodeling shall incorporate a roof form which
reflects the adjacent late 19th or early 20th century buildings. Flat roof
slopes shall slope to the back and will have a decorative cornice at the
top of the building. Peaked or gable roofs shall have significant
overhangs and decorative brackets are encouraged.
E. Entry points shall be located to afford direct access from the sidewalk.
Corner buildings may have two separate entry points or a single entry
point at the corner.
F. All of the facades of the building which face a public street shall be
architecturally consistent (i.e., building materials, style, etc.) with each
other.
A. Building facades shall reflect the late 19th or early 20th century style of
the Villages.
B. The pedestrian zone (two feet to eight feet above the sidewalk) shall
have a minimum of 60% clear glass. Opaque or heavily tinted glass is
not permitted.
C. The pedestrian zone should not be obscured to allow visual access to
the interior of the building. Displays that allow visual access of a
minimum of three feet into the building (excluding window treatments
such as curtains or blinds) shall be permitted.
D. A minimum of 25% of the facade for the upper floor shall incorporate
transparent glass openings.
§ 300-57.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-57.3
237:783
§ 300-57.4. Materials.
§ 300-57.5. Awnings, doors, and windows.
E. Existing windows shall not be covered up or changed in size unless the
proposed change is part of an effort to restore the original appearance
of the building.
F. No external security devices (coiling shutters, accordion gates, etc)
shall be utilized. Alternative security systems, such as lighting, alarms,
and interior barriers, are to be used when necessary.
G. A visual separation shall be provided between the first and second story
of a building. This element may consist of decorative trim, awnings, or a
change of material that creates added relief in order to add a shadow
line that delineates the end of the first story.
H. Large buildings, greater than 40 feet in width, shall be designed to look
like multiple smaller buildings.
A. All new construction or remodeling that is visible from the public rightof-
way shall utilize materials that appear to be smaller in scale, such as
brick or clapboard. Larger-scale materials, such as concrete block, shall
be limited to the rear of the building.
B. Brick selected for new construction or renovation shall reflect the
surrounding late 19th or early 20th century buildings.
C. Vertical siding is permissible if it reflects the late 19th or early 20th
century style architecture.
D. All wood shall be finished using either stain or paint. All metal shall be
colored; clear coated aluminum or stainless steel is not permitted
unless it already exists.
A. Awnings shall be consistent with materials used in the late 19th or early
20th century (i.e., canvas, wood, etc.).
B. If awnings are placed on a facade, they shall be consistent with the
shape of the window that they are located over. For example, an awning
placed over an arched window shall be arched and an awning placed
over a rectangular window shall be a flat-topped awning.
C. Awnings shall have a triangular or curved profile.
D. Awnings may not be backlit.
E. Doors should allow visual access to the interior of the building. If the
door is solid, it shall be multi-panel. All doors shall be painted or stained
to accent the building.
§ 300-57.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-57.6
237:784
§ 300-57.6. Signage.
These following requirements are intended to augment the sign regulations
outlined in Article 52. In cases where there are conflicting requirements,
this section shall take precedence.
§ 300-57.7. Additional requirements.
A. Signage must be located in a manner that creates a pedestrian-friendly
atmosphere. Methods to be encouraged are: attached to the facade of
the building, hanging signs suspended above the sidewalk, or
placement on an awning.
B. The size and location of the signs should respect the architectural
elements of the building.
C. Signs painted or posted on the interior of storefront windows should not
obstruct visual access to the interior of the building.
D. Temporary signs should be designed and placed in a manner that does
not obscure visual access to the interior of the building.
E. Pole signs are prohibited within the CB District. Detached signs shall
consist of a monument sign no taller than five feet in height and
constructed using materials that are consistent with § 300-57.4.
F. Perpendicular signs are permitted. Perpendicular sign shall not project
more than five feet from the facade of the building to which it is
attached. There must be a minimum of nine feet of clearance between
the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk. The maximum size of a
perpendicular sign is 16 square feet.
G. Sandwich board signs are permitted within the CB District if they meet
the following requirements:
(1) The maximum size of a sandwich board sign may not exceed six
square feet per side.
(2) The sign must be removed and stored in an area not visible from
the public right-of-way during nonbusiness hours.
(3) Sandwich board type signs should be consistent (colors, graphics,
etc) with the building-mounted signs.
(4) The business owner must have an insurance policy that includes
the sandwich board sign.
A. The demolition of any structure within the CB District is considered an
unlisted action under SEQR. Site plan approval of a proposed
redevelopment plan for the property must be obtained prior to the
issuance of a demolition permit. Relief from this provision may be
granted by the Village Board of Trustees if the structure is deemed to
be a safety hazard by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 300-57.6 STORM SEWERS § 300-57.7
237:785
B. Drive-through facilities must be in conjunction with a permitted use.
Stand-alone drive-through facilities are prohibited.
C. A drive-through facility must be placed to the rear of the structure in
order to ensure that its presence does not obstruct pedestrian access to
the building and along the public right-of-way. A detached facility may
be used to accomplish this.
§ 300-57.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-57.7
237:786
ARTICLE 58
Solar Energy Systems
[Added 4-17-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 300-58.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to facilitate the development and operation of
solar energy systems. Solar energy systems may be appropriate in all zoning
districts when measures are taken, as provided in this chapter, to minimize
adverse impacts on neighboring properties and protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
§ 300-58.2. General requirements.
§ 300-58.3. Minor solar energy systems.
Minor solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts in the
Village as an accessory use. Building permits shall be required for
installation of minor solar energy systems. All minor solar energy systems
shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward
any roads and buildings on neighboring properties. All minor solar energy
systems sited at grade shall also be located in a side or rear yard.
A. Where applicable, and unless more restrictive regulations also apply,
the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all solar energy systems.
B. Where site plan review and approval is required elsewhere in the
regulations of the Village for a development or activity, the review shall
include a determination of the adequacy, location, arrangement, size,
design, and general site compatibility of any proposed solar energy
system.
C. All solar energy system installations must be performed by a qualified
installer, in accordance with applicable electrical and building codes,
the manufacturer's installation instructions, and industry standards.
Prior to operation all electrical connections must be inspected by the
Village Code Enforcement Officer, or by an appropriate electrical
inspector or agency, as determined by the Village. In addition, any
connection to the public utility grid must be inspected by the
appropriate public utility.
D. If batteries are included as part of the solar energy system, then, when
in use, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure meeting
New York State Building Code requirements and, when no longer used,
shall be disposed of in accordance with the laws and regulations of
Broome County and other applicable laws and regulations.
E. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its originally intended
function for more than 12 consecutive months, the property owner shall
remove the solar energy system no later than 90 days after the end of
such twelve-month period.
§ 300-58.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-58.4
237:787
§ 300-58.4. Major solar energy systems.
A. Major solar energy systems are prohibited in the following districts:
NC, USF, SSF, UTF, UMF, and SMF.
B. In all other districts, major solar energy systems are permitted by
special permit pursuant to Article 66 of the Zoning Code, subject to site
plan approval from the Village Planning Board and the granting of all
other necessary approvals. Each system, along with its site and
stormwater management plan, shall be reviewed by the Village
Engineer prior to final system and plan approval.
C. In addition to those requirements set forth in Articles 63 and 66 of the
Zoning Code, governing site plan and special permit approval, the
following terms and conditions apply to all major solar energy systems:
(1) Lot coverage. The total coverage of all buildings and structures on
a lot shall not exceed the lesser of that allowed in the district, or
75% of the total parcel area.
(2) Height and setback restrictions.
(a) The maximum height for system components located on the
ground or attached to a framework located on the ground shall
not exceed 15 feet in height above ground. The maximum
height for system components located on a roof or attached to
a framework located on the roof shall not exceed the maximum
building height allowed in the district.
(b) All system components shall have a fifty-foot setback from any
property line or, if the parcel adjoins a residential use, a
setback of 200 feet from the property line adjoining the
residential use, unless, in either case, the district's regulations
require a greater setback.
(c) The owner or operator shall provide a landscaped buffer
around all system components to provide year round screening
from neighboring properties and roads.
(3) Design standards.
(a) Removal of trees and other existing vegetation shall be
minimized or offset with planting elsewhere on the property.
(b) Roadways within the site shall be constructed of impervious
materials and shall be designed to meet the requirements for a
fire access road as detailed in the Fire Code of New York State.
(c) All on-site utility and transmission lines shall, to the extent
feasible, be placed underground.
§ 300-58.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-58.4
237:788
(d) All components shall be designed and located in order to
prevent reflective glare toward any roads or buildings on
neighboring properties.
(e) All mechanical equipment, including any structure for
batteries or storage cells, shall be enclosed by a minimum sixfoot-
high fence with a self-locking gate, and provided with
landscape screening.
(f) Each system shall be designed to minimize the total acreage of
developed land.
(g) There shall be a minimum of one parking space to be used in
connection with the maintenance of the system. Such parking
space shall not be used for the permanent storage of vehicles.
(4) Other criteria.
(a) A major solar energy system to be connected to the utility grid
shall provide a proof of concept letter from the utility company
acknowledging the solar farm will be connected to the utility
grid in order to sell electricity to the public utility.
(b) Signs.
[1] A sign not to exceed eight square feet shall be displayed on
or near the main access point and shall list the facility
name, owner and with an emergency phone number where
the owner and operator can be reached on a twenty-fourhour
basis.
[2] A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations.
(c) A system owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures.
The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of
maintaining the major solar energy system and any access
road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
(5) Abandonment.
(a) All applications for a major solar energy system shall be
accompanied by a decommissioning plan to be implemented
upon abandonment, or cessation of activity, or in conjunction
with removal of the facility, prior to issuance of a building
permit.
(b) An applicant's failure to begin and make substantial steps
towards completion of the project within 18 months after
receiving final site plan approval may be deemed abandonment
§ 300-58.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-58.4
237:789
of the project and require implementation of the
decommissioning plan to the extent applicable.
(c) The decommissioning plan must ensure the site will be
restored to a useful, nonhazardous condition without delay,
including, but not limited to, the following:
[1] Removal of aboveground and belowground equipment,
structures and foundations.
[2] Restoration of the surface grade and soil after removal of
equipment.
[3] Revegetation of restored soil areas with native seed mixes,
excluding any invasive species.
[4] The plan shall include a period for the completion of site
restoration work.
(d) In the event the facility is not completed and functioning within
18 months of the issuance of the final site plan approval, the
Village may notify the operator and/or the owner to complete
construction and installation of the facility within 180 days. If
the owner and/or operator fails to perform, then, absent good
cause shown, the Village may notify the owner and/or operator
to implement the decommissioning plan. The decommissioning
plan must be completed within 180 days of notification by the
Village.
(e) Upon cessation of activity of a constructed facility for a period
of one year, the Village may notify the owner and/or operator of
the facility to implement the decommissioning plan. Within 180
days' of notice being served, the owner and/or operator can
either restore operation equal to 80% of approved capacity, or
implement the decommissioning plan.
(f) If the owner and/or operator fails to fully implement the
decommissioning plan within the 180-day time period, the
Village may, at its discretion, provide for the restoration of the
site in accordance with the decommissioning plan and may
recover all expenses incurred for such activities from the
defaulted owner and/or operator. The cost incurred by the
Village shall be assessed against the property, shall become a
lien and tax upon the property, and enforced and collected with
interest by the same officer and in the same manner as other
taxes.
(g) The site developer shall purchase a bond not less than 20% of
the project installation cost prior to permits being issued for
any major solar energy system project. The bond shall be in
place for the life of the facility and shall be used to fund the
decommissioning of the facility in the event it is abandoned.
§ 300-58.4 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-58.4
237:790
The bond shall be reviewed and approved by the Village
attorney prior to the issuance of project-related building
permit.
§ 300-58.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-58.4
237:791

Part 6
Review And Approval Procedures
ARTICLE 60
General Provisions
§ 300-60.1. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to all the procedures in this part (Part 6)
unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 300-60.2. Application submittal.
A. Form of application. Applications required under this Zoning Ordinance
must be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer must develop
checklists of application submittal requirements and make those
checklists available to the public. Application forms and checklists of
required submittal information are available in the Code Enforcement
Office.
B. Completeness and accuracy review.
(1) An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form,
includes all required information and is accompanied by the
required filing fee.
(2) If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Code
Enforcement Officer must provide paper or electronic written
notice to the applicant along with an explanation of all known
deficiencies in the application that will prevent competent review
of the application. No further processing of the application will
occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not
corrected by the applicant within 60 days, the application will be
considered withdrawn.
(3) No further processing of incomplete applications will occur, and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle.
When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed
in the next available processing cycle.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may require that applications or
plans be revised before being placed on the agenda of a review or
decisionmaking body if the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that:
(a) The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent
evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with Zoning
Ordinance standards; or
§ 300-60.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-60.2
237:793
§ 300-60.3. Public hearing process.
(b) The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan's/application's compliance with Zoning Ordinance
standards.
C. Application sufficiency and acceptance. Applications deemed complete
will be considered to be in the processing cycle and will be reviewed by
the Code Enforcement Officer and other review and decisionmaking
bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures
of this Zoning Ordinance.
D. Application filing fees. Application filing fees are required for
processing permit and applications to the governing boards, Planning
Boards, and Boards of Appeals. The fees help offset the cost of
providing public notice, personnel costs for plan/permit reviews and
field inspections. Fees are not required with applications initiated by
the governing body. Application fees are nonrefundable.
A. Application processing cycles. The Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Department as applicable, after consulting with review and
decisionmaking bodies, shall promulgate processing cycles for
applications. Processing cycles may establish:
(1) Deadlines for receipt of complete applications;
(2) Dates of regular meetings;
(3) The scheduling of agency and staff reviews and reports; and
(4) Time frames for review and decisionmaking.
B. Public hearings.
(1) Parties in interest and citizens must be given an opportunity to
appear and be heard at required public hearings, subject to
reasonable rules of procedure.
(2) A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be
continued to a later date without providing additional notice as
long as the continuance is set for specified date and time and that
date and time is announced at the time of the continuance.
(3) If a public hearing is tabled, deferred or postponed for an indefinite
period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public
hearing, new public notice must be given before the rescheduled
public hearing. If the applicant requests a postponement, the
applicant must pay all costs of renotification.
C. Public hearing notices.
§ 300-60.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-60.3
237:794
§ 300-60.4. Action by review bodies and decisionmaking bodies.
(1) Newspaper notice. Whenever the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance require that newspaper notice be provided, the notice
must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality.
(2) Mailed notice.
(a) Whenever the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance require that
notices be mailed, the notices must be sent by United States
Postal Service first class mail.
(b) Addresses must be based on the latest property ownership
information available from the real property assessment
records. When required notices have been properly addressed
and deposited in the United States mail, failure of a party to
receive such notice will not be grounds to invalidate any action
taken.
(3) Posted notice. When the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
require that posted notice be provided, at least one notice sign
must be posted on each public street frontage abutting the subject
property in a location plainly visible to passersby.
(4) Content of notice. All required public hearing notices must:
(a) Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
(b) Describe any property involved in the application by street
address or by general description;
(c) Describe the general nature, scope and purpose of the
application or proposal; and
(d) Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
A. Review and decisionmaking bodies may take any action that is
consistent with:
(1) The regulations of this Zoning Ordinance;
(2) Any rules or bylaws that apply to the review or decisionmaking
body; and
(3) The notice that was given.
B. Review and decisionmaking bodies are authorized to defer action or
continue a public hearing in order to receive additional information or
further deliberate.
§ 300-60.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-60.5
237:795
§ 300-60.5. Conditions of approval.
When decisionmaking bodies approve applications with conditions, the
conditions must relate to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed
use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the
use or development.
§ 300-60.6. Review and decisionmaking criteria; burden of proof or
persuasion.
In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application
complies with all applicable review or approval criteria. Applications must
address relevant review and decisionmaking criteria.
§ 300-60.6.1. Code compliance required. [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L.
No. 4-2016]
The commencement or continuation of any activity regulated by this chapter
that is not in compliance with the express provisions of this chapter, or that
is not in compliance with the express provisions of any site plan, special
permit or variance including any attached plans, findings or conditions,
shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to enforcement under the
terms of this article and New York Law.
§ 300-60.7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 5-20-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a penalty or fine up to and not to exceed $250 or to a term of
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 300-60.5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-60.7
237:796
ARTICLE 61
Text Amendments
§ 300-61.1. Authority to file.
Amendments to the text of this Zoning Ordinance may be initiated only by
the governing body or by a petition requesting the amendment presented to
the governing body.
§ 300-61.2. Notice of hearing.
Notice of required public hearings on Zoning Ordinance text amendments
must be provided as required by the governing body and by state law. (See
§ 300-60.3C for additional information on public hearing notices.)
§ 300-61.3. Planning Board review and report.
The Planning Board must review all proposed Zoning Ordinance text
amendments and prepare a report that evaluates the proposed amendment
in light of adopted plans, the relevant provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
and the review criteria of § 300-61.7.
§ 300-61.4. Referrals.
§ 300-61.5. State Environmental Quality Review.
For Zoning Ordinance text amendment applications subject to SEQR
requirements, all required environmental reviews must be completed
before final action is taken on the amendment.
§ 300-61.6. Hearing and final action by governing body.
A. Whenever required under §§ 239-l and 239-m of the General Municipal
Law, Zoning Ordinance text amendments must be forwarded to the
County Planning Department for review prior to final action by the
governing body.
B. If any proposed amendment consists of a change in the district
classification applying to real property within 500 feet of a municipal
boundary, the Town Clerk shall refer the proposed amendment to the
chief elected official of the affected municipality, prior to final action.
A. After receiving the report of the Planning Board, the governing body
must deny the proposed amendment or convene its own public hearing
on the proposed text amendment.
B. Following the public hearing, the governing body may act to approve
the proposed text amendment, approve the proposed text amendment
with modifications or deny the proposed text amendment. The
governing body may also return the application to the Planning Board
for further consideration.
§ 300-61.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-61.6
237:797
§ 300-61.7. Review criteria.
In reviewing and making decisions on Zoning Ordinance text amendments,
the Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board and governing body must
consider at least the following criteria:
§ 300-61.8. Protest petitions.
In the case of a protest against any amendment, such amendment shall
not become effective except in accordance with the provisions of Village or
Town Law.
C. The governing body may act by a simple majority vote of those
governing body members, except when a valid protest petition has been
submitted in accordance with § 300-61.8, approval or approval with
modifications requires a majority plus one vote of the governing body.
D. The municipal Clerk shall notify, by mail, the petitioner of the action
taken by the governing body.
E. If the governing body approves the amendment, supplement, change or
modification to the text of this chapter, the Zoning Code shall be
amended after publication as required by local law.
F. The governing body may, in order to protect the public health, safety,
welfare and environmental quality of the community, attach to its
resolution approving the petition, additional conditions deemed
necessary to achieve the review criteria.
A. Whether the proposed Zoning Ordinance text amendment corrects an
error or inconsistency in the Zoning Ordinance or meets the challenge
of a changing condition;
B. Whether the proposed Zoning Ordinance text amendment is in
substantial conformance with the adopted plans and policies of the
municipality; and
C. Whether the proposed Zoning Ordinance text amendment is in the best
interests of the municipality as a whole.
§ 300-61.6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-61.8
237:798
ARTICLE 62
Zoning Map Amendments
§ 300-62.1. Authority to file.
Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezonings) may be initiated only by the
governing body or by a petition requesting such change, presented to the
governing body, duly signed by the owners of at least 50% of the frontage
of the parcels included within the area proposed to be rezoned. Rezoning
petitions may be filed by the owner or by the owners' authorized agent.
§ 300-62.2. Application filing.
Complete applications for Zoning Map amendments must be filed with the
Village or Town Clerk for consideration by the Village or Town Board. If the
Town or Village Board decides to entertain the petition, it shall be referred
to the respective Planning Board pursuant to § 300-62.4. If the governing
board decides to not to entertain the petition it shall be deemed denied 60
days after filing.
§ 300-62.3. Notice of hearing.
Notice of required public hearings on Zoning Map amendments must be
provided as required by the governing body and by state law. (See
§ 300-60.3C for additional information on public hearing notices.)
§ 300-62.4. Planning Board review and report.
The Planning Board must review all proposed Zoning Map amendments
and prepare a report that evaluates the proposed amendment in light of
adopted plans, the relevant provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the
review criteria of § 300-62.8.
§ 300-62.5. Referrals.
§ 300-62.6. State Environmental Quality Review.
For Zoning Map amendment applications subject to SEQR requirements, all
required environmental reviews must be completed before a public hearing
is held and final action is taken on the amendment.
A. Whenever required under §§ 239-l and 239-m of the General Municipal
Law, Zoning Ordinance Map amendments must be forwarded to the
County Planning Department for review prior to final action by the
governing body.
B. If any proposed amendment consists of a change in the district
classification applying to real property within 500 feet of a municipal
boundary, the Town Clerk shall refer the proposed amendment to the
chief elected official of the affected municipality prior to final action.
§ 300-62.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-62.7
237:799
§ 300-62.7. Hearing and final action by governing body.
§ 300-62.8. Review criteria.
In reviewing and making decisions on Zoning Map amendments, the
Planning Board and governing body must consider at least the following
criteria:
A. After receiving the report of the Planning Board, the governing body
must convene a public hearing on the proposed Map amendment.
B. Following the close of the public hearing, the governing body may act to
approve the proposed Zoning Map amendment, approve the proposed
Zoning Map amendment with modifications or deny the proposed
Zoning Map amendment. The governing body may also return the
application to the Planning Board for further consideration, together
with a written explanation of the reasons for doing so.
C. The governing body may act by a simple majority vote, except when a
valid protest petition has been submitted in accordance with
§ 300-62.9, approval or approval with modifications requires a majority
plus one vote of the governing body members.
D. The municipal Clerk shall notify, by mail, the petitioner of the action
taken by the governing body.
E. If the governing body approves the amendment, supplement, change or
modification to district boundaries or classifications, the Zoning Map
shall be amended after publication as required by local law.
F. The governing body may, in order to protect the public health, safety,
welfare and environmental quality of the community, attach to its
resolution approving the petition, additional conditions deemed
necessary to achieve the review criteria.
A. Whether the proposed Zoning Map amendment corrects an error or
inconsistency in the Zoning Ordinance or meets the challenge of a
changing condition;
B. Whether the proposed rezoning is in substantial conformance with
adopted plans and policies affecting the area proposed to be rezoned;
C. Whether public facilities (infrastructure) and services will be adequate
to serve development allowed by the requested rezoning;
D. Whether the rezoning will substantially harm the public health, safety
or general welfare or the value of nearby properties;
E. Whether the rezoning is compatible with the zoning and use of nearby
property;
F. The suitability of the subject property for the uses and development to
which it has been restricted under the existing zoning regulations; and
§ 300-62.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-62.8
237:800
§ 300-62.9. Protest petitions.
G. The gain, if any, to the public health, safety and general welfare due to
denial of the application, as compared to the hardship imposed upon
the landowner, if any, as a result of denial of the application.
A. A formal protest petition opposing a Zoning Map amendment must be
submitted to the governing body or on the public record before the
governing body's vote, allowing sufficient time for the municipality to
determine the validity of the petition.
B. A protest petition will be considered "valid" if it is signed by:
(1) The owners of 20% or more of the area of land included in such
proposed change; or
(2) The owners of 20% or more of the area of land immediately
adjacent to that land included in such proposed amendment,
extending 100 feet therefrom; or
(3) The owners of 20% or more of the area of land directly opposite
thereto, extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite land.
C. When a valid protest petition has been submitted, approval of a Zoning
Map amendment requires a majority plus one vote of those governing
body members.
§ 300-62.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-62.9
237:801

ARTICLE 63
Site Plan Review
§ 300-63.1. Intent.
The intent of the site plan review process is to preserve and enhance
the character of a neighborhood, achieve compatibility with adjacent
development, mitigate potentially negative impacts on traffic, parking,
drainage and similar environmental concerns, improve the overall visual
and aesthetic quality of the Town and Villages, and increase the capability
of the Zoning Ordinance to adapt to a variety of unique circumstances.
§ 300-63.2. Applicability.
In accordance with New York State Town and Village Law, no construction
or site improvement work may commence until site plan approval, where
required, has been granted. Site plan review and approval is required in
accordance with the procedures of this article for all new buildings and uses
and expansions of existing buildings as defined in this article:
A. Site plan review shall not be required for the:
(1) Maintenance of existing sign structures in all districts and the
placement of signs in all districts; and
(2) Placement of a mobile home or manufactured home on a single lot
or in an approved mobile home or manufactured home park.
(3) Single and two-family residential uses.
B. Minor site plan review requires only Planning Department approval and
shall be required for:
(1) Any proposed changes to parking, loading or stacking, or
dumpsters, located more than 250 feet from residential use or
district where such modifications are determined by the Planning
Department to be consistent with the intent and objectives of the
original site plan.
(2) The proposed modification to an approved landscape plan to
preserve existing mature trees and/or vegetation or change
proposed plant species or the relocation of underground utilities
where such modifications are determined by the Planning
Department to be consistent with the intent and objectives of the
original site plan;
(3) The placement of accessory structures such as generators,
toolsheds, HVAC equipment, transformers, or compressors;
(4) Additions to buildings and uses that do not require additional offstreet
parking spaces.
§ 300-63.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-63.2
237:803
§ 300-63.3. Procedure.
(5) Adjustments to approved site plans during development. During
the development of an approved site plan, the Planning Department
may authorize minor adjustments to the final development plan
when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or
engineering considerations first discovered during actual
development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the
following and shall be exempt from the procedures outlined in
§ 300-63.3:
(a) Altering the location of any one structure or group of
structures by not more than 10 feet or 0.1 of the distance
shown on the approved site plan between such structure or
structures and any other structure or any vehicular circulation
element or any boundary of the parcel, whichever is less.
(b) Altering the location of any circulation element by not more
than 10 feet or 0.1 of the distance shown on the approved plan
between such circulation element or any structure, whichever
is less.
(c) Reducing the yard area or open space associated with any
single structure by not more than 5%.
(d) Altering any final grade by not more than 5% of the originally
planned grade.
(e) Modification of landscaping, as long as screening intent is
maintained.
(6) Minor modifications. Minor modifications shall be limited to the
following and shall be exempt from the procedures outlined in
Article 63.3:
(a) Error correction that does not alter the site plan.
(b) Modifications that are not in violation of this chapter.
(c) Changes that do not affect overall site layout or properties
outside of the site.
C. Major site plan review requires Planning Board approval and is
required for all new buildings and uses as well as expansions of uses
and buildings that are not explicitly exempt from site plan review or do
not qualify for minor site plan review.
A. Application. Application for a building permit for any land use or
activity requiring site plan review and approval shall be made to the
Code Enforcement Officer, who shall receive and review such
application and refer it to the Planning Department for processing. As a
part of the review, the Building Official shall certify that the site
development plan meets all the minimum requirements of this chapter.
§ 300-63.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-63.3
237:804
If the site plan does not meet all minimum requirements of this chapter,
the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance
in accordance with the provisions of Article 67 of this chapter.
B. Presubmission conference. Prior to the preparation and submission of a
final plan for site plan review and approval, the applicant may prepare a
sketch plan and meet with the Planning Department staff to consider
specifics of the proposed use or development, neighborhood
characteristics, and features of the site. Such sketch plan should be
submitted in duplicate and include enough information to enable a clear
understanding of the proposal.
C. Plan requirements. A final site plan for any land use or activity
requiring site plan review and approval shall be prepared and
submitted to the Planning Department. Such final site plan shall contain
the following information, as applicable:
(1) Location name and address of owner, name of designer (if any) of
the proposed development.
(2) Identification map showing the location of the site within the Town
or Villages.
(3) Scale, North arrow, and date.
(4) Present zoning district in which the site is located.
(5) Location of the site in relation to all abutting properties and
streets, and showing existing property lines, rights-of-way, and
easements.
(6) Existing and proposed buildings, structures and land uses.
(7) A proposed layout of streets and other vehicular circulation
facilities, including the location and width of driveways and type of
curbing on site, loading and maneuvering areas, and ingress and
egress to existing and prospective streets and highways.
(8) Projected number of seating or employees, if needed, to determine
the number of parking spaces.
(9) Any wetlands and/or floodable area included in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
(10) A topographic survey extending 50 feet beyond the property line
may be required.
(11) A storm drainage and grading plan showing the collection and
disposal of stormwaters, or, if applicable, a stormwater pollution
prevention plan consistent with the requirements of Article I and
Article II of the Erosion and Sediment Control Law of the Town or
Villages.
§ 300-63.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-63.3
237:805
(12) A plan showing proposed utilities and, if required, easements. If a
private sewerage system is used, plans for the system shall bear
the stamped approval of the Broome County Department of Health.
(13) Existing major vegetation (trees and shrubs) and proposed
landscaping treatment, including species, location, and planting
size and full-growth size.
(14) Drawings or sketches which illustrate the height, bulk, and design
characteristics of the proposed building, and indicate major
materials to be used.
(15) Location and type of exterior lighting, and location and dimension
of exterior signs, including ground and wall signs.
(16) Projected number of seating or employees, if needed, to determine
the number of parking spaces.
(17) Any other information required by the Planning Department to
explain the proposal.
(18) Application form, project narrative form, SEQR documentation.
(19) Developer's clause:
(a) On behalf of ______________________ (Developer-Applicant), we
hereby certify and agree that the submitted plans meet all the
requirements and specifications described in Article 63 (Site
Plan), and any other applicable sections of the Town of Union
Code. Notwithstanding any notes, provisions or specifications
in the plans, we agree on behalf of the Developer-Applicant
that Town of Union Code specifications shall take precedence
over any such notes, provisions or specifications which may be
inconsistent with and/or not in conformance with the Town of
Union Code specifications. We further agree that in the event
of any inconsistency or ambiguity between the notes,
provisions or specifications on the final plans and the Town of
Union Code, that in all cases the Town of Union Code
specifications shall be controlling with respect to the work,
materials or other requirements.
Signature of Developer
Signature of Developer's Engineer
or Design Professional
(20) Any of the above requirements may be waived by the Planning
Department if conditions warrant.
§ 300-63.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-63.3
237:806
§ 300-63.4. Review criteria.
During review of a minor or major site plan, the Planning Department or
Planning Board, as applicable, shall ensure that the site plan is consistent
with this chapter and generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Referrals.
(1) To County Planning and any other involved agencies. Upon receipt
of the complete application and before taking final action on
certain applications for site plan approval (review), such
applications shall be referred to the Broome County Planning
Department and any other involved agencies for review and report
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 239-l, 239-m and 239-nn of
the General Municipal Law.
(2) To the applicable Historic Review Board. Before taking final action
on an application for site plan approval (review) for a parcel located
in any locally designated historic district, park or a locally
designated landmark, such application shall be referred to the
applicable Historic Review Board for review and action in
accordance with Chapter 164, Historic Protection Districts, of the
Code of the Village of Johnson City, and Chapter 157, Historic
Districts, of the Village of Endicott Code. [Amended 3-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 1-2012]
E. Relevant comments. In reviewing site plans it shall be the responsibility
of the Planning Department to obtain comments or approvals in writing
from any relevant Town and Village department/division before a
decision on approval is made.
F. Environmental assessment. The environmental assessment shall be in
accordance with the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR).
G. Issuance of building permit. When an application for site plan review
has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Article 63
with or without modifications, a building permit shall be issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer if there is compliance with all other pertinent
code requirements. All required modifications established as a result of
the site plan review procedure shall be conditions of the building
permit.
H. Filing. The decision of the Planning Board or the Planning Department
as appropriate shall immediately be filed in the applicable Town or
Village Clerk's Office and Office of the Code Enforcement Officer within
five business days and a copy thereof given or mailed to the applicant.
§ 300-63.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-63.5
237:807
§ 300-63.5. Denial criteria.
The Planning Department or Planning Board shall deny an application
on the basis of specific written findings directed to one or more of the
following:
A. The application is incomplete in specified particulars or contains or
reveals violations of this chapter or other applicable regulations which
the applicant has, after written request, failed or refused to supply or
correct.
B. The proposed site plan interferes unnecessarily, and in specified
particulars, with easements, roadways, rail lines, utilities, and public or
private rights-of-way.
C. The proposed site plan unnecessarily, and in specified particulars,
destroys, damages, detrimentally modifies or interferes with the
enjoyment of significant natural, topographic or physical features of the
site.
D. The proposed structures unnecessarily, and in specified particulars,
destroy, damage, detrimentally modify or interfere with the significant
design features of the existing buildings and structures on the site.
E. The proposed structures or landscaping unnecessarily, and in specified
particulars, bears a poor relationship to the existing physical
development of the site or results in an overall development that
compromises existing design, parking or landscaping elements.
F. The site design does not comply with ADA requirements.
G. The proposed site plan unnecessarily, and in specified particulars, is
injurious or detrimental to the use and enjoyment of surrounding
property.
H. There is inadequate infrastructure capacity to support the use or
development.
I. The proposed site plan and associated improvements fail to mitigate the
project's anticipated traffic impacts.
J. The proposed site plan fails to provide for adequate access for
emergency vehicles.
K. The pedestrian and vehicular circulation elements unnecessarily, and in
specified particulars, create hazards to safety on or off the site.
L. The proposed structure unnecessarily, and in specified particulars, is
lacking amenity in relation to or is incompatible with, nearby structures
and uses.
M. The proposed site plan unnecessarily, and in specified particulars, is
lacking amenity in relation to, or incompatible with, nearby structures
and uses.
§ 300-63.5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-63.5
237:808
§ 300-63.6. Findings for approval.
In rendering a final decision, the Planning Department or Planning Board,
as applicable, shall consider and make findings that:
§ 300-63.7. Approval or denial.
§ 300-63.8. Modifications of certain regulations.
N. The proposed site plan unnecessarily, and in specified particulars,
creates drainage or erosion problems.
O. The proposed structures unnecessarily, and in specified particulars, are
incompatible with or lacking in amenity in relation to existing uses on
the site or existing building materials, roof shapes and fenestration on
the site.
P. The proposed site plan fails to contribute to existing pedestrianoriented
rights-of-way and unnecessarily, and in specified particulars, is
lacking in amenity in relation to the public realm and streetscape.
Q. The proposed site plan detrimentally impacts the visual and physical
access to and along the waterfront.
A. The proposed site plan is consistent with the purpose and specific
requirements of this chapter and generally consistent with the policies
of the Comprehensive Plan;
B. Adequate services and utilities will be available prior to occupancy; and
C. The site plan is consistent with all other applicable laws.
A. The Planning Department or Planning Board shall issue a final decision
on each site plan. The decision of the Planning Department or Planning
Board, which shall be based on the findings set forth, shall be final and
shall:
(1) Approve the application;
(2) Approve the application with conditions; or
(3) Deny the application.
B. In any case where an application is denied, the Planning Department or
Planning Board shall state the specific reasons and shall cite the
specific provisions of this chapter upon which such denial is based.
A. Review by the Planning Department. The Planning Department may, at
its discretion, reduce the required number of parking spaces by up to
25% upon determination that the applicant can demonstrate that the
site can support the required number of spaces, should the need arise
in the future. If the Planning Department determines that waived
parking, paving and striping are needed to provide necessary off-street
§ 300-63.5 STORM SEWERS § 300-63.8
237:809
§ 300-63.9. Filing of decision.
In accordance with New York State law, the decision of the Planning Board
or Planning Department, as applicable, shall be filed in the Office of the
Municipal Clerk consistent with all applicable state requirements.
§ 300-63.10. Appeal.
§ 300-63.11. Fees.
Upon filing an application for site plan review, all applicable fees shall be
paid.
parking, it may order the installation thereof. Any certificate of
occupancy issued for any parking area and the building or use served
thereby, where the number of spaces has been waived, shall be deemed
conditional upon the possible requirement for the future development
of the additional off-street parking upon such order by the Planning
Department. Failure to comply with such order within the time fixed
thereby shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. Review by Planning Board. The Planning Board may, at its discretion,
reduce the required number of parking spaces by up to 25% upon
determination that the applicant can demonstrate that the site can
support the required number of spaces, should the need arise in the
future. If the Planning Board determines that waived parking, paving
and striping are needed to provide necessary off-street parking, it may
order the installation thereof. Any certificate of occupancy issued for
any parking area and the building or use served thereby, where the
number of spaces has been waived, shall be deemed conditional upon
the possible requirement for the future development of the additional
off-street parking upon such order by the Planning Board. Failure to
comply with such order within the time fixed thereby shall constitute a
violation of this article.
A. Appeal of Planning Department decision. An applicant for a minor site
plan review or any other aggrieved party may appeal to the Planning
Board for a review and modification of a decision made by the Planning
Department. Such appeal shall be treated by the Planning Board in the
same manner as a major site plan review and follow the provisions of
§ 300-63.3 of this chapter.
B. Appeal of a Planning Board decision. Any person or persons, jointly or
severally aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board of the Village
or Town, may apply to the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 300-63.8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-63.11
237:810
ARTICLE 64
Nonconforming Uses
§ 300-64.1. Purpose.
Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments, there exist
lots, buildings, uses of land and characteristics of use which were lawful
before this chapter or amendments were passed but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under terms of this chapter or future
amendments. Regulations for the continuance, maintenance, repair,
restoration and discontinuance of nonconforming lots, buildings, land and
uses are established for the following purposes:
§ 300-64.2. Exceptions.
Normal maintenance and repair, structural alteration in and reconstruction
or enlargement of a building with nonconforming bulk are permitted, as
well as new construction on the lot, if the same does not increase the degree
of or create any new nonconforming bulk in such building.
§ 300-64.3. General provisions.
A. To permit these nonconformities to continue, but to minimize any
adverse effect on adjoining properties and development.
B. To regulate their maintenance and repair.
C. To restrict their rebuilding if substantially destroyed.
D. To require their permanent discontinuance if not operated for certain
periods.
E. To require conformity if they are discontinued, and to bring about the
eventual compliance with the objectives of the Future Land Use Plan
and this chapter.
A. Repair and alteration. Normal maintenance and repair of and incidental
alteration to a building occupied by a nonconforming use are permitted
if they do not extend the nonconforming use. No structural alteration or
enlargement shall be made in a building occupied by a nonconforming
use, except where required by law, i.e., court ordered, or to adapt a
building to a conforming use or to any other use permitted under
Subsection B or in a building occupied by a nonconforming use
permitted to extend under Subsection C.
B. Change of use. A nonconforming use may not be changed to a more
intensive nonconforming use nor shall a conforming use be changed to
a nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use when changed to a
conforming use shall not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use, building or structure shall
not be enlarged except upon the issuance of a variance from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 300-64.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-64.3
237:811
C. Extension or enlargement of nonconforming use. Extension or
enlargement shall mean:
(1) The enlargement of such building so as to create additional floor
space.
(2) The extension within any existing building to any portion of the
floor area not formerly used for such nonconforming use, except
where such additional floor area was manifestly designed for such
use at the time such use became nonconforming.
(3) The extension of the use to any area outside of the building.
(4) In the case of a nonconforming, nonbuilding land use, the use of
any additional land on which no substantial operations were
previously conducted, provided that any such extension or
enlargement is on the same lot occupied by the nonconforming use
on the effective date of this chapter.
(5) To the extent the district bulk requirements permit, upon the
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, a nonconforming use may
be extended to, but not exceed, an increase of 50% of its floor area
or of its land area occupancy of a nonbuilding use. However, this
provision may be used only once for each such use and in no event
may be applied to signs or to increase the number of units in a
multifamily building.
(6) An accessory building(s) to a legally existing nonconforming
residential use, in a nonresidential zoning district, is permitted by
right, provided that the accessory building(s) meets the minimum
side/rear yard requirement for the district in which the property is
located and provided that the accessory building complies with all
other requirements for such buildings.
D. Damage and destruction. If a building is damaged to the extent of 50%
or more of its assessed valuation, excluding the full value of the land, as
determined by the Town Assessor, such building may be repaired,
provided that substantial work is undertaken within one year after such
damage; otherwise, such building shall thereafter be occupied only by a
conforming use and structure. This provision shall not prevent the
repair of a nonconforming building damaged to the extent of less than
50% of its assessed value. [Amended 5-20-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
E. Discontinuance or abandoning of use. A nonconforming use or building
discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months shall not,
thereafter, be used or occupied except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. Discontinuance of the
active and continuous operation of a nonconforming use, or a part or
portion thereof, for a period of 12 consecutive months is hereby
construed and considered to be an abandonment of such
nonconforming use, regardless of any reservation of intent not to
abandon same or of intent to resume active operations. Actual
§ 300-64.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-64.3
237:812
abandonment is evidenced by the removal of buildings, structures,
machinery, equipment and other evidence of such nonconforming use
of the land and premises.
F. Nonconforming parking, loading, and stacking facilities. A building, use
or occupancy lawfully existing at the time this chapter or any
amendment thereto becomes effective, but which does not conform to
the off-street parking, loading and stacking requirements, may be
occupied or continued without such facilities being provided. Any such
spaces that may be provided thereafter shall comply with the
requirements of Article 51. If an existing building, use or occupancy is
altered so that there is an increase in the number of dwelling units,
seating capacity, employees or floor area, or if the use is changed to one
requiring more off-street parking, loading and stacking spaces, the
number of such spaces shall be provided at least equal to the number
required for the increased area of the building or use in accordance
with all provisions of Article 51.
G. Nonconforming lots. No parcel or lot, after the adoption of this chapter
or amendment thereto, shall be used or divided in a manner which
prevents or diminishes compliance with the requirements established
by this chapter or amendments thereto. Lots subdivided prior to the
adoption of this chapter or any amendment and not meeting the
minimum lot size requirements may be built upon, provided that the
bulk requirements for any use within the district are met except as
provided in this chapter.
§ 300-64.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-64.3
237:813

ARTICLE 65
Planned Unit Development District (PUD)
§ 300-65.1. Purpose.
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning District allows for an
alternative process to develop a unified and integrated development plan
in the Town or Villages. PUD Zoning Districts promote flexible development
opportunities that would not otherwise be possible through the strict
application of the land use and development regulations of this chapter, and
allow diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the relationship
of uses, structures, and open spaces. The PUD District results in a cohesive
and unified project based on unique standards and regulations developed
for a particular site or sites. Planned Unit Development Districts shall
achieve the following objectives:
§ 300-65.2. Location.
The Planned Unit Development District shall be applicable to any area
of the Town or Villages where the applicant can demonstrate that the
characteristics of the development will satisfy the intent and objectives of
this chapter. Where a PUD District is deemed appropriate, the rezoning
of land to a Planned Unit Development District will replace all uses and
dimensional specifications contained elsewhere in this chapter. The PUD
District shall be defined as all contiguous parcels zoned PUD including
associated streets or rights-of-way. A planned unit development plan must
be reviewed and approved on an individual basis, separately from
neighboring planned unit developments.
A. An alternative development pattern in harmony with the objectives of
various Town, Village and regional land use and development plans.
B. A creative use of land and related physical development allowing an
orderly transition from one land use to another.
C. Diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the relationship of
uses, structures, open spaces and height of structures in developments
conceived as cohesive unified projects.
D. Unique standards for site and building design.
E. The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics,
such as open space, natural topography, vegetation and geologic
features and the prevention of soil erosion.
F. To encourage a more efficient and economical arrangement of land
uses, buildings, circulation system and utilities, resulting in a smaller
network of utilities and streets and a lessened burden of traffic on
streets and highways.
§ 300-65.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.3
237:815
§ 300-65.3. District ownership.
All owners of the parcel or parcels included in the planned unit development
plan (PUD plan) shall be included as joint applicants on the initial PUD
application.
§ 300-65.4. Area requirements.
A. No Planned Unit Development District shall be established having an
area of less than 10 contiguous acres within the Town or two contiguous
acres within the Villages.
B. Open space requirements for individual PUD plans.
(1) Not less than 25% of the total area shall be set aside for common
open space. In general, open space shall achieve the following:
(a) Protect and preserve floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, or
watercourses, etc.
(b) Protect any historic, archeological or cultural resources listed
on the national, state, county, or local historical registers.
(c) Protect any mature woodlands, meadows, or ecologically
sensitive areas for wildlife habitat.
(d) Provide an upland buffer area adjacent to any streams,
wetlands, or surface water to protect native species
vegetation.
(e) Landscape common areas such as islands and new streets.
(f) Open space intended for recreation or public use shall be so
located to be accessible to pedestrians.
(g) The suitability of open space for recreational or public use
shall be determined by its visibility from a significant number
of units or length or number of public or private streets.
(2) Disposition requirements.
(a) Ownership shall be held by the developer(s), or in corporate
ownership by the owners of the lots or dwelling units within
the development, if the open space is reserved for private use.
(b) Such common open space shall be set aside as a deed
restriction for a specific period of time or conservation
easement in perpetual ownership. The maintenance of
common open space and recreation areas and maintenance
and replacement of approved landscaping shall be guaranteed
in a form approved by the Municipal Attorney.
(c) Lands dedicated as open space, park, or recreation shall be
noted on the plat map, deed description filed and referenced.
§ 300-65.3 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.4
237:816
§ 300-65.5. Use requirements.
(d) The legal instruments used to convey ownership, use, and
maintenance shall be established and filed of record, prior to
the conveyance of any subdivision lots.
(e) Resubdivision and/or development of any dedicated open space
recorded on the plat is prohibited.
A. Permitted uses. A Planned Unit Development District shall include a
mixture of uses including, but not limited to, two or more of the
following: residential, commercial and industrial. [Amended 3-6-2012
by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(1) Any use that is not expressly prohibited in § 300-65.5B, but not
specifically permitted by right as a commercial, light industrial, or
residential use, may be approved by the governing body at its sole
discretion upon application by the property owners.
(2) For purposes of this section, varied residential development
(single-family detached, single-family attached, two-family,
multifamily) may be considered separate uses.
B. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the PUD District:
Adult entertainment business
Automobile-related business including, but not limited to, automatic
and coin car washes; automobile dealership, new or used; vehicle
body/fender work; gasoline service stations; service stations;
automobile sales or rental; motor vehicle repair garages
Blacksmithing
Boilerworks
Cemeteries
Contractor's and building material storage
Creamery
Food processing plant
Foundries
Gasoline storage tanks
Junkyard
Laundries and dry-cleaning plants
Lumber/saw mill
Mobile homes
Refineries
Shoe manufacturing
Stone crushing
§ 300-65.4 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.5
237:817
§ 300-65.6. Additional requirements and standards.
§ 300-65.7. Required documents.
Vehicle manufacturing
A. The requirements and standards for a Planned Unit Development
District plan shall be specifically determined for each individual project.
The area, setback, density and height requirements shall be proposed
by the developer and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Board and governing board. Following the approval of a PUD District
plan, the accepted requirements shall regulate the PUD District. At a
minimum, the application for a PUD District shall include:
(1) Purpose statement that includes how the project meets the
objectives of this chapter;
(2) Uses;
(3) Lot, area and yard dimensions;
(4) Densities and floor area ratios;
(5) Building characteristics;
(6) Open space;
(7) Parking; and
(8) Additional requirements and data may be required by the Planning
Director and shall be submitted with the application.
B. Planned Unit Development Districts shall be served adequately by, and
shall not impose an undue burden upon, essential public facilities and
services, such as highways, streets, traffic control signals and devices,
streetlighting, parking spaces, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers, and schools. Where any
such facility or service is not available or adequate to service the
Planned Unit Development District, the applicant shall be responsible
for establishing his/her ability, willingness and binding commitment to
provide such facilities and services.
C. All easements to be recorded in connection with a Planned Unit
Development plan shall not be modified, removed or released without
the express consent of the governing body and may be enforced by the
Town or Villages.
A. Conceptual development plan. The developer or agent shall submit 15
copies of the conceptual development plan to the Planning Department
for Planning Board review. The plan shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor as appropriate and
shall include the following:
§ 300-65.5 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.7
237:818
(1) The proposed location of:
(a) Specific land uses within the PUD District;
(b) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;
(c) Extent of public and private open space;
(d) Extent of utility systems; and
(e) Residential and nonresidential structures.
(2) Proposed phasing plan for the project.
(3) The overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of
nonresidential uses.
(4) The existing and proposed ownership and management of the
Planned Unit Development District, including the buildings,
landscaped areas and open spaces.
B. Preliminary development plan. The developer or agent shall submit 15
copies of the preliminary development plan to the Planning Department
for Planning Board and Town/Village Board review. The plan shall be
prepared by a licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect or
surveyor as appropriate and shall include the following:
(1) Fifteen sets of preliminary professional drawings/plans, the PUD
application form, the rezoning application form, Part I of the long
environmental assessment form, the project narrative and other
required information.
(2) Filing fee as determined by the governing body.
(3) Preliminary development plans illustrating:
(a) The proposed name and location of the development, name of
developer and name of person who prepared the plan.
(b) A scale no greater than one inch equals 100 feet.
(c) The name, date, North arrow, and scale of each map.
(4) The proposed location of:
(a) Specific land uses within the PUD District;
(b) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;
(c) Extent of public, private, and dedicated open space;
(d) Extent of utility systems; and
(e) Residential and nonresidential structures.
(5) Proposed phasing plan for the project.
§ 300-65.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.7
237:819
(6) The overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of
nonresidential uses.
C. Final development plan. The developer or agent shall submit 10 copies
of the final development plan to the Planning Department for review by
the Planning Board. All plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record,
which will permit reproduction. The plans shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor as
appropriate and shall include the following:
(1) All drawings and plans. All drawings shall denote the following:
(a) The proposed name, and location of development, name of
developer and name and stamp of the person who prepared the
plans.
(b) Drawings on sheets a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches.
(c) A scale no greater than one inch equals 100 feet.
(d) The name, date, North arrow, and scale.
(e) Existing streets, buildings, easements, water bodies, streams,
drainage channels, floodplains and base flood elevation and
railroad rights-of-way.
(f) Open space and parkland including, at a minimum, the
following information:
[1] Minimum percentage.
[2] Ownership.
[3] Maintenance.
[4] Location of proposed dedicated open space, eventually to
be described and recorded with the deed.
(g) Proposed streets, indicating which are to be private and which
are to be deeded to the Town or Village.
(h) Building plans (including footprints, elevations, and floor
plans) and designated uses.
(i) Off-street parking, loading and stacking areas.
(j) Landscaped areas (including plant type, location, and size),
open space, recreation, and screening.
(k) Signs.
(2) Construction improvement plan. The following information shall be
denoted on the construction improvement plan:
§ 300-65.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.7
237:820
(a) Location of existing water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, culverts or drains located adjacent to and on the
property to be developed.
(b) Profiles and details for all street work, storm drainage
channels, structures and systems, retaining walls or other
improvements to support cut slopes and embankments,
bridges, sewer lines, culverts, fire hydrants and any other
underground utilities.
(c) Easements for existing and proposed utilities, if applicable.
(d) Improvements, such as curbs and gutters, streetlighting,
sidewalks, fences, gates and driveways, shall be shown if the
improvements are required by the Planning Board.
(e) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the
center lines of streets shall be shown;
(f) Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or
streets, the elevation along the center of the existing street or
streets, within 100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown.
(3) Grading and drainage plan. The following information shall be
denoted on the grading and drainage plan:
(a) Existing and proposed contour lines at an interval no greater
than five feet.
(b) The location of all approved open channels, swales and natural
overland flows.
(c) Pre- and post-stormwater runoff drainage computations, preand
post-development velocities, peak rates of discharge,
storage volumes and surface area requirements for controlling
stormwater runoff at all points of discharge.
(d) Pertinent existing natural features, such as wetlands,
outstanding trees and outlines of densely wooded areas.
(e) Erosion control measures, both long-term and short-term,
sediment control measures, stormwater management facilities
(temporary or permanent) shown during and after construction
and construction sequencing.
(f) The stormwater pollution prevention plan and/or erosion and
sediment control plan shall meet the requirements under 40
CFR Part 122.22(b)(15) of the Clean Water Act. A Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Articles I and II of Chapter 171, Erosion and
Sediment Control, shall be required for final PUD development
plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and
design criteria and standards in Article II of Chapter 171,
§ 300-65.7 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.7
237:821
§ 300-65.8. PUD District process.
Erosion and Sediment Control. The approved final PUD
development plan shall be consistent with the provisions of
Chapter 171, Erosion and Sediment Control of the Town Code,
Chapter 238 of Johnson City's Code and Chapter 213 of
Endicott's Code.
(4) Engineering feasibility studies of any anticipated problems, which
might arise due to the proposed development, shall be submitted if
requested by the Planning Board.
A. Purpose. The provisions of this section establish special procedures for
amending this chapter to permit the mapping of Planned Unit
Development Districts. The procedures herein established are intended
to substitute procedural protections for substantive regulations in
recognition of the fact that traditional density, bulk, spacing and use
regulations, which may be useful in protecting the character of
substantially developed and stable areas, may impose inappropriate
preregulations and rigidities upon the development or redevelopment
of parcels or areas which lend themselves to an individual, planned
approach.
B. Authority. The Zoning Map may be amended from time to time, by local
law duly enacted by the governing body, to provide for Planned Unit
Development Districts; provided, however, that no such amendment
shall be enacted except in accordance with procedures herein
established and the applicable standards and regulations established by
Article 63, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 181, Subdivision of Land, in
the Town's Code and Chapter 244, Subdivision of Land, in the Johnson
City Code.
C. General overview of procedure. The following outlines the process
required to obtain approval for a Planned Unit Development District in
the Town or Village. In general, the process includes the following
steps; additional information on each step is outlined in this section.
(1) Step 1: conceptual development plan approval (optional). The
applicant submits a conceptual development plan and discusses the
information on an informal basis with the Planning Director, Code
Enforcement Officer, and Municipal Engineer. Following the review
of the concept plan, the Planning Director has the discretion to
present the concept plan to the Planning Board and governing body
for comment.
(2) Step 2: preliminary development plan approval. The applicant
submits a preliminary development plan to the Planning Board
(along with a rezoning application to the governing body) for an
advisory opinion. The plans are transmitted to the governing body
for approval or denial of the rezoning and preliminary plan
following a public hearing by the governing body, if applicable.
§ 300-65.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.8
237:822
(3) Step 3: final development plan review. The applicant incorporates
conditions into plans for final development site plan or subdivision
plat review by the Planning Board. If the plans are in substantial
conformity, final approval is granted.
D. Procedure.
(1) Conceptual development plan approval (optional). The applicant
has the option to discuss the proposal with the Planning
Department by submitting a conceptual development plan. The
following outlines the conceptual development plan approval
process.
(a) The plan should include the following information: proposed
uses, vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, building
placement, existing and proposed utilities, drainage and
proposed private and public open space.
(b) The plan will be reviewed by the Planning, Code Enforcement
and Engineering Departments, as appropriate, which may
meet jointly to discuss the project.
(c) The conceptual plan review may be placed on the Planning
Board's agenda at its regularly scheduled meeting to discuss
the review process and offer recommendations for the plan.
(d) The applicant may, at its option, submit the preliminary
development plan in lieu of a less-detailed conceptual
development plan with the submission of the Planned Unit
Development District rezoning application and planned unit
development plan application. In such case, the applicant shall
comply with all provisions of this chapter applicable to
submission of the preliminary development plan and to
submission of the final development plan.
(e) The Planning Department and Planning Board may offer
recommendations and suggestions on potential issues and
alterations that should be considered by the applicant. The
applicant can use this information in preparing the preliminary
development plan as part of the application process.
(2) Preliminary development plan review. The preliminary
development plan offers the applicant the opportunity to provide
preliminary details to the Planning Department and Planning Board
on the design and layout of the project. By providing the
preliminary site layout, circulation patterns, densities, setbacks
and other proposed regulations, the applicant will have the
opportunity to discuss and amend the preliminary development
plan before finalizing the PUD plan.
(a) Submission of preliminary development plan.
§ 300-65.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.8
237:823
[1] The applicant shall submit 15 sets of preliminary
professional drawings/plans, the PUD application form,
the rezoning petition form, the long EAF, the project
narrative, and the application fee as defined under Code to
the Planning Department.
[2] The Planning Department will refer the PUD/rezoning
application to:
[a] The Planning Board for its advisory opinion, and
[b] The Town/Village Board. The Town/Village Board
shall:
[i] Declare lead agency for the rezoning.
[ii] Refer the application back to the Planning
Department to commence the 239 review, if
required, and distribute the plans and application
to other interested agencies, including
Engineering, Water Department, Fire
Department, and Code Enforcement. (At this time,
the Planning Department may ask for additional
copies of the plans, as justified and needed for
review by other interested agencies.)
[3] If the development requires the subdivision of land or
installation of public streets and/or utilities, an application
for subdivision approval can be made. The preliminary
development plans shall be subject to the applicable
sections under Chapter 181, Subdivision of Land, in the
Town Code and Chapter 244, Subdivision of Land, in the
Johnson City Code.
[4] The review procedures for rezoning, PUD and site plan/
subdivision plat can run concurrently, with the applicant
acknowledging that the property is still subject to rezoning
approval.
(b) Action by Planning Board.
[1] The Planning Board shall review and study the preliminary
development plan and consider the comments of other
agencies.
[2] Within 60 days of receiving the preliminary development
plan application, the Planning Board shall make its
recommendations on the preliminary development plan.
The recommendation can include one of the following:
[a] Approve the plans as submitted.
§ 300-65.8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.8
237:824
[b] Approve the preliminary plans with conditions. The
Planning Board may impose changes or conditions,
which shall be incorporated into the final plans.
[c] Disapprove of the plans. In the event of disapproval of
the preliminary PUD plans, the Planning Board shall
state its reasons for opposition in writing.
[3] The failure of the Planning Board to act within 60 days, or
such longer period as may be agreed to by the applicant,
shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the
preliminary development plan as submitted.
[4] The Planning Board shall transmit its recommendation to
the governing body for consideration in the rezoning
application made as part of the preliminary development
plan application for the property.
(c) Action by governing body.
[1] The governing body shall follow regulations under SEQRA.
[a] Make a SEQR determination of type of action (if Type
I, determine whether an EIS or long EAF will suffice).
[b] If EIS is not required, call for a public hearing to be
held following the thirty-day review period. (The
Planning Department will prepare public notices for
paper and sign posting to be posted a minimum of 10
days prior to hearing, and will prepare Part II of EAF.)
[2] The governing body shall review and study the preliminary
development plan and consider the comments of other
agencies. Attention will be given to the arrangement of
uses and buildings, the relationship to the topography of
the land, other factors, such as vegetation, wetlands,
floodplains, sewage disposal, drainage, water needs, trip
generation, recreation/open space areas and such
concerns as may be appropriate.
[3] Following the thirty-day 239 review period, if required,
and receipt by the governing body of the report of the
Planning Board, or its failure to act as above provided, the
governing body shall conduct a public hearing on the
preliminary development plan and rezoning application.
[4] Within 30 days of conclusion of the public hearing, the
governing body shall:
[a] By local law duly adopted, approve the preliminary
development plan, with or without modifications to be
accepted by the applicants as a condition of such
approval, and amend the Zoning Map of the Town or
§ 300-65.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.8
237:825
Village to designate the area included in the approved
plan as "The ____ Planned Unit Development"; or
[b] Refer it back to the Planning Board for further
consideration of specified matters; or
[c] Deny the preliminary development plan.
[5] In the event that the governing body, prior to the
expiration of the time limit herein specified for its refusal
or adoption of the proposed amendment, requests further
information from the applicant, the time limit for its
refusal or adoption of the proposed amendment shall be
extended to 60 days.
[6] In the event that the governing body shall fail to act within
the time limit herein specified, the preliminary
development plan shall be deemed denied.
[7] Within 10 business days of the governing body's action, or
its failure to act as above provided, the Planning Director
shall:
[a] Mail notice of the decision to all parties entitled.
[b] File a copy of the entire preliminary development plan
in the permanent records of the Planning Department.
[c] File the preliminary development plan with the
Municipal Clerk.
[8] If the preliminary development plan is approved with
conditions, the Zoning Map shall not be amended until the
applicant has filed with the Planning Director written
consent to such conditions.
[9] In the event that a preliminary development plan is
approved, or approved with conditions acceptable to the
applicant, no development shall be permitted unless and
until a final development plan has been submitted and
approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Final development plan approval. The final development plan
incorporates the specific conditions outlined during the preliminary
development plan approval process. Inclusion of the approval
conditions will allow the project to move forward in a timely
manner; the application process includes a mechanism to
streamline the approval so the project can move forward.
(a) All final development plan approvals shall require site plan
approval as set forth in Article 63, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter. If applicable, both processes can run concurrently.
§ 300-65.8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.8
237:826
(b) If the Planning Board finds substantial conformity and finds the
final development plan to be in all other respects complete and
in compliance with any conditions imposed by approval of the
preliminary development plan, the Planning Board shall
approve the final development plan. A final development plan
shall be deemed not to be in substantial conformity with an
approved preliminary development plan if it:
[1] Exceeds by more than 10% the maximum parking, height,
lot coverage, yard requirements or changes in land use
percentages (besides arrangement of land use), approved
for the preliminary Planned Unit Development plan;
[2] Changes in housing type;
[3] Reduction in open space;
[4] Decreases by more than 10% the area approved for public
and private open space or significantly changes the
general location of such areas;
[5] Substantially relocates approved public circulation
elements to any extent that would significantly decrease
their functionality; adversely affect their relation to
surrounding lands and circulation elements; or
significantly reduce their effectiveness as buffers or
amenities;
[6] Significantly alters the arrangement of land uses within
the Planned Unit Development District;
[7] Provides for uses not included in the approved preliminary
development plan; or
[8] Exceeds the maximum density for residential uses, as
approved on the preliminary plan, and the maximum floor
area ratio for nonresidential uses.
(c) Any changes to the proposed phasing plan submitted with the
preliminary plan shall be submitted with the final development
plan.
(d) If expressly authorized by the approval of the final
development plan, the applicant may, pursuant to and subject
to the limitations of the applicable codes and ordinances of the
Town, apply for and receive building permits for model
buildings, residential or commercial, that would be used for
the express purpose of showing typical structures to be
developed in the PUD. These buildings can only be constructed
within the area of the Planned Unit Development District as
approved and upon issuance of a building permit.
§ 300-65.8 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.8
237:827
§ 300-65.9. Revision to PUD Districts.
(e) Within one year of approval of the final development plan, or a
time frame agreed to by the Planning Board and the applicant,
the applicant shall make application for appropriate building
permits for the planned unit development.
A. Adjustments to final development plan during development. During the
development of an approved PUD, the Planning Department may
authorize minor adjustments to the final development plan when such
adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering
considerations first discovered during actual development. Such minor
adjustments shall be limited to the following:
(1) Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures by
not more than 10 feet or 0.1 of the distance shown on the final
development plan between such structure or structures and any
other structure or any vehicular circulation element or any
boundary of the Planned Unit Development District, whichever is
less.
(2) Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than 10
feet or 0.1 of the distance shown on the final development plan
between such circulation element or any structure, whichever is
less.
(3) Altering the boundary of any open space (other than dedicated
open space) by not more than 50 feet, provided that the total
amount of open space is not reduced by more than 5%.
(4) Reducing the yard area or open space associated with any single
structure by not more than 5%.
(5) Altering any final grade by not more than 5% of the originally
planned grade.
B. Amendments to final development plan. In addition to the adjustments
authorized by the Planning Department, an approved final development
plan may be amended or varied by submitting a new site plan to the
Planning Board. The process for final development plan approval shall
be followed for all amendments.
C. Approval revoked. The following changes to an approved Planned Unit
Development District are considered significant, and any approval of
the PUD District shall be revoked and the approval process begun
again. Revisions for which this shall apply include:
(1) Any change which shall require additional roads or utilities or
cause the required number of parking spaces to increase by 15% or
more or will cause any change in the SEQR determination.
§ 300-65.8 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.9
237:828
§ 300-65.10. Limitations to approvals.
§ 300-65.11. Enforcement.
§ 300-65.12. Appeal.
An appeal from any final decision regarding the Planned Unit Development
District may be filed by any person aggrieved or by any authorized officer,
(2) Any reduction in common or public open space (other than
dedicated open space) by more than 15%.
(3) Any change in use included in the proposed development.
(4) Any increase in the gross floor area of 15% or more in an industrial
or commercial development.
(5) An increase in density of 15% or more in residential developments
or a change of housing type, even though the density may not
increase. Changes in the tenure shall not be considered a
significant change.
A. Within one year after the approval of a final development plan, or such
other time as may be established by the approved development
schedule, construction shall commence in accordance with such
approved plan.
B. Failure to commence construction within such period shall, unless an
extension shall have been granted, automatically render void the final
development plan approval and all permits based on such approvals. In
addition, such documents shall require time expiration and reverter
language to remedy nonperformance.
A. If the Building Official finds that development is not proceeding in
accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails in any other
respect to comply with the final development plan as finally approved,
he/she shall immediately notify the governing body of such fact and
issue an order stopping any or all work on the Planned Unit
Development District until such time as any noncompliance is cured.
B. Within 60 days of such notice, the governing body shall either:
(1) Revoke, by local law, the final development plan approval and
direct the Building Official to initiate appropriate amendment
procedures to return the affected area of the Planned Unit
Development District to an appropriate zoning classification;
(2) Take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance
with the final development plan as approved; or
(3) Require the owner or applicant to seek an amendment of the final
development plan.
§ 300-65.9 STORM SEWERS § 300-65.12
237:829
department, board or commission of the Town or Village in accordance with
Article 78 of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 300-65.12 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-65.12
237:830
ARTICLE 66
Special Use Permits
§ 300-66.1. Applicability.
All uses and activities requiring a special use permit must be reviewed and
approved in accordance with the procedures of this article.
§ 300-66.2. Application filing.
Complete applications for a special use permit approval must be filed with
appropriate personnel in the Code Enforcement Office.
§ 300-66.3. Action by Planning Department.
Upon request of the Planning Board, the Planning Department shall prepare
a report that reviews the request for a special use permit.
§ 300-66.4. Action by Code Enforcement Officer.
Upon request of the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
prepare a report that reviews the request for a special use permit.
§ 300-66.5. Referral to county planning agency.
Whenever required under §§ 239-l and 239-m of the General Municipal Law,
special use permit applications must be forwarded to the county planning
agency for review prior to final action by the municipality.
§ 300-66.6. Hearing and final action by Planning Board.
A. Special uses within the zoning districts are generally considered to be
uses which are appropriate in a particular zoning district but because of
their potential for incompatibility with adjacent uses require individual
review and may require the imposition of conditions in order to assure
the appropriateness of the use in a particular zoning district.
B. A special use permit shall be required in accordance with the district
use tables in Part 2.
C. The Planning Board shall hear and decide all applications for special
use permits.
D. Specially permitted uses require site plan review unless otherwise
exempt. Concurrent applications are permitted.
A. Within 62 days from the day a complete application is received for
special permit approval, the Planning Board must convene a public
hearing on the proposed application.
B. Notice of required public hearings on a special use application must be
provided as required by the governing body and by state law.
§ 300-66.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-66.6
237:831
§ 300-66.7. Review criteria.
In rendering a decision, the Planning Board shall consider and make
findings that the proposed use:
§ 300-66.8. Conditions.
§ 300-66.9. Renewal.
Special use permits that have been issued for specific time periods are
subject to review for compliance with all of the conditions imposed at the
time of approval of the initial permit. Following a public hearing on the
matter, the Planning Board may deny a renewal of a special use permit when
any of the following apply:
C. Within 62 days following the close of the public hearing, the Planning
Board may act to approve the proposed special use permit, approve the
proposed special permit with conditions or disapprove the proposed
special use permit.
D. Special use permits may be conditioned upon periodic renewal.
A. Will be generally consistent with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan;
B. Meets any specific criteria set forth in this chapter;
C. Will be compatible with existing uses adjacent to and near the property;
D. Will be in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter;
E. Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property;
F. Will not create a hazard to health, safety or the general welfare;
G. Will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor be
detrimental to the neighborhood residents; and
H. Will not otherwise be detrimental to the public convenience and
welfare.
A. The Planning Board may impose such conditions upon the premises
benefited by a special use permit as may be necessary to prevent or
minimize adverse effects upon other property in the neighborhood,
including limitations on the time period for which the permit is granted.
B. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the motion authorizing
the special use permit.
A. The petitioner has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of
the prior approval.
B. Substantial new issues regarding the permit conditions during the
operation of the use have arisen.
§ 300-66.6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-66.9
237:832
§ 300-66.10. Amendments to approved permits.
Amendments or revisions to an approved special use permit require review
and approval in accordance with the special use permit procedures of this
article.
§ 300-66.11. Transferability.
A special permit is not transferable except upon approval by resolution of
the issuing board. A special permit shall authorize only one special use and
shall expire if the special use ceases for more than three months for any
reason.
C. The general requirements of this chapter have not been met.
D. There are changes in the area or neighborhood which would be
incompatible with the special use.
§ 300-66.9 STORM SEWERS § 300-66.11
237:833

ARTICLE 67
Variances
§ 300-67.1. Applicability.
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), on appeal from the decision or
determination of any administrative official charged with enforcement of
this chapter, shall have the power to grant use and area variances, subject
to the standards and procedures articulated in the New York State Town
and Village Law. The variance procedures may not be used to:
§ 300-67.2. Authority to file.
Applications for zoning variances may be initiated only by the owner of the
subject property or by the owner's authorized agent.
§ 300-67.3. Application filing.
Complete applications for a zoning variance must be filed with appropriate
personnel in the Code Enforcement Office.
§ 300-67.4. Notice of hearing.
Notice of required public hearings on zoning variances must be provided as
required by local and state law. (See § 300-60.3C for additional information
on public hearing notices.)
§ 300-67.5. Burden of proof.
The petitioner seeking the variance shall have the burden of presenting
sufficient evidence to allow the Zoning Board of Appeals to reach a
conclusion as set forth below as well as the burden of persuasion on those
items.
§ 300-67.6. Hearing and final decision.
A. Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval
procedures of this article; or
B. Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or
requirement imposed by another authorized board or commission.
A. Once the application has been determined to be complete, the Zoning
Board of Appeals must hold at least one public hearing on a proposed
zoning variance.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide upon the appeal within 62
days after the closing of the public hearing. The time within which the
Zoning Board of Appeals may render its decision may be extended by
mutual consent of the petitioner and the Board.
§ 300-67.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-67.6
237:835
§ 300-67.7. Review criteria.
Zoning variances may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals only
when it finds substantial evidence in the official record that:
§ 300-67.8. Transferability.
Zoning variance approval runs with the land and is not affected by changes
of tenancy, ownership, or management.
§ 300-67.9. Amendments.
A request for changes in conditions of approval of a zoning variance must
be processed as a new variance application, including the requirements for
fees, notices and hearings.
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse, modify or affirm, in whole or
in part, any such appealed order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in strictly
applying and interpreting the provisions of this chapter and for such
purposes shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken.
D. Appeals for interpretation shall be decided by the concurring vote of a
majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals in compliance
with New York State Town and Village Law.
E. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed in the Office
of the Town or Village Clerk within five business days after the decision
is rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
A. Strict application of one or more standards or requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardships or practical
difficulties that are not the result of the deliberate actions of the
property owner or their agent, employee, or contractor;
B. The zoning variance is the minimum zoning variance necessary to
provide relief from the unnecessary hardships or practical difficulties;
C. The zoning variance is generally consistent with the overall purpose of
this chapter; and
D. The zoning variance will result in substantial justice being done,
considering both the public benefits intended to be secured by this
Zoning Ordinance and the individual hardships that will be suffered if
the zoning variance request is denied.
§ 300-67.6 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-67.9
237:836
ARTICLE 68
Appeals of Administrative Decisions
§ 300-68.1. Applicability.
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) is authorized to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer or any
other administrative official in the administration, interpretation or
enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance.
§ 300-68.2. Right to appeal.
Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by any person aggrieved
by the Code Enforcement Officer or other administrative official's decision
or action. The ZBA is authorized to make determinations about whether
individuals filing appeals are aggrieved by the decision or action.
§ 300-68.3. Application filing.
§ 300-68.4. Effect of filing.
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed, unless the Code Enforcement Officer certifies to
the ZBA, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property.
§ 300-68.5. Record of decision.
Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the Code Enforcement
Officer or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed
must transmit to the ZBA all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed is taken.
§ 300-68.6. Notice of hearing.
Notice of required public hearings on appeals must be provided as required
by the governing body and by state law. (See § 300-60.3C for additional
information on public hearing notices.)
§ 300-68.7. Hearing and final decision.
A. Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must be
filed with appropriate personnel in the Code Enforcement Office.
B. Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within 60 days of the
date of the decision being appealed.
A. The ZBA must hold a public hearing on the appeal.
B. Following the close of the hearing, at the same or subsequent meeting,
the ZBA must take action on the appeal.
§ 300-68.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-68.7
237:837
C. In exercising the appeal power, the ZBA has all the powers of the official
from whom the appeal is taken, and the ZBA may reverse the appeal or
affirm the appeal, in whole or in part, or modify the decision being
appealed.
D. In acting on the appeal the ZBA must grant to the official's decision a
presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error
on the appellant.
§ 300-68.7 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-68.7
237:838
ARTICLE 69
Review and Decisionmaking Bodies
§ 300-69.1. Town and Village Board.
§ 300-69.2. Planning Board.
A. Establishment. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals,
or the general welfare of the community, the Town Board is hereby
empowered under New York State Town and the Village Board is hereby
empowered under New York State Village Law to regulate and
administer the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Powers and duties. The Town and Village Board shall be responsible for
final action regarding the following:
(1) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(2) Amendments to the text of this chapter; and
(3) Applications for the creation of a Planned Unit Development
District.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board is established under the provisions
of New York State Town and Village Law.
B. Membership, appropriations and terms. The Planning Board's
composition, appropriations, terms, vacancies, removals, and
appointments shall be in accordance with New York State Town and
Village Law.
C. Power and duties. The Planning Board shall have the following powers
and duties.
(1) Review authority. The Planning Board shall be responsible for
reviewing and making recommendations regarding the following:
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(b) Amendments to the text of this chapter; and
(c) Applications for the creation of a Planned Unit Development
District.
(2) Final authority. The Planning Board shall be responsible for final
action regarding applications for the following:
(a) Major site plan review; and
(b) Special use permits.
(3) General authority. The Planning Board may exercise additional
powers as directed by the Town or Village Board and as may be
§ 300-69.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-69.2
237:839
§ 300-69.3. Zoning Board of Appeals.
described elsewhere in this chapter and as permitted by New York
State Town or Village Law.
D. In accordance with Subdivision 16 of § 7-718 of Village Law, there shall
be a maximum of two alternate Planning Board members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval by resolution of the
Village Board for terms established by the Village Board. Alternate
Planning Board members shall substitute for a Planning Board member
or members in the event any such member is or members are unable to
participate in a matter or application before the Planning Board where
illness, absence or a conflict of interest would otherwise prevent five
members of the Planning Board from considering any pending matter.
The Chairperson of the Planning Board is authorized to designate an
alternate Planning Board member for a member who is unable to
participate in an application or matter before the Planning Board
because of an illness, absence or conflict of interest. When so
designated, an alternate Planning Board member shall possess all of the
powers and responsibilities of a member of the Planning Board. [Added
3-6-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
A. Establishment. The ZBA is established under the provisions of New
York State Town and Village Law.
B. Membership, appointments and terms.
(1) The ZBA shall consist of five members appointed by the Town or
Village Board. The members of the ZBA as now constituted shall
continue in office until the expiration of their present terms.
Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for terms of five
years each. Vacancies shall be filled as provided for in the New York
State Town and Village Law.
(2) The Clerk of the ZBA shall perform such duties as required by it.
The Town or Village Board may appoint additional clerks or other
employees serving at its pleasure to assist the ZBA.
(3) In accordance with Subdivision 11 of § 7-712 of Village Law, there
shall be a maximum of two alternate Zoning Board of Appeals
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval by resolution of the Village Board for terms established by
the Village Board. Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals members
shall substitute for a Zoning Board of Appeals member or members
in the event any such member is or members are unable to
participate in a matter or application before the Zoning Board of
Appeals where illness, absence or a conflict of interest would
otherwise prevent five members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
from considering any pending matter. The Chairperson of the
Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to designate an alternate
Zoning Board of Appeals member for a member who is unable to
§ 300-69.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-69.3
237:840
participate in an application or matter before the Zoning Board of
Appeals because of an illness, absence or conflict of interest. When
so designated, an alternate Zoning Board of Appeals member shall
possess all of the powers and responsibilities of a member of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. [Added 3-6-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
C. Meetings.
(1) The ZBA shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business consistent
with statute and this chapter.
(2) The Chair of the ZBA or, in the Chair's absence, the Acting Chair,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses in
the manner and to the extent permitted by New York State Town
and Village Law and the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(3) The ZBA may seek recommendations from the Planning Board and
other agencies as it deems appropriate.
(4) Hearings shall be public, and decisions shall be voted upon at
public sessions. The ZBA may otherwise hold executive sessions in
accordance with the New York State Open Meetings Law.99
D. Minutes. The Municipal Clerk shall keep minutes of all proceedings
before the ZBA.
E. Powers and duties. The ZBA shall have the following powers and duties.
(1) Final authority. The ZBA shall be responsible for final action
regarding the following:
(a) Applications for variances;
(b) Administrative appeals;
(c) Applications for temporary use permits; and
(d) Amendments to restrictions enacted by the ZBA.
(2) General authority. The ZBA may exercise additional powers as
directed by the Town or Village Board and as may be described
elsewhere in this chapter and as permitted by New York State law.
99.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 100 et seq.
§ 300-69.3 STORM SEWERS § 300-69.3
237:841

Part 7
Terminology
ARTICLE 70
General Terms
§ 300-70.1. Word usage and interpretation.
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense, and the plural includes the singular, unless the
natural construction of the term indicates otherwise.
§ 300-70.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall be
defined as:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use in extent, area,
and purpose and located on the same lot with the principal building or use.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having, as a significant portion of
its stock-in-trade, books, films, magazines and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CARE — The provision of temporary or long-term residential care
and services to adults who, though not requiring continual medical or
nursing care as provided by facilities licensed or operated pursuant to
Article 28 of the Public Health Law or Articles 19, 23, 29 and 31 of the
Mental Hygiene Law, are, by reason of physical or other limitations
associated with age, physical or mental disabilities or other factors, unable
or substantially unable to live independently.
ADULT-CARE FACILITY — A facility, other than a family-type home, which
provides adult care. For the purposes of this chapter, an adult-care facility
shall include the following: adult home, enriched housing program,
residence for adults, shelter for adults, public home and private proprietary
A. The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, individual, or any other entity.
B. The term "shall" is mandatory and directory.
C. The term "may" is permissive.
D. The term "used" includes the terms "designated, intended or arranged
to be used."
E. The term "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
F. The term "buildings" includes the word "structure."
§ 300-70.1 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:843
adult-care facility, as defined by New York State Department of Social
Services Chapter II, Subchapter D, Part 485.
ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment that
permits or allows dancers to display or expose specified anatomical areas.
Any establishment on whose premises an employee, who need not be the
same employee, displays or exposes specified anatomical areas on more
than one day in a thirty-day period shall be deemed an "adult dancing
establishment" under this chapter.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT USE — Any activity or business which provides entertainment
services or materials to customers with an emphasis on matter depicting
or relating to sexual activities or specific anatomical areas or which
customarily excludes minors by reason of age. Adult uses include: X-rated
video stores and bookstores, live or video peep shows, topless or fully nude
dancing establishments, combination X-rated video/book stores, nonmedical
massage parlors, hourly motels, swingers clubs, X-rated movie theaters,
escort service clubs, or any combination or variation thereof.
AGRI-BUSINESS — Any business which is designed to directly support
or is engaged in the production operations of an agricultural operation,
the manufacture or distribution of farm equipment and supplies, or the
processing, storage, and distribution of farm commodities. Agri-businesses
may include: farm markets, agri-tourism, and direct marketing businesses
associated with agriculture.
AGRICULTURAL USE OR FARMING OPERATION(S) — Land used
principally as a bona fide agricultural operation by the owner or tenant;
the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, silviculture,
viticulture, fish culture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce, provided that
the operation of the accessory use is clearly incidental to the agricultural
activity; the business of garbage feeding of hogs, fur farms, or the raising
of animals for use in medical or other tests or experiments is excluded.
Commercial logging and timber harvesting are also excluded.
AIRPORT — A tract of land that is maintained for the landing and departure
of aircraft, together with facilities to shelter, repair and supply aircraft.
ALLEY — Narrow supplementary thoroughfare for the public use of vehicles
or pedestrians, affording access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to or deletion
from a building other than repairs and modification in building equipment
systems (i.e., heating, cooling, electrical, etc.).
AMUSEMENT — Any mechanical, electric or electronic device used or
designated to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of
a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or any other article into any slot, crevice
or other opening or by paying money to have it activated. Not included are
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:844
rides, bowling alleys, any devices maintained within a residence for use of
occupants thereof and their guests, any gambling devices or jukeboxes.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility that provides medical care to animals
which is run by a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM). Animals may be
kept in the facility during the recovery period or while under medical
treatment. Animal hospitals may include boarding of animals.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The use of land and such accessory uses
incidental to the raising of domestic animals. Domestic animals include but
are not limited to: cattle, horses, rabbits, goats, sheep, swine and poultry.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A dog kennel, stable and similar uses oriented to the
care of animals, whether commercial, nonprofit or private, not including
agricultural uses such as dairy or beef cattle farms.
ANTENNA(S) — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
frequency signals. Such signals shall include but not be limited to radio,
television, cellular, paging, digital and/or data communications, personal
wireless communications services (PWS) and microwave communications.
This definition excludes short wave or ham radio equipment used for
personal communication.
ANTENNA, COLLOCATED/EXISTING STRUCTURE — An antenna that is
attached to an existing communications tower, smokestack, water tower or
other existing structure and that is less than 15 feet higher than the existing
structure on which it is mounted.
ANTENNA, NONCOLLOCATED/NEW STRUCTURE — An antenna that is
not mounted on an existing structure or is located 15 feet higher than the
existing structure on which it is mounted.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AND WATERSHED PROTECTION ZONE — Includes
areas duly designated as Wellhead Protection Zone (Z1), Aquifer Recharge
Zone (Z2) and Watershed Zone (Z3) on the Village or Town Aquifer
Protection Map. The Aquifer Protection Map shall be an overlay on the
Zoning Map and the rules and regulations of the Wellhead, Aquifer
Recharge and Watershed Protection Zone shall apply in addition to the
requirements of this chapter.
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY — A residential facility providing supervision,
monitoring, or assistance with the daily activities for more than 25 elderly
or disabled persons in a residential setting. Such facilities may include a
congregate dining room. Group homes and boardinghouses are not included
in this definition.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM) — A mechanized consumer
banking device operated by a financial institution for the convenience of its
customers, whether outside or in an access-controlled facility. ATMs located
within a building shall be considered accessory to the principal use unless
the ATM is likely to be an independent traffic generator.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — Any building, structure or land used for the repair
and/or maintenance of passenger vehicles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or
similar vehicles used for noncommercial purposes.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:845
AUTOMOTIVE SALES — The sales or leasing of new or used automobiles,
motorcycles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, which includes storage and
any incidental maintenance.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION —
BAR — Establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption.
BASEMENT — A story, partly below ground level but having at least 1/2 of
its height above ground level.
BATCHING PLANT — A plant for the manufacture or mixing of concrete,
cement, and concrete and cement products, including any apparatus and
uses incident to such manufacturing and mixing.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A residential dwelling used for
providing overnight accommodations and a morning meal to not more than
10 transient lodgers and containing not more than five bedrooms for such
lodgers (Ref: NYS Uniform Code).
BERM — A man-made earthen mound (usually from two to six feet in height)
designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views,
reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, industry,
profession, commodity, service, organization, activity, institution, product,
or entertainment neither sold, located nor offered upon the property where
the sign is situated.
BLIGHT — Unsightly condition of a structure or lot, including, but not
limited to, broken windows, peeling paint, the accumulation of debris, litter,
rubbish, or rubble; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling or rusting; landscaping that is dead, characterized by
uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance, or damaged; and any other
similar conditions of disrepair and deterioration regardless of the condition
of other properties in the neighborhood.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two intersections.
Establishments used or intended for use of one or any combination of
the following activities:
(1) Retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels.
Retail selling and installing of liquids, coolants, or lubricants where
substantial disassembly is not required.
(2)
Engine tune-ups, body work, frame straightening, painting,
electrical work, transmission repair, or any other repair services
not specifically listed.
(3)
A.
Vehicle dismantling for the resale of salvaged parts, including tires, is
not included in this definition. (See "junkyard.")
B.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:846
BOARDING/ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling occupied by one nuclear
family with four or more boarders, lodgers or roomers, who are lodged with
or without meals, and in which there are provided such services as are
incidental to its use as a temporary residence for some of the occupants. A
"rooming house" is a "boardinghouse."
BROOME COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION SERVICE — The
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
BROWNFIELD — Abandoned, idled, or underused industrial and
commercial facilities where expansion or redevelopment is complicated by
real or perceived environmental contamination.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main finished grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS STORES — Establishments
which specialize in the retail sale of new building and construction
materials and related supplies; general home repair and improvement
materials and supplies are excluded. Establishments in this category may
have display equipment designed to handle lumber and related products
and supplies that may be kept either indoors or outdoors in approved areas
(Ref: 2002 NAICS United States Census).
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by the
combined area of the primary and accessory buildings. This definition
excludes driveways, swimming pools, decks, parking areas and parking lots
and other impermeable surfaces on such lot, excluding patios, terraces and
pedestrian walkways.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING FRONT LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest the
street line, or if there are street lines on two or more sides of the building, it
is the line of that face of the building frontage on that street line where the
principal entrance is located. This face includes covered porches, whether
enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat or mansard roofs and to the average height
of pitched, gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The duly designated Building Official of the Town
of Union or Villages of Johnson City or Endicott.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or
other Building Official to enable the construction or alteration of a building
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:847
to begin. The permit shall only be issued after the proper documentation
and information have been submitted and necessary approvals have been
granted.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal or
primary use of the lot on which it is situated.
BULK — The size and shape of buildings and nonbuilding uses and the
physical relationship of their exterior walls to lot lines and other buildings
or walls and all open spaces required in connection with a building. Bulk
requirements include lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot
width, setbacks, yards, building heights, spacing between buildings on a
single lot, density and the number of buildings in a row.
BULK SALES OR RENTAL — Includes furniture stores, major home
appliance stores, carpet and flooring stores, equipment rental, auction
houses and similar uses. It does not include vehicle sales or rental
businesses.
BUSINESS INCUBATOR — A facility dedicated to the start-up and growth of
small businesses, accomplished through management and facility support
systems. For purposes of this definition, management support systems
include access to professional advice, information on small business
regulations, management, advertising, promotion, marketing, sales,
inventory, employees, labor relations, and financial counseling. Facility
support systems include clerical and reception staff, cleaning and building
security, and access to copy and facsimile machines, computers, faxes, and
other electronic equipment.
BUSINESS PARK(S) — An area of land in which a collection of more than
one nonindustrial business is located.
CALIPER — A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of nursery
stock. For trees less than four inches in diameter, the measurement should
be taken at six inches above ground level. For trees greater than four inches
in diameter up to and including 12 inches, the caliper measurement must be
taken at 12 inches above the ground level. For trees greater than 12 inches
in diameter, the trunk is measured at breast height (diameter at breast
height or DBH), which is 4.5 feet above the ground.
CAMP —
Any one or more of the following:
TYPE 1 — Any area of land or water on which are located two or
more cabins, tents, trailers, recreational vehicles, shelters, or other
accommodations of a design or character suitable for seasonal or
temporary living purposes, regardless of whether such structures
or other accommodations actually are occupied seasonally. This
excludes mobile homes, manufactured homes, mobile home parks,
and manufactured home communities.
(1)
TYPE 2 — Any land, including any building thereon, used for any
assembly of persons for what is commonly known as "day camp"
(2)
A.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:848
CAMPSITE — The lot or space in any camp which may be assigned to,
or used and occupied by any one cabin, tent, trailer, recreational vehicle,
shelter, or other accommodation for transient or temporary living purposes
for overnight, weekend or seasonal camping.
CARPORT — An open-sided roofed automobile shelter, either freestanding
or formed by extension of a roof from the side of a building, in which case it
shall be deemed part of the structure to which it is attached. In either case,
a carport shall not be deemed a garage.
CAR WASH — Any building or premises, or portion thereof, the use of which
is devoted to the business of washing automobiles for a fee, whether by
automated cleaning devices or otherwise.
CELLAR — Is an enclosed space having more than 1/2 of its height below
ground level.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
animal or human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums, crematorium, and columbaria.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A statement, signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Building Official, setting forth that a building,
structure, or use complies with all of the requirements of this chapter only
and such adjustment thereto granted by the Board of Appeals and/or the
Planning Board.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Building Official allowing the occupancy or use of
a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed
or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and
ordinances.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, TEMPORARY — A certificate issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official upon the meeting of
all requirements of this chapter, except those elements of the site plan
for which a performance bond has been accepted by the Town Board.
The temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a period
exceeding one year.
CHURCH, COMMUNITY-SCALE — Facility intended as a gathering place for
organized religious worship and related activities.
CLUBHOUSE, MEMBERSHIP — Includes YMCA, YWCA, YMHA, fraternity,
sorority, lodge, religious and similar membership clubs which may have
dormitory accommodation on the premises.
purposes, whether or not conducted for profit and whether
occupied by adults or by children, either as individuals, families or
groups.
Hospitals, places of detention or schools offering general instruction
are excluded from this definition.
B.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:849
CLUB, PRIVATE — A building or use catering exclusively to private club
members and their guests for recreational or athletic purposes, and not
operated primarily for gain or profit.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land
to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of
historically or environmentally sensitive features. The design divides land
into not more than the number of lots permissible in a conventional
subdivision of the same property in the same zone, but where the size of
individual lots may be reduced in order to gain common open space.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person officially designated by the
Village Board of Trustees or the Town Board that is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA — An area unobstructed by
buildings, but may include walks, paths, landscaping or other site features
in public or common ownership. Recreation buildings may be included as
part of common open space.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A meeting hall or place of assembly intended for
use as a gathering place by diverse members of the community.
COMMUNITY GARDENS — A private or public facility for cultivation of
fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person
or family.
COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place, area, structure, or
other facility owned or operated by a governmental entity or certified
nonprofit organization used by persons in the community to carry out
recreational activities including outdoor and indoor facilities such as tennis
courts, swimming pools, soccer fields, etc.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — A supervised community home, operated in
compliance with the New York State Mental Hygiene Law, which houses
not more than 14 individuals and provides client supervision on a twentyfour-
hour basis. For the purposes of this chapter, an approved community
residence as defined herein is considered a one-family dwelling.
COMPATIBLE —
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the design
and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a structure;
A.
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the design
and/or appearance between two or more structures;
B.
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the design
and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a neighborhood;
or
C.
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the use or
function between two or more attributes of a neighborhood or area.
D.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:850
CONDOMINIUM OWNERSHIP — The ownership interest in dwelling units
and other facilities pursuant to Article 9-B of the Real Property Law of New
York State.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY, ELDERLY — A building or group of
buildings providing a continuity of residential occupancy and health care
for elderly persons. Such facility typically includes dwelling units for
independent living, assisted living facilities, plus a skilled nursing care
facility of a suitable size to provide treatment or care of elderly residents
(55 years or older). It may include ancillary facilities for service or care of
residents.
CONIFEROUS — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green yearround.
Also known as "evergreen."
CONVALESCENT HOME, NURSING HOME or EXTENDED CARE FACILITY
— See "hospital."
COOPERATIVE OWNERSHIP — The ownership interest in dwelling units
and other facilities by a corporation organized pursuant to the Cooperative
Corporation Law of New York State.
COPY SHOP — A business engaging in the reproduction of photographic
impressions through mimeographic, electrostatic, or thermal copy process,
whether wet or dry.
COURT — An unoccupied open space other than a yard. An "outer court" is
one which extends to the front, side or rear yards; an "inner court" is any
other court.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of a
roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The length of the opening along the road curb providing
vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public
street.
CUSTODIAL CARE FACILITY — A facility providing custodial care and
treatment in a protective living environment for persons residing voluntarily
or by court placement, including, without limitation, correctional and postcorrectional
facilities, juvenile detention facilities, and temporary detention
facilities.
DANCE, ART, OR MUSIC STUDIO — Establishments or work space
dedicated to artists, artisans, musicians, dancers, or other individuals
practicing one of the fine or performing arts or skilled in an applied art or
craft. Incidental retail sales of work produced on the premises or related
to the studio may be included in the business's permitted function. This
definition excludes all adult-oriented uses.
DAY-CARE, ADULT — The provision of care to individuals over the age of
18 for periods less than 24 consecutive hours, but not including schools,
provided that such day care conforms to all applicable licensing and/or
registration requirements of New York State.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:851
DAY-CARE, YOUTH — Any program or facility caring for children for more
than three hours per day per child in which child day-care is provided by
a licensed child day-care provider except those programs operating as a
group family day-care home, a family day-care home, and a school-age child
care program as defined by § 390.1 of the Social Services Law of the State
of New York (Ref: New York State Social Services Law).
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters which are employed to measure intensity of sound are
calibrated in decibels.
DECIDUOUS — A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
DESIGN REVIEW/DESIGN CONTROL — The comprehensive evaluation of a
development and its impact on neighboring properties and the community
as a whole, from the standpoint of site and landscape design, architecture,
materials, colors, lighting, and signs, in accordance with a set of adopted
criteria and standards.
DESIGN STANDARDS — A set of guidelines regarding the architectural
appearance of a building, or improvement, that governs the alteration,
construction, demolition, or relocation of a building, or improvement.
DETENTION AREA — An area that is designed to capture specific quantities
of stormwater and to gradually release the stormwater at a sufficiently slow
rate to avert flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made changes to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
excluding normal maintenance of farm roads.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, FINAL — The required plans submitted to the
Planning Board, provided that approvals have been granted for preliminary
plans and the change of zone (which constitute the first two phases for a
Planned Unit Development or Mobile Home Park District).
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary development plan
shall include the following information:
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, SITE — A plan for the improvement and
development of single-family attached residential, multifamily, commercial,
office, industrial, institutional, Planned Unit Development District and
Mobile Home Park District properties. The plan shall be submitted to and
approval obtained from the Planning Board prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
A proposed site plan showing building locations and land use areas;
traffic circulation, parking areas and pedestrian walks; and landscaping
layout.
A.
A proposed construction sequence for buildings, parking spaces and
landscaped areas.
B.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:852
DORMITORY USE — Includes fraternity, sorority, nurses' home and
dormitory.
DOWNZONING — A change in the zoning classification of land to a
classification permitting development that is less intensive or dense, such
as from multifamily to single-family or from commercial to industrial to
residential. A change in the opposite direction is called "upzoning."
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — An establishment, including outdoor theaters and
restaurants, where a patron generally does not enter the building but is
served or entertained in a motor vehicle.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES — A building or use, from which, by design
of physical facilities, a product is sold to or a service performed for
customers while they are in or near their motor vehicles, including but
not limited to fast-food restaurants, drive-up bank tellers, film-processing
service booths, etc.
DRIVEWAY — Land used as access to and situated on the property or lot by
vehicular traffic.
DRY-CLEANING OUTLETS — Facilities which provide dropoff and pickup of
garments and other textile items for dry-cleaning services off-site. (Actual
dry cleaning services are not performed on site.) Dry cleaning outlets do not
include any coin-operated facilities.
DRY-CLEANING FACILITIES — Facilities which provide on-site specialty
cleaning services for specific garments and textile items, except carpets and
upholstery.
DWELLING — A detached building designed or used exclusively as living
quarters for one or more persons or families; the term shall not be deemed
to include motel, hotel, boarding or rooming house, recreation vehicle,
tourist home or tent.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed or used as living
quarters by three or more families living independently of each other; may
include apartment buildings, townhouses, or row houses.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed or used as living quarters
by one family.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED (commonly called "townhouse" or
"row house") — A row of two or more adjoining dwelling units each on its
own lot and separated from each other by one or more party walls.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED (commonly called "single-family
house") — A building separated from lot lines and other buildings by open
space on all sides.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed and used exclusively for
occupancy for two families living independently of each other and which is
separated from lot lines or other buildings by open space on all sides.
DWELLING UNIT — One room, or a group of rooms joined to each other
and not regularly locked in the interior, located in a dwelling, designed and
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:853
maintained as a unified living quarter, occupied by an individual or a family,
containing integrated facilities used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and
sanitation.
EASEMENT — Any authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, for a specified purpose, of any designated portion of a lot.
EAVE — The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a
building.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private school or other
organization conducting a regularly scheduled curriculum of study and
operated under the Education Law of New York State.
ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION — Any building or group of buildings
devoted to and supported by charity.
ELEVATIONS, BASE FLOOD — Elevations above mean sea level of the flood
levels which have a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, as defined on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM or EAF — The official form used
by an agency, in compliance with SEQRA, to assist it in determining the
environmental significance or nonsignificance of actions. An EAF may
consist of the short or full EAF as detailed in § 617.6 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
EVERGREEN — A tree, shrub, or plant having foliage that persists and
remains green throughout the year.
EXOTIC ANIMALS — Reptiles, ferrets, snakes, tropical birds, turtles, and
any species of animal whose natural or usual habitat within the State of
New York is either in the wild or in a zoo but which is being housed or
sustained by a person.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, operation
of law, or adoption, or any number of individuals not related by blood,
marriage or adoption living together and who meet the indicia for a
functional and factual family equivalent.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — As defined in § 390(1)(e) of the Social Services
Law (SSL) as a program where day care is provided for three to six children
for more than three hours per day in a family home occupied as a residence.
The home may care for an additional one or two school-age children if those
children receive care primarily before or after school.
FARM — Any parcel of land containing at least three acres which is used for
the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products.
It includes necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits and the
storage of equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur-bearing animals,
riding academies, livery or boarding stables and dog kennels.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:854
FARMER'S MARKET — The seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail
of home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area,
where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the vegetables
or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale.
FENCE, OBSCURING — A wood or vinyl fence, including any gates in said
fence, that is 80% or more opaque.
FILL — Any material that is not hazardous as defined in the Solid Waste
Disposal Act or the regulations of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation Parts 370 through 374 and 376, such as earth,
clay, sand, gravel, and concrete that is placed, stored, or dumped upon
the surface of the ground resulting in an increase in the natural surface
elevation. "Fill" shall not include solid waste as defined in Parts 360 and
364 of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
Law, garbage (putrescible animal, vegetable waste), refuse (putrescible
and nonputrescible liquid or solid waste), rubbish or debris (household
or commercial trash), recyclable materials, junk or junk vehicles, parts,
explosives, pathological waste, or biological waste.
FILLING — The depositing of fill on land, whether submerged or not,
including nonhazardous earth, clay, sand, or gravel.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal area of the floors of a building
and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding unfinished basement
or cellar floor areas not devoted to habitable use, but including the area
of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured
between interior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The floor area of rooms in a dwelling unit
used for bedrooms, living rooms, dining rooms and kitchens.
FOOD PROCESSING AND PACKING PLANTS — Facilities which transform
and process livestock and agricultural products into products for eventual
consumption and package the processed goods for distribution to
wholesalers or retailers.
FOREST — A biological community dominated by trees and other woody
plants covering a land area of one acre or more. This also includes forests
that have been cut but not cleared. In other areas, a biological community
dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of 10,000
square feet or greater. Forest includes:
FORESTRY OPERATIONS — The use of land for the raising and harvesting
of timber, pulp woods, and other forestry products for commercial purposes,
including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process
the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this
definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development
Areas that have at least 100 trees per acre with at least 50% of those
trees having a two-inch or greater diameter at 4.5 feet above the
ground and larger; and
A.
B. Forest areas that have been cut but not cleared.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:855
approved by the Town, which shall be considered accessory to the
development of the property.
FRONTAGE — The extent of a building or a lot along one public street as
defined herein.
FROST LINE — Forty-two inches below the final grade surface of the
ground.
FUNCTIONAL AND FACTUAL FAMILY EQUIVALENT — A group of
unrelated individuals living together and functioning together as a
traditional family. In determining whether or not a group of unrelated
individuals comprise a functional and factual family equivalent, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may consider the following factors:
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased
for cremation or burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GAME ROOM — A building or place containing five or more amusement
games as defined herein. (See "amusement.")
GARAGE, ATTACHED — A garage having a common wall or a portion
thereof with a principal residential building and used for the storage of
motor vehicles, boats or trailers and in which no home occupation, business
or service for profit is maintained.
Whether the occupants share the entire dwelling unit or act as separate
roomers.
A.
Whether the household has stability akin to a permanent family
structure. The criteria used to determine this test may include the
following:
Length of stay together among the occupants in the current
dwelling unit or other dwelling units.
(1)
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing in the
household.
(2)
(3) The presence of one individual acting as head of the household.
Proof of sharing expenses for food, rent or ownership costs, utilities
and other household expenses.
(4)
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the
members of the household.
(5)
Whether the household is a temporary living arrangement or a
framework for transient living.
(6)
Whether the composition of the household changes from year to
year.
(7)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group of
persons is the functional equivalent of a family.
(8)
B.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:856
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of motor vehicles,
provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit
therein.
GARAGE, PRIVATE DETACHED — A building used as an accessory use to
a principal residential building for the storage of motor vehicles, boats or
trailers and in which no home occupation, business or service for profit is
maintained.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building, other than a private garage, which
is available to the public, operated for gain and used for storage of
automobiles.
GARAGE SALE — A sale of used household or personal articles (as furniture,
tools, or clothing) held on the seller's own premises.
GOLF COURSE — A public or private recreation establishment having no
fewer than nine holes; each improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
hazards for playing the game of golf. Miniature golf and driving ranges are
excluded.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of grounds, lawns, walks,
paved areas and roads brought to grade as shown on plans and designed
related thereto in existence at the time the certificate of occupancy is
issued.
GREENHOUSE — An enclosed structure, typically constructed of glass or
plastic, in which agricultural or horticultural stock is grown in climatecontrolled
conditions and protected from outside elements.
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — A building used to house people with health
problems. Such facility shall be under the direction and supervision of
trained medical or mental health professionals.
GROUP FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — As defined in § 390(1)(d) of the Social
Services Law (SSL) as a program in which day care is provided in a family
home occupied as a residence for seven to 10 children, including not more
than four children under two years of age, or up to 12 children where all of
the children in care are over two years of age. Care may also be provided
for up to two additional school-age children outside of school hours.
HALFWAY HOUSE, PENAL — A facility where one or more residents are:
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment in which members use health and
fitness facilities and equipment, and includes any outdoor equipment or
facilities owned by the establishment.
HELIPORT — An area of land used exclusively for the takeoff and landing
of helicopters. A helicopter is an aircraft whose support in the air is chiefly
A. On probation;
B. On parole; or
C. Participating in a penal institution's pre-release program.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:857
derived from the aerodynamic forces acting upon one or more rotors
turning on vertical axis.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY — Includes areas duly designated within
definable geographic boundaries as an Historic District by the Historic
District Commission which may have within its boundaries properties or
structures that, while not of such specific historic and/or architectural
significance, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of
the Historic District. The Historic District shall be an overlay on the Zoning
Map and the rules and regulations of the Historic District shall apply in
addition to the requirements of this chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession of a service character
conducted within a dwelling by a member of the residing family, which
is clearly secondary to the dwelling use for living purposes and does not
change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such
secondary use.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION OWNERSHIP — The ownership of dwelling
units, common elements and other facilities by an association organized
pursuant to the laws of New York State.
HORTICULTURAL USES — Any land or structures, including greenhouses,
used for the commercial production, sale, or research of vegetative
products.
HOSPITAL — Any facility, structure or place for diagnosis and treatment of
human illnesses, injuries or ailments. This includes a sanitarium, clinic, rest
home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged.
HOTEL — A building containing rooms which are used, rented or hired
out to be occupied for sleeping purposes and where a general kitchen
and dining room may be provided within the building or in an accessory
building.
HOUSEHOLD — Any number of persons living together who meet the
indicia for a functional equivalent of a traditional family.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Small, domesticated animals or fish kept for pleasure
and not for utility or commercial purposes. Pets include animals such as, but
not limited to, dogs, cats, hamsters, nonvenomous snakes, fish and nonfowl
birds (not raised for meat or eggs).
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — A residential complex containing
multifamily units which is designed for the needs of the elderly and which is
subject to the management or other legal restrictions that require that the
project shall be occupied by households wherein at least one person is 55
years or over. Such facilities may include a congregate dining room.
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used or
which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied
for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a single kitchen and dining
room are provided within the buildings or in an accessory building. (See
"lodging.")
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:858
INDUSTRIAL AGRICULTURAL ENTERPRISE — A large-scale business
activity that specializes in a specific aspect of agriculture or farming and
uses specialized equipment or buildings to process farm products for their
delivery to market. The raising of livestock or processing of agricultural
products grown on the premises may be subordinate to such use.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A collection of sites for the location of various
industries which may or may not be related to one another.
INSTITUTION — A facility that provides a public service and is operated
by a federal, state, or local government, public or private utility, school,
church or similarly recognized and legally established sect, public agency,
tax exempt organization, or quasi-public organization.
JUNK — Old, discarded or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, waste or junked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or wrecked
motor vehicles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old, discarded or scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material, tires, lumber, pallets and other wood debris.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used for the collecting,
storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material,
or for collecting, wrecking, dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of
machinery parts or vehicles not in running condition.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — An establishment for boarding, breeding,
grooming, training for a fee, or selling household pets, domestic animals or
exotic animals other than personal pets of the property owner or lessee.
KENNEL, PRIVATE — The raising or keeping of five or more household pets.
LANDFILL — A disposal facility or part of one at which solid waste, or its
residue after treatment, is intentionally placed in or on land, at which solid
waste will remain after closure, and which is not a landspreading facility, a
surface impoundment, or an injection well.
LANDSCAPE WASTE — All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, tree limbs, and other materials accumulated as the result of the care
of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and trees.
LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with individual clotheswashing
machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of laundry
facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment house or an
apartment hotel.
LEED CERTIFIED — A building or site that is classified as meeting certain
building and construction standards set forth by the United States Green
Building Council (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED).
LIVESTOCK — Any domestic animal, such as cattle, horses, donkeys, mules,
burros, sheep, hogs or goats of greater than three months' age.
LOADING AREA — An off-street space not less than 12 feet wide and
35 feet long with an overhead clearance of at least 15 feet, exclusive of
passageways, driveways, ramps, columns and other areas, and which is
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:859
used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
LODGING — A single building or group of buildings containing guest rooms
or apartments, with parking space for such rooms or apartments, which
is primarily designed for the accommodation of transient travelers and
does not contain individual cooking facilities. Lodging facilities may also
provide additional services to guests, such as food and beverages, limited
recreational facilities, conference rooms, and laundry. Hotels and motels
are considered lodging.
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required, having not less
than the minimum area, width and depth required for a lot in the district in
which such land is situated and having frontage on a street or other means
of access as may be determined by the Planning Board to be adequate as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit for a building on such land.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the property lines, excluding
any part lying within the boundaries of a public street or proposed public
street.
LOT, AVERAGE SIZE — In the performance standard bulk requirements, the
average size of all lots of the same use in the same development.
LOT, CORNER —
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the street line of the lot
to its opposite rear line measured at right angles to the building front line
in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance measured across the width of the lot at the
building front line or the proposed building front line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street,
the line separating the lot from the street right-of-way; in the case of a lot
abutting more than one street, each street line shall be considered a front
lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot
line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the
front line, not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the lot and farthest
from the front lot line.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding a lot.
A lot located at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting
streets.
A.
A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of
two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered
a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of
the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
B.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:860
LOT LINE, SIDE — The property line or lines extending from the front lot
line to the rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which has been established as such by plat,
survey or deed prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which
this chapter is derived and as shown on the records of the County Clerk.
LOT SIZE — The total area within the property lines, excluding any portion
lying within the boundaries of a public street or future street right-of-way.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the lot depth.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit built
on or after June 15, 1976, and conforming to the requirements of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR Part 3208, 4-1-1993,
transportable in one or more sections, which in traveling mode, is eight feet
or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320
square feet minimum, constructed on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, cooling, and electrical
systems therein. The term "manufactured home" shall not include any
self-propelled recreational vehicle. Manufactured homes shall also include
single-wide manufactured homes as a part of this definition.
MANUFACTURED HOME, DOUBLE-WIDE — A manufactured home
consisting of two sections, combined at the site, with a combined width of
no less than 20 feet, while still retaining their individual chassis for possible
future movement and complying with the federal requirements specified
in the "manufactured home" definition. This definition does not include
modular homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY — Any lot, piece, or parcel of
ground whereon more than two mobile/manufactured homes are placed, or
are designed for such placement, and whether a charge is or is not made
for such use (may also be referred to as a "mobile home park").
MANUFACTURING — Any factory, shop, yard warehouse, mill or other
nonresidential premises utilized in whole or in part for the processing,
preparation, production, containerizing, storage or distribution of goods,
wares, commodities, parts, materials, electricity and the like. The
processing, preparation and production activities customarily deal with
man-made or raw materials and other manufactured items which are
altered, restored or improved by the utilization of biological, chemical or
physical actions, tools, instruments, machines or other such similar natural,
scientific or technological means. "Manufacturing" shall not include the
handling of any waste products and materials. Manufacturing processes
and treatments include but are not limited to such operations as mixing,
crushing, cutting, grinding and polishing; casting, molding and stamping;
alloying and refining; assaying, cleaning, coating and printing; and
assembling and finishing.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:861
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A site or premises or portion thereof upon
which any person who is an employee manipulates the superficial tissues
of the body of another person with any portion of the hand, foot, leg,
arm or elbow, but not including the following: licensed massage therapists,
licensed health care facilities, licensed physicians, chiropractors, physical
therapists or nurses engaged in the practice of their professions or
educational athletic facilities, if the massage is a normal and usual practice
in such facilities.
MEDICAL OFFICE — Includes medical, dental and clinical outpatient offices
for the diagnosis and treatment of human ailments.
MIXED USE — A development or redevelopment that allows for more dense
development in a single building or on a single lot and includes a mixture of
uses including, but not limited to, two or more of the following: residential,
commercial and industrial.
MOBILE HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit built prior to
June 15, 1976, with or without a label certifying compliance with NFPA,
ANSI, or a specific state standard, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet
or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet minimum,
constructed on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities
and includes the plumbing, HVAC, and electrical systems therein. The term
"mobile home" shall not include travel trailers or any self-propelled
recreational vehicle.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile or manufactured homes for
nontransient use or a group of individually owned lots that were developed
as a single development project.
MOBILE HOME PARK UNIT — The lot or space in any manufactured home
community or mobile home park which shall be assigned to, or used and
occupied by any one mobile/manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — A parcel of land under single ownership
in which a single lot or lots are developed and eventually sold by the
landowner to persons for the placement of a mobile home.
MODULAR HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit, conforming to
applicable provisions of the NYS Uniform Code and bearing insignia of
approval issued by the State Fire Prevention and Code Council, which is
constructed by a method or system of construction whereby the structure
or its components are wholly or in substantial part manufactured in a
manufacturing facility, intended or designed for permanent installation, or
assembly and permanent installation.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:862
MONOPOLE — A single, self-supporting pole-type structure, tapering from
base to top and supporting a fixture designed to hold one or more antennas.
MOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used or
which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general kitchen and dining
room may be provided within the building or in an accessory building. (See
also "lodging.")
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a public street or highway except
such as are operated exclusively by human power.
MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING LOT — An open parking facility which is not
accessory to a building or use on the same or another lot.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP OR GARAGE — Any building or structure
used for repair and servicing of motor vehicles for profit or as part of a
commercial operation.
MUNICIPAL USES — Administrative, clerical, or public offices or buildings
of a government agency (local, county, state, or federal), including postal
facilities, together with incidental storage or accessory uses/buildings.
NONCONFORMING BULK — Any building, land or part thereof, existing
at the effective date of this chapter, which does not meet the bulk
requirements for the use and for the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or structure that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located upon the
effective date of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — An established use of a building or structure or
of land existing at the effective date of this chapter which does not conform
to the use requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USE — All uses of land and buildings except onefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place in which the primary purpose is to
allow a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays specified
anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or
any form of consideration. Nude model studios shall be distinguished from
model studios where nude modeling is an incidental function.
NURSERY — An enterprise that conducts the retail and/or wholesale sale of
plants that may have been grown on the premises, as well as prepackaged
accessory items (but not power equipment, such as gas or electric lawn
mowers and farm implements) directly related to their care and
maintenance.
NURSING HOME or SKILLED LIVING FACILITY — A residential facility
established for profit or nonprofit, which provides nursing care and related
medical services on a twenty-four-hours-per-day basis to individuals due
to illness, disease or physical or mental infirmity. This does not include
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:863
hospitals, clinics, or facilities providing surgical or emergency medical
services, drug addiction, alcoholism, or mental health services.
NYS UNIFORM CODE(S) — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, which shall include all subunits (Residential Code,
Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Fuel Gas Code, Fire Code,
Energy Code, and Property Maintenance Code) as currently in effect and
as hereafter amended from time to time. The Uniform Code shall also be
referred to as the "NYS Uniform Code."
OFFICE — Firms or organizations providing professional, executive,
management, or administrative services, such as those listed in the
"professional services" definition.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by the Town or Village Boards, showing
the streets, highways and parks laid out and additions resulting from the
approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the subsequent
filing of such plats.
OPEN SPACE — That portion of a lot which is open, unobstructed and
unoccupied from the ground upward and includes permeable walkways not
used by vehicles, landscaping, uncovered patios, and uncovered recreation
facilities.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The storage of items, merchandise, materials, or
vehicles outside of an enclosed structure for more than four consecutive
days that are not being displayed for sale.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
corporation, or company holding title to the property.
PARAPET WALL — That portion of a building wall that rises above the level
of the roof.
PARKING AREA — An off-street area containing one or more parking
spaces, with passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto.
PARKING FACILITY — Includes all required off-street parking spaces,
loading areas, stacking spaces, aisles, driveways and landscaping as
required in this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space used for the temporary location of
one licensed motor vehicle, not including access driveway, having direct
access to a street or alley.
PARKING, VALET — Parking services provided by a business for patrons of
the facility, whereby automobiles are driven to and from the parking facility
by an employee of the business.
PAVING — Ground surface covered with cobblestones, clay-fired bricks,
concrete precast paver units (including, but not limited to) poured concrete
with or without decorative surface materials, blacktop, or other asphaltic
or rubber mixture which may include sand or gravel as an ingredient and
which creates a hard surface. A graded natural surface or one covered with
rolled stone or overlaid with loose gravel is not considered a paved surface.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:864
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond, letter of credit, cash or securities posted
by the developer and accepted by the Board of Trustees, to guarantee that
the developer will construct, or cause to be constructed, within one year all
required improvements set by the Planning Board as conditions under site
plan approval.
PERIMETER STRIP — Land not less than 10 feet in width located adjacent
to a street, side, and rear lot lines designed for visual separation between
uses or activities, excluding required driveways. Landscaping of the strip
may include trees, shrubs, lawn, or planted ground cover that must be
permanently maintained to present an attractive, well-kept appearance.
Landscaped areas shall not be surfaced in part or whole with concrete,
asphalt, or other surface material, but shall contain earth, and may contain
organic mulch, inorganic fillers such as wood shavings, bark, volcanic rock
or other similar mulch material.
PERMIT DEPARTMENT — The Permit Department of the Town or Villages.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Places primarily providing
services oriented to personal needs, such as barber and beauty shops, shoe
repair shops, household appliance repair shops, dry cleaning and laundry
pickups, shoe shine parlors, and other similar establishments. Retail sales
shall be allowed as incidental uses in personal service establishments.
PLANNING BOARD — The officially designated Planning Board for the
Town or Villages, as established by the Board of Trustees or the Town Board
in accordance with New York State Town and Village Law.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT — The Planning Department of the Town of
Union or the designated department within the Villages of Endicott and
Johnson City.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The duly designated Planning Director of the
Town or Villages.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING/USE — The primary use of the building or land
requiring the greater setback, larger area or greater yard shall be deemed
the principal building/use.
PROCESSING FACILITY — A building or an enclosed space used for the
collection and processing of materials. "Processing" means the preparation
of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such
means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing,
mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer (PE)
authorized to practice engineering as defined by New York State laws.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Individuals or organizations that provide
specialized services, including, but not limited to, medical practitioners,
attorneys, architects, engineers, photographers, brokers, and other similar
services. This classification excludes hospitals, banks, and savings and loan
associations.
PROPERTY LINE — A line bounding a lot. Also known as a "lot line."
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:865
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USE — Includes auditorium, theater, public hall, school
hall, meeting hall, church, temple and synagogue.
PUBLICLY OWNED BUILDING/LOT — A building or lot used and/or owned
by a government agency, school district or fire company.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — A building or lot used in connection with the
transmission or distribution of water, sewage, gas, electricity, telephone or
other public services.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING AND FACILITY — A building or lot used for
or in connection with the transmission, distribution or regulation of water,
sewage, gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, telecommunications or
other public utility service by a municipal corporation or by a corporation
subject to regulation by a state and/or federal regulatory agency. It does not
include the administrative offices of the utility.
PUBLIC WALKWAY — A passage or path designated for pedestrian activity
or walking.
QUARRY, SAND PIT, GRAVEL PIT or TOPSOIL STRIPPING — A lot of land or
part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel or other
minerals, or topsoil for sale, as an individual operation, and exclusive of the
process of grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for
which application for a building permit has been made in conformance with
the NYS Uniform Code.
RECREATION, INDOOR — Includes a bowling alley, theater, pool hall,
skating rink, gymnasium, health spa, video machine arcade, swimming pool
and similar places of indoor commercial recreation, both public and private,
as well as accessory uses, including user supplies, food service and sales,
service and storage of recreation equipment and accessories.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR — Includes a privately or publicly owned marina,
golf course and clubhouse, trap, skeet and archery ranges, swimming pool,
skating rink, park, beach, tennis court, racquetball court, camping area,
picnic area and similar places of outdoor recreation, as well as accessory
uses, including user supplies, food service and sales, service and storage of
recreation equipment and accessories.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A trailer or self-propelled motor vehicle
structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or
driven, and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for
recreation, camping and travel use and including, but not limited to, travel
trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
RECYCLING CENTERS — Facilities used for the receiving, temporary
storage, or transfer of materials for recycling or reuse. Junkyards are
excluded from this definition. Recycling centers may also include ancillary
sales of recycled materials.
RELATED BY ADOPTION — Persons who are parent/grandparent and child/
grandchild to each other and persons who are brother and sister to each
other and persons who are aunt or uncle or niece or nephew to each other
by reasons of a legal adoption.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:866
RELATED BY BLOOD — Persons who are parent and/or grandparent and
child and/or grandchild to each other; persons who are brother or sister to
each other, including brother or sister of the half blood; persons who are
aunt or uncle and niece or nephew to each other.
RELATED BY MARRIAGE — Persons who are husband and wife to each
other; persons who are mother- or father-in-law and son- or daughter-inlaw
to each other; persons who are brother- or sister-in-law to each other;
persons who are stepparent and stepchild to each other.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — Includes church, temple, synagogue, mosque,
parish house, convent, seminary and retreat house.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, EXPERIMENTAL OR TESTING
LABORATORY — A building or groups of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, materials testing, or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Includes one-family dwelling, two-family dwelling,
and multiple-family dwellings.
RESTAURANT — An establishment for the sale and on-premises
consumption of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business for the quick counter service of
food in a packaged form where the patron has the option to consume the
packaged food on or off the premises.
RETAIL OR PERSONAL SERVICE STORES AND SHOPS — An
establishment for the sale of goods, articles or consumer services
individually or in small quantities directly to the consumer. Retail store or
service shall not be interpreted to include the following: drive-up service,
gasoline station, motor vehicle repair service, new or used car sales and
service, and trailer or mobile home sales and service.
REZONING PETITION — A formal request to the Board of Trustees or Town
Board to have the Zoning Map amended.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The boundary of a road, street, highway, or expressway
owned and maintained by any federal, state, or local municipal entity.
RINGELMANN CHART — One which is described in the United States
Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity
of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER — The number of the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of smoke emission.
ROOM, HABITABLE — In any dwelling unit, the rooms used for bedrooms,
living room, dining room and kitchen.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
more than three persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption
to each other or the owner or operator.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:867
ROOFLINE — In the case of a flat roof, the uppermost line of the roof of a
building; in the case of a pitched roof, the lower edge of the eave; or in the
case of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost height of said facade
or parapet, provided that the facade or parapet extends around the entire
perimeter of the building at the same elevation.
SAWMILL — A facility where logs, partially processed cants, or bark are
sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, ground or otherwise processed to
produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for use on
the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot.
SCHOOL — Parochial, nursery, private and public school, college, university
and accessory uses operated under the Education Law of the State of New
York and governed by the New York State Department of Education and
shall exclude commercially operated schools of beauty, culture, business,
dancing, driving, music and similar establishments which are not so
governed.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings
divided into separate units or compartments used to meet the temporary
storage needs of businesses and residential users. A warehouse operated
for a specific commercial or industrial establishment shall not be considered
a self-service storage facility.
SEQRA — New York State Environmental Quality Review Act.
SERVICE AREA — Includes those parts of any lot which are used primarily
to provide access for servicing the use on the lot, including land used
for delivery of goods, storage, and collection of wastes and provisions for
maintenance.
SERVICE STATION (GAS) — Any building or land that is used for the sale
of motor fuel, oil, and motor vehicle accessories and which may or may not
include facilities for minor repairs of motor vehicles or an accessory food
store. Includes facilities not selling gasoline but specializing in oil and other
automobile fluid changes.
SETBACK — The least required horizontal distance between property line,
and any structure on the lot measured at the shortest point, including
terraces, porches, or any covered projection thereof, but excluding steps.
SETBACK, REAR — The setback to the rear lot line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The setback to any property line other than a street or
rear lot line.
SETBACK, STREET or FRONT — The setback to the street or front lot line.
On corner lots, both yards bordering the street shall be considered as street
setbacks. Such street setback shall be measured from the public right-ofway.
Alleys shall be considered streets for this requirement, except as noted
within this chapter.[Amended 3-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Includes the following:
The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
A.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:868
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIAL — General term used herein to refer
to any matter, material, device or performance, whether or not otherwise
specifically enumerated herein, which depicts, describes or relates to any
sexual conduct or to a specified anatomical area.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED NOVELTY STORE — Any establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its profit or stock-in-trade, the selling,
leasing, trading or renting thereof, for any form of consideration
whatsoever, instruments, devices and/or paraphernalia, which depict,
describe or relate to any sexual conduct or to a specified anatomical area.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of three or more stores, shops or similar
businesses offering a variety of goods and services, occupying adjoining
structures, whether attached or detached, having a common interrelated
parking, loading and site circulation system with consolidated access to
public roads. Also known as "malls," "retail centers," and "plazas."
SIGN — Any material, structure or device, or part thereof, composed of
lettered or pictorial matter which is located out-of-doors, or on the exterior
of any building, or indoors as a window sign, displaying an advertisement,
announcement, notice or name, and shall include any declaration,
demonstration, display, representation, illustration or insignia used to
advertise or promote the interests of any persons or business or cause when
such is placed in view of the general public.
Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation and sodomy.
B.
C. Masturbation.
FRAME SIGN — — A portable sign with two or more steeply angled
sides; also known as a "sandwich board" sign.
A.
AWNING or CANOPY SIGN — Any visual message incorporated into an
awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover
over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.
B.
COPY-CHANGE SIGN — A sign on which the visual message may be
periodically changed.
C.
DIGITAL MESSAGE SIGN — Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or
symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed
display screen composed of illuminated segments. A sign that only
displays time and/or temperature shall not be considered a digital
message board/center.
D.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An on-site sign that is designed and erected
solely for the purposes of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic
within a project or site.
E.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not attached or part of any building
but separate and permanently affixed by any other means, in or upon
the ground. Included are pole signs, pylon signs and masonry wall-type
signs.
F.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:869
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing all elements which form an integral part of the sign. The structure
supporting a sign shall be excluded unless the structure is designed in a
way to form an integral background for the display. If the sign consists of
more than one section, all areas will be totaled.
SIGN DIRECTORY — A listing of two or more business enterprises,
consisting of a matrix and sign components.
SIGN STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for
the sign. In the case of a sign structure consisting of two or more sides
where the angle formed between any two of the sides or the projections
thereof exceeds 30°, each side shall be considered a separate sign
structure.
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography,
location of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, boundaries, all
essential dimensions and bearings and any other information deemed
necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, either from the interior or exterior of the sign, and which
includes reflective and phosphorescent light.
G.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign unrelated to a business or a profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the
premises where such sign is located.
H.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels or
otherwise, designed to be movable and not structurally attached to the
ground, a building, a structure or another sign.
I.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached to the building wall or
structure and which extends horizontally more than 15 inches from the
plane of such wall, or a sign which is perpendicular to the face of such
wall or structure.
J.
REPRESENTATIVE SIGN — A three-dimensional sign built so as to
physically represent the object advertised.
K.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A portable sign with two or more steeply
angled sides; also known as an "A-frame sign."
L.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign related to a single activity or event having
a limited timeframe as specified in Part 5, Article 52, of this chapter.
M.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is painted on or attached to the outside
wall of a building with the face of the sign in the plane parallel to such
wall and not extending more than 15 inches from the face of such wall.
N.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign visible from a sidewalk, street or other public
place, painted or affixed on glass or other window material, or located
inside within four feet of the window, but not including graphics in
connection with customary window display of products.
O.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:870
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Authority delegated to the Planning Board by the
Board of Trustees or Town Board which enables the Planning Board to
approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the site development plans
for all buildings or uses where site plan review is required.
SOLAR ACCESS — The orientation of streets and lots to the sun so as
to permit individual properties to use passive and/or active solar energy
resources.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Includes flat plate, concentrating and
tracking collectors, dissipators, roof ponds and updated appurtenances.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An arrangement or combination of
components and structures designed to provide heating, cooling, hot water
or electricity through the process of collecting, converting, storing,
protecting against unnecessary dissipation and distributing solar energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE — A solar energy system designed to
provide heating, cooling, hot water or electricity that requires external
mechanical devices for operation.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MAJOR — All solar energy systems other than a
minor solar energy system.[Added 4-17-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MINOR — A solar energy system that is
secondary to a lawful primary use of the premises, where the total surface
area of all system components on the lot does not increase lot coverage by
more than 1,000 square feet in the USE, SSF, UTF, UMF, and SMF districts
or, in all other districts, 4,000 square feet.[Added 4-17-2018 by L.L. No.
3-2018]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE — A solar energy system which relies
upon the design and elements of a building to enhance the use of natural
forces, including solar radiation and nighttime coolness, to provide heating,
cooling or hot water and which is not primarily dependent upon mechanical
devices for operation.
SOLAR SKY SPACE — The space between a solar collector and the sun
which must be free of obstructions for a solar energy system's effective
operation.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A document approved by the Planning Board that
allows a specifically designed use that would not be appropriate generally
or without restrictions throughout the zoning district but which, if
controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood,
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. See Article 66.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes less than completely and
opaquely covered:
A. Human genitals or pubic region.
B. The cleavage of the human buttocks.
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:871
STABLE — A building in which horses are kept for public or private use,
remuneration, hire or sale.
STACKING SPACE — A temporary space, eight feet by 18 feet, to be used
by motorists while waiting to use drive-in units, car washes, gas pumps or
other similar uses.
STORY — Part of a building which is between one floor level and the next
higher floor level or, if there is no floor above it, then the ceiling above it.
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
STREET CENTER LINE — A line midway between and parallel to two street
frontage property lines.
STREET FRONTAGE — The lot lines which abut a public street or right-ofway
of a planned street.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of
the street shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street as dedicated by a deed or
record. Where the width of the street is not established, the street line shall
be considered to be 25 feet from the center of the street.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy or ornamentation, including but not limited to buildings, mobile
homes, towers, flagpoles, swing sets, antennas, satellite dishes, or gas or
liquid storage tanks, that are principally above ground.
SWIMMING POOL — Any constructed body of water or structure to contain
water and any accessory equipment pertaining thereto, designed to be used
or intended to be used for swimming or bathing by any family or persons
residing on the premises and their guests. Portable wading pools, two feet
or more deep, shall be considered "swimming pools."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Towers and/or antennas and
nonhabitable accessory structures used in connection with the provision of
cellular telephone service, personal communication services, digital and/
or data communication services, paging services, radio and television
broadcast services and similar broadcast services (also referred to as
That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area
falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a
point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around
the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of
the breast but shall not be interpreted to include any portion of the
cleavage of the breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not so
exposed.
C.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
D.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:872
"facilities" or "equipment"). Examples of such structures include utility or
transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
TERMINAL FACILITIES — A facility which is used for the transfer of goods
or materials from one form of transportation to another (e.g., from a tractortrailer
to a home delivery truck). Such transfer of goods or materials is
typically done within an enclosed structure.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the performing arts
or the viewing of motion pictures.
THEATER, DRIVE-IN — Open land with its appurtenant facilities devoted
primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions to
patrons seated in automobiles or on outdoor seats.
TOWER — A structure designed to support antennas. It includes, but is
not limited to, freestanding towers, guyed towers, monopoles and similar
structures.
TOWN BOARD — The elected legislative body, Town of Union, New York.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Union.
TOWN CODE — The local laws, ordinances, rules, certain resolutions, and
regulations of the Town of Union that are collectively known as the "Code of
the Town of Union," and hereafter referred to as the "Town Code."
TOWNHOME — One of a series of single-family dwellings connected by
common party walls and forming a continuous group of homes.
TOWN PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The Public Works Department of
the Town of Union as described in the Code of the Town of Union.
TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used as the power unit in
combination with a semitrailer or trailer, or two such trailers in tandem.
Any such motor vehicle shall not carry cargo except that a tractor and
semitrailer engaged in the transportation of automobiles may transport
motor vehicles on part of the power unit. (Ref: New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 151a.)
TRAILER — Any vehicle not propelled by its own power drawn on the public
highways by a motor vehicle as defined in this section, except motor vehicle
side cars, vehicles being towed by a nonrigid support and vehicles designed
and primarily used for other purposes and only occasionally drawn by such
a motor vehicle.
TREE CUTTING — The removal, felling or destruction of 50% or more
of a tree, but does not include trimming branches for tree maintenance
purposes.
TREE REMOVAL — The destruction of any tree by cutting, girdling,
interfering with the water supply, applying chemicals, or regrading around
the base of the trunk.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY (UROW) — The ultimate right-of-way as set forth
in the Town of Union Official Map. The ultimate right-of-way incorporates
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:873
the area for future street widening, sidewalks and future street
construction. The land may or may not be in public ownership.
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried but
which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product,
chemical, preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint, or other substance.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, a building or a structure is
designed, intended, arranged, used or maintained.
USE, CHANGE OF — Any change in the type or nature of occupancy of a
building or land, except the following:
USE, PERMITTED — Any use specifically allowed in the district, excluding
illegal uses and nonconforming uses.
VARIANCE, AREA — The authorization of the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical
requirements set forth in this chapter. Procedures and criteria for use
variances are found in Article 67.
VARIANCE, USE — The authorization of the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or prohibited by
this chapter. Procedures and criteria for use variances are found in Article
67.
VIDEO MACHINE ARCADE — An amusement center having coin-operated
video machines for entertainment. A video machine arcade is an indoor
recreation facility.
VIEWSHED — An area within range of vision in any direction from a
particular site or location.
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The elected legislative body, Village of
Endicott or Johnson City.
VILLAGE CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Endicott or Johnson
City.
VILLAGE CODE — The local laws, ordinances, rules, certain resolutions,
and regulations of the Villages that are collectively known as the "Code of
the Village of Endicott" or the "Code of the Village of Johnson City," and
hereafter referred to as the "Village Code."
A change in the volume of use without any physical extension of sales
and/or service area.
A.
An expansion or substitution of accessory or incidental uses in
connection with the established principal use, except that in no case
shall such an accessory or incidental use dominate in area or purpose
the principal lawful use.
B.
C. A change in ownership.
D. A change to a generically similar use.
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § 300-70.2
237:874
VILLAGE PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The Public Works Department
of the Village of Endicott or Johnson City as described in the Village Code.
WAREHOUSE — A building, typically enclosed, designed or used for the
storage of commodities; includes warehouse, wholesale establishment,
discount house, bulk storage and bulk sales outlet.
WETLANDS — Areas designated as freshwater wetlands by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or the Army Corps of
Engineers, as prescribed by law and subject to Chapter 125, Freshwater
Wetlands, of the Code of the Town of Union.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — A business that deals with the buying or selling
or arranging for sale of goods or commodities, usually in bulk, for
purchasers other than individual customers, to include offices, freight
distribution centers, large storage facilities and the use of delivery trucks in
the routine operation of the business.
WILDLIFE REFUGE — Includes bird sanctuary, zoo, forest reserve, game
reserve and botanical garden.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between the front lot line and the front line of a
building extended to the side lot lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard
shall be measured between the front line of the building and the street line.
YARD, REAR — A yard between the rear lot line and rear line of a building
extended to the side lot lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be
measured between the rear lot line and the rear line of the building.
YARD, SIDE — The area between the side building line and the related side
lot line and between the front yard and the rear yard.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The officially established Zoning Board
of Appeals of the Town and Villages with the duties and responsibilities
identified in Part 6 of this chapter; also referred to as the "Zoning Board" or
"Board of Appeals."
§ 300-70.2 STORM SEWERS § 300-70.2
237:875
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation. The following is a chronological
listing of legislation of the Village of Johnson City adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the
reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not general
and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in
the Code nor on this list is available from the office of the Village
Clerk. The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of
the Code was a taxation resolution, adopted 6-18-1993. A complete
listing, including disposition, of all legislation reviewed in
conjunction with the original publication of the Code is on file in
the office of the Village Clerk.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-5-1993 Towing Ch. 258
L.L. No.
1-1993
12-21-1993 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-1994
2-15-1994 Economic Development
Zone
NCM
L.L. No.
2-1994
2-15-1994 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
3-1994
6-14-1994 Adopt-A-Road-And-Lot
Program
Ch. 84
L.L. No.
4-1994
8-16-1994 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
5-1994
9-20-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-1998
L.L. No.
6-1994
10-4-1994 Economic Development
Zone amendment
Ch. 10
L.L. No.
1-1995
2-7-1995 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
2-1995
5-2-1995 Plumbing code
amendment
Ch. 200
L.L. No.
3-1995
5-16-1995 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
4-1995
6-20-1995 Tax benefits for relocating
businesses
Ch. 10, Art. II
§ 300-70.2 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:876
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-1995
6-20-1995 Administration of parks
and recreation
amendment
Ch. 51
L.L. No.
6-1995
6-20-1995 Water amendment Ch. 270
L.L. No.
7-1995
7-18-1995 Economic Development
Zone Map amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
8-1995
9-19-1995 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
1-1996
3-5-1996 Dance and dance halls
amendment
Ch. 132
L.L. No.
1-1997
1-21-1997 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 240
L.L. No.
2-1997
1-21-1997 Civilian fingerprinting Ch. 146
L.L. No.
3-1997
2-18-1997 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
4-1997
5-27-1997 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 222, Part 1
L.L. No.
5-1997
7-22-1997 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
6-1997
9-16-1997 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 12-16-1997 Wellhead protection;
zoning amendment
Ch. 272; repealed
by L.L. No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
1-1998
5-5-1998 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-1998
6-23-1998 Numbering of buildings;
solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment; housing
standards amendment;
property maintenance
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 117; 236, Art.
I; 166; 208;
repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
3-1998
7-14-1998 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
4-1998
7-14-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:877
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-1998
8-18-1998 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
6-1998
9-15-1998 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 8-18-1998 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
7-1998
10-6-1998 Licensed occupations:
pawnbrokers
Ch. 172, Art. II
L.L. No.
8-1998
10-20-1998 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
1-1999
1-5-1999 Licensed occupations:
dealers in secondhand
goods
Ch. 172, Art. III
L.L. No.
2-1999
3-2-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
3-1999
8-17-1999 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
4-1999
11-16-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-1999
12-7-1999 Property and building
nuisances
Ch. 206
L.L. No.
6-1999
12-7-1999 Plumbing Code
amendment
Ch. 200
L.L. No.
7-1999
12-21-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2000
1-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 1-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-2000
3-7-2000 Alarm systems Ch. 88
Res. 4-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
3-2000
6-20-2000 Constable Ch. 8
Res. 6-20-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:878
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2000
8-15-2000 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
Res. 9-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2000
12-5-2000 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 1-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2001
3-20-2001 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 4-17-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-2001
5-1-2001 Empire Zone: general
provisions; time of annual
Village election
amendment
Ch. 10, Arts. I and
II
L.L. No.
3-2001
5-1-2001 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
4-2001
5-29-2001 Personnel policies: health
insurance repealer
Ch. 55, Art. III
(footnote only)
Res. 9-18-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 12-4-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2001
12-18-2001 Fire prevention and
building construction: fire
prevention amendment
Ch. 148, Art. II
Res. 12-18-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 1-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 1-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2002
4-16-2002 Various Code
amendments
Chs. 88; 96, Art.
III; 118; 132; 138;
140; 166; 192;
200; 208; 214,
Art. I; 236, Art. I;
254
Res. 7-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:879
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2002
8-13-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
3-2002
9-3-2002 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2002
11-19-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 12-17-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2003
5-6-2003 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
2-2003
5-27-2003 Water amendment Ch. 270, Part 2
L.L. No.
3-2003
8-11-2003 Animals amendments;
zoning amendment
Ch. 96, Arts. I and
II; repealed by
L.L. No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
4-2003
8-11-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
Res. 8-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 8-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 9-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 9-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 9-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
Res. 9-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2003
12-22-2003 Water amendment Ch. 270
L.L. No.
1-2004
5-25-2004 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
2-2004
6-15-2004 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
3-2004
8-17-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
4-2004
9-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:880
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. 12-7-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2005
4-5-2005 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 244; repealed
by L.L. No. 2-2011
Res. 4-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-2005
5-24-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 222, Part 1
L.L. No.
3-2005
5-24-2005 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish, and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2005
9-66-2005 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
5-2005
10-18-2005 Taxation: infrastructure
exemption
Ch. 250, Art. V
L.L. No.
6-2005
11-1-2005 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
7-2005
12-6-2005 Sex offenders Ch. 223
L.L. No.
8-2005
12-6-2005 Empire Zone amendment Ch. 10, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2006
4-4-2006 Outdoor woodburning
furnaces
Ch. 184
L.L. No.
2-2006
4-18-2006 Plumbing code
amendment
Ch. 200
L.L. No.
3-2006
5-30-2006 Water: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 270, Part 1
L.L. No.
4-2006
12-19-2006 Building Code
administration
Ch. 114
L.L. No.
5-2006
12-19-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
6-2006
12-19-2006 Fire prevention Ch. 148
L.L. No.
7-2006
12-19-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
1-2007
3-20-2007 Taxation: targeted
business investment
exemption
Ch. 250, Art. III
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:881
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2007
5-29-2007 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 238
L.L. No.
3-2007
5-29-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 244
L.L. No.
4-2007
5-29-2007 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
5-2007
8-14-2007 Storm sewers: illicit
discharges, activities and
connections
Ch. 237, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2008
3-4-2008 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 9
L.L. No.
2-2008
7-15-2008 Plumbing code
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 200; 244;
repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
3-2008
9-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
4-2008
12-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2009
4-7-2009 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
2-2009
7-21-2009 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2009
7-21-2009 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 222, Part 1
L.L. No.
4-2009
9-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2009
12-1-2009 Plumbing code
amendment
Ch. 200
L.L. No.
1-2010
1-5-2010 Taxation: home
improvement exemption
Ch. 250, Art. VI
L.L. No.
2-2010
1-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
3-2010
8-17-2010 Taxicabs repealer;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254, reference
only; Ch. 264
L.L. No.
4-2010
8-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:882
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2010
8-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
6-2010
8-17-2010 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
7-2010
8-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
8-2010
8-17-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 192
L.L. No.
9-2010
11-16-2010 Smoking amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
1-2011
3-1-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-2011
5-3-2011 Zoning Ch. 300
L.L. No.
3-2011
5-3-2011 Flood damage prevention Ch. 156
L.L. No.
4-2011
5-3-2011 Historic Preservation
Districts
Ch. 164
L.L. No.
5-2011
5-3-2011 Telecommunications
facilities
Ch. 256
L.L. No.
6-2011
6-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
7-2011
7-19-2011 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 222, Part 1
L.L. No.
8-2011
8-16-2011 Targeted business
investment tax exemption
amendment; home
improvement tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 250, Arts. III
and VI
L.L. No.
9-2011
8-16-2011 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
10-2011
9-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2012
3-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
2-2012
4-3-2012 2012/2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2012
5-22-2012 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 222, Part 1
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:883
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2012
5-22-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2012
8-7-2012 Home improvement tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
L.L. No.
6-2012
8-7-2012 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 222, Parts 1,2
and 3
L.L. No.
7-2012
8-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
8-2012
8-21-2012 Filling and grading Ch. 134
L.L. No.
9-2012
8-21-2012 Fire insurance claims Ch. 147
L.L. No.
10-2012
9-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
11-2012
9-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
12-2012
12-18-2012 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 140
L.L. No.
13-2012
12-18-2012 Smoking policy
amendment
Ch. 230, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2013
2-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
2-2013
2-19-2013 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2013
3-5-2013 Water: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 270, Part 1
L.L. No.
4-2013
4-2-2013 2013/2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:884
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2013
5-7-2013 General provisions:
adoption of Code
amendment; housing
standards amendment;
property and building
nuisances amendment;
signs and billboards
amendment; solid waste:
garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment;
streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
wellhead, aquifer
recharge and watershed
protection zones
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch.
166; Ch. 206; Ch.
226; Ch. 236, Art.
I; Ch. 240, Art. I;
Ch. 244; Ch. 272;
Ch. 300
L.L. No.
6-2013
5-21-2013 Graffiti Ch. 163
L.L. No.
7-2013
6-18-2013 Shopping carts Ch. 225
L.L. No.
8-2013
6-18-2013 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
9-2013
10-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
10-2013
12-3-2013 Home improvement tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
L.L. No.
1-2014
4-1-2014 2014/2015 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2014
4-15-2014 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2014
4-15-2014 Water: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 270, Part 1
L.L. No.
4-2014
4-15-2014 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 222, Part 1
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:885
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2014
5-20-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment; street
excavations and
disturbances amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I;
Ch. 240, Art. II;
Ch. 300
L.L. No.
6-2014
10-7-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 244
L.L. No.
1-2015
1-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
2-2015
3-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
3-2015
3-17-2015 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 188
L.L. No.
4-2015
5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
5-2015
7-21-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
6-2015
7-21-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
7-2015
10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
8-2015
11-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
9-2015
12-1-2015 Home improvement tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
L.L. No.
1-2016
3-15-2016 Water: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 270, Part 1
L.L. No.
2-2016
4-5-2016 2016/2017 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2016
4-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
4-2016
9-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
5-2016
9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
6-2016
10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
7-2016
10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:886
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
8-2016
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
1-2017
1-3-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
2-2017
3-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
3-2017
4-18-2017 Telecommunications
facilities amendment
Ch. 256
L.L. No.
4-2017
4-18-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2017
7-18-2017 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 5
L.L. No.
6-2017
7-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
7-2017
8-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
8-2017
9-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
9-2017
10-3-2017 Transient retail
businesses and vendors
Ch. 196
L.L. No.
10-2017
10-3-2017 Animals: general
provisions amendment;
fowl and poultry repealer;
zoning amendment
Ch. 96, Art. I; Ch.
96, Art. II
(footnote only);
Ch. 300
L.L. No.
11-2017
10-3-2017 Bicycles, rollerblades and
skateboards
Ch. 108
L.L. No.
12-2017
12-5-2017 Fire insurance claims
amendment
Ch. 147
L.L. No.
1-2018
1-2-2018 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 208
L.L. No.
2-2018
3-6-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
3-2018
4-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
4-2018
5-1-2018 Plumbing Code
Amendment
Ch. 200
L.L. No.
5-2018
5-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 STORM SEWERS § DL-1
237:887
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
6-2018
5-15-2018 Solid Waste: Garbage,
Rubbish and Refuse
Amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
7-2018
5-15-2018 Water: General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 270, Pt. 1
L.L. No.
8-2018
5-15-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 222, Pt. 1
L.L. No.
9-2018
7-17-2018 Towing Amendment Ch. 258
L.L. No.
10-2018
7-17-2018 Littering Ch. 174
L.L. No.
11-2018
7-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
12-2018
8-7-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
L.L. No.
13-2018
8-21-2018 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 240
L.L. No.
14-2018
12-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
15-2018
12-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 264
L.L. No.
16-2018
12-4-2018 Solid Waste: Garbage,
Rubbish and Refuse
Amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
L.L. No.
17-2018
12-4-2018 Water: General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 270, Pt. 1
L.L. No.
18-2018
12-4-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 222, Pt. 1
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-15-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
L.L. No.
2-2019
2-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 264
§ DL-1 JOHNSON CITY CODE § DL-1
237:888

VILLAGE OF JOHNSON CITY
LOCAL LAW NO. 3 FOR THE YEAR 2019
A LOCAL LAW AMENDING CHAPTER 300 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
ENTITLED “ZONING”
Section 1. Chapter 300 of the Village Code entitled “Zoning” shall be amended as follows:
§ 300-53.15. Fences.
Delete and Replace with:
F. Except for animal husbandry, stables, riding academies and kennel uses in an RR
District, livestock, poultry, cattle, barbed wire and/or electrically charged fencing
are prohibited. Barbed wire can also be used in nonresidential districts, provided
that the barbed wire starts at least six feet in height above the grade.
G. In residential districts, no fences shall be constructed, established or built in excess
of six feet in height, with the exception of tennis or recreation courts which may be
12 feet in height. In nonresidential districts, fences for nonresidential uses may be
constructed, established or built up to 10 feet in height above the average natural
grade, provided that they do not create a traffic hazard.
Insert:
J. Construction materials specifications shall be as follows:
1. Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain link, wrought iron, or PVC
permanent fencing material.
2. Materials such as sheet metal, razor wire, page wire, pallets, doors, old building
materials or non-traditional fence materials are prohibited.
3. Temporary fences are permitted only for the duration of a construction project.
[The remainder of this section shall remain the same]
Section 2. Remainder
Except as hereinabove amended, the remainder of the Code of the Village of Johnson City
shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Separability
The provisions of this Local Law are separable and if any provision, clause, sentence,
subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any
person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words, or
parts of this local law or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent that this local law would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part had not been included 
therein, and as if such person or circumstance, to which the local law or part thereof is held
inapplicable, had been specifically exempt therefrom.
Section 4. Effective Date
This Local Law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the New York State
Secretary of State in accordance with Section 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.

VILLAGE OF JOHNSON CITY
LOCAL LAW NO. 3 FOR THE YEAR 2020
A LOCAL LAW AMENDING CHAPTER 300
OF THE VILLAGE CODE ENTITLED “ZONING”
Section 1. Chapter 300 of the Village Code shall be amended as follows:
§ 300-40.9 Home occupations of Board.
A. Remains the same.
B. Delete and Replace with: The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building of an owner occupied one-family dwelling and shall not cover more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area.
C. Remains the same.
D. Remains the same.
E. Remains the same.
F. Remains the same.
G. Delete and Replace with: The selling of merchandise to walk-in customers and the
selling of merchandise not produced by such home occupation is prohibited.
H. Remains the same.
I. Remains the same.
J. Remains the same.
K. Insert new subsection (K). The new subsection reads as follows: Inventory and supplies
shall not occupy more than 50% percent of the area permitted to be used as a home
occupation.
L. Insert new subsection (L). The new subsection reads as follows: The home occupation
shall not involve any operation considered to be hazardous.
Section 2. Remainder
Except as hereinabove amended, the remainder of the Code of the Village of Johnson City
shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Separability
The provisions of this Local Law are separable and if any provision, clause, sentence,
subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any
person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words, or
parts of this local law or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent that this local law would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part had not been included
therein, and as if such person or circumstance, to which the local law or part thereof is held
inapplicable, had been specifically exempt therefrom.
Section 4. Effective Date
This Local Law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the New York State
Secretary of State in accordance with Section 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.