The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 C-1. Title.
This Charter shall be known as the "1923 Revised Charter of the City of
Jamestown."
 C-2. Boundaries.
The City of Jamestown is bounded and described as follows:
A. All that part of the first and second townships of the 11th range of
townships of the Holland Land Company's survey, and according to
such survey bounded as follows: Beginning at the southwest corner of
Lot 48 in the first township; running thence northerly along the west
line of Lot 48 to the north line of the first township; thence westerly
along the township line to the southwest corner of Lot 41 in the second
township; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 41 and 42, to the
northerly bounds of the lands of the Erie Railroad Company; thence
westerly along the northerly bounds of the lands of said railroad
company 1,403 feet to an iron stake; thence north 1 and 10 minutes
east to the center of the outlet of Chautauqua Lake; thence easterly
along the center line of said outlet to a point due south of the northwest
corner of Lot 35; thence north to the northwest corner of said Lot 35;
thence easterly along the north line of Lot 35, Lot 27 and the east 1/3 of
Lot 26; thence to the westerly bounds of Curtis Street; thence northerly
along said westerly bounds of Curtis Street about 2,000 feet to the
angle therein; thence easterly at right angles with the aforesaid west
bounds of Curtis Street 25 feet to the center thereof; thence northerly
along the westerly bounds of Lot 19 to the northwest corner thereof;
thence easterly along the northerly bounds of said Lot 19, 750 feet to an
iron stake, distant 589 35/100 feet westerly from the northeast corner
of the west 1/3 of said Lot 19 (measured along the north line of said lot);
thence southerly parallel to and 750 feet easterly from the westerly line
of Lot 19 to a point in the present north boundary line of the City;
thence easterly in direct continuation of the northerly line of Lots 35, 27
and 26 extended to the east line of Lot 19; thence southerly along the
east line of Lot 19 to the outlet of Chautauqua Lake; thence across said
outlet to the northeast corner of Lot 18; thence southerly along the east
line of Lots 18 and 17 to the north line of the first township; thence east
along the township line to the northeast corner of Lot 24 in the first
township; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 24 to the southeast
corner thereof; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 24, 32, 40
and 48 to the place of beginning.
B. All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Ellicott, County of
Chautauqua and State of New York and being a part of Lot 56, Town 1
and Range 11 and also Lot 49, Town 2 and Range 11 of the Holland
Land Company's Survey and being further bounded and described as
 C-1 CHARTER  C-2
C:3
 C-3. Corporate name and powers.
The citizens of this state who may from time to time reside within the
territorial limits of the City of Jamestown are hereby created a municipal
corporation in perpetuity to be known as the City of Jamestown. The City
may take and hold in trust real or personal property for any public purpose,
upon such terms as may be prescribed by the grantor or donor, and may
provide for the execution of such trusts. The City may sue or be sued,
prosecute and defend in any court of law or equity.
 C-4. Continuation of rights, liabilities and civil divisions.
All property, real and personal, rights, powers, privileges and contracts
at the time of the passage of this Charter possessed, owned, occupied,
exercised or enjoyed by, as well as all the duties, contracts, obligations
and liabilities imposed upon the City of Jamestown shall remain in and are
follows: Beginning at a set rebar w/cap on the easterly bounds of said
Lot 56, old City boundary, at its intersection with the northerly bounds
of improved Baker Street; thence S 57-13'-36" W, along said highway
boundary, a distance of 283.31 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence
N 15-04'-27" W a distance of 404.32 feet to an existing iron pipe;
thence S 70-34'-40" W a distance of 95.44 feet to an existing iron pipe;
thence N 15-18'-19" W a distance of 1650.50 feet to an existing iron
pin; thence S 74-40'-19" W a distance of 811.00 feet to an existing
rebar w/cap; thence N 00-27'-41" W a distance of 77.18 feet to an
existing iron pipe; thence N 02-59'-08" W a distance of 871.47 feet to
an existing iron pipe on the northerly bounds of said Lot 56; thence
S 89-50'-58" W, along said lot and town line, a distance of 438.51
feet to an existing rebar w/cap; thence N 00-54'-47" W a distance
of 120.00 feet to an existing rebar w/cap; thence N 89-50'-58" E a
distance of 121.49 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 00-24'-53"
W a distance of 260.43 feet to an existing rebar at the southwesterly
corner of Homestead Boulevard; thence N 89-35'-07" E a distance
of 100.00 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 00-24'-53" W a
distance of 125.00 feet to a point on the center line of Glenwood
Avenue, passing through an existing iron pipe 25.00 feet southerly of
the last described point; thence N 89-35'-07" E, along the center line of
Glenwood Avenue, a distance of 1131.18 feet to a set rebar w/cap on the
easterly bounds of said Lot 49, old City boundary; thence S 00-21'-05"
W, along said lot line, a distance of 511.11 feet to an existing iron pipe
at the southeasterly corner thereof; thence S 89-32'-31" E, along the
northerly bounds of said Lot 56 which line is also a town line, old City
boundary and center line of Newland Avenue, a distance of 596.04 feet
to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 56; thence S 04-24'-30" E, along
said lot line and old City boundary and passing through an existing
iron pipe 25.09 feet southerly of the last described point, a distance of
2535.47 feet to the point and place of beginning. Containing 64.61 +/-
acres of land according to a boundary survey prepared by Steven R.
Gustafson, P.L.S. dated November, 1992.
 C-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-4
C:4
hereby transferred to, vested in and imposed upon said City of Jamestown.
All divisions of said City into road, fire and other districts, highways, streets
and alleys shall remain, be and continue such divisions, highways, streets
and alleys in said City of Jamestown. All local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the City Council of said City in force at the time of the
passage of this Charter shall be and remain valid and effectual as the local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of said City and of its City Council
until repealed, modified or changed; subject, however, to the provisions
of this Charter. Said City Council is hereby authorized and empowered
in the name, for and in behalf of the City of Jamestown, to enforce all
such contracts, local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including the
collection of debts and demands, the imposition and collection of fines and
penalties, and the prosecution and defense of all suits, and to do, take and
perform all other acts and proceedings that may be or become necessary or
proper to carry out and enforce said contracts, local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations with the same force and to the full extent as might have
been done if this Charter had not been passed. The rights and privileges of
all persons or parties that may have arisen or accrued under, pursuant to or
by reason thereof shall remain and be the same under this Charter as they
would have been had this Charter not been passed. All rights and liabilities
of said City existing at the time of the passage of this Charter shall be in no
wise affected or changed hereby.
 C-4 CHARTER  C-4
C:5

ARTICLE II
Officers
 C-5. Elected officers.
 C-6. Appointed officers. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
4-28-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The appointed officers of the City shall include a Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, Comptroller, Corporation Counsel/Director of Human
Resources, Director of Public Works/Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation, the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities and
Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
 C-7. Elections.
 C-8. Appointment procedures.
A. The elected officers of the City shall be a Mayor and nine Council
members.
B. If a vacancy, as defined by the New York State Public Officers Law,
occurs in an elected office of the City of Jamestown, the City Council
shall select, 60 days after such vacancy occurs, by a majority vote of its
membership, a person to serve until the next General Election
scheduled not less than 60 days after such vacancy occurs. The person
appointed to fill such vacancy shall be a member of the same political
party as the person who vacated the office.
A. Time of City elections. The election of the Mayor shall be held on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in the year 1995 and
on the same day each fourth year thereafter. The election of all other
elective officers of the City shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in the year 1995 and on the same day each
odd-numbered year thereafter. The election of the Mayor and the
members of the City Council shall be conducted under the Election Law
of the State of New York. Every inhabitant of the City who shall, at the
time and place of offering his/her vote, be qualified to vote for a
member of the Assembly and shall be then and there entitled to vote for
all officers elected by the City at large and for all ward officers to be
elected by his or her ward.
B. Nomination of candidates. All candidates for elected offices of this City,
including Judge of the City Court of Jamestown, shall be nominated by
party primary or independent nomination in conformity with the
Election Law of the State of New York.
C. Election of officers. The election of the elected officers of this City shall
be conducted in conformity with the Election Law of the State of New
York.
 C-5 CHARTER  C-8
C:7
 C-9. Terms of office. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
The terms of office of the various elected and appointed officers of the City
shall be as follows:
A. Method of appointment. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in
this Charter or in the City Code for a specific officer or position, the
appointed officers of the City shall be nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by a majority of all members of the City Council. At the first
regular or special meeting of the City Council held during the month of
January in the year 1996 or at a subsequent regular meeting as soon
thereafter as may be and on the same day during each fourth year
thereafter or at a subsequent regular meeting as soon thereafter as
may be, the Mayor shall nominate such of the appointed officers and
employees specified herein whose terms have expired. A certificate
signed by the Mayor of every appointment to office shall be made and
filed with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. In case the
City Council neglects or refuses to confirm any nomination made by the
Mayor or by any officer or board at the meeting at which it was made or
at the next regular meeting, such Mayor, officer or board shall, at the
next regular meeting subsequent to such final neglect or refusal to
confirm, nominate some other person and shall continue to do so at
successive meetings until the nomination last made shall be confirmed.
If the Mayor or other officer or board shall for two consecutive regular
meetings of the City Council fail or refuse to make any nomination
provided by this Charter, the City Council shall proceed to nominate
and elect said person by a 2/3 vote of all the members of the Council.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 4-28-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
B. The appointing power. Except as otherwise provided herein, all other
officers, boards and the like shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council.
A. The term of office of the Mayor and all appointed officers of the City
specified in  C-6 of the Charter, except the Chief of Police/Director of
Public Safety, shall begin on the first day of January in the year 1996
and shall continue for successive terms of four years each from that
date. The term of office for the members of the City Council shall begin
on the first day of January in the year 1996 and shall continue for
successive terms of two years each from that date.
B. The term of office of the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety shall
begin on the first day of January in the year 2006 and shall continue for
successive terms of four years each from that date.
C. All elected and appointed officers and employees for whom a term of
office is specified by the provisions of this Charter shall continue in
office until their several successors are duly elected, appointed,
employed and qualified, as the case may be.
 C-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-10
C:8
 C-10. Qualification of officers.
 C-11. Oath and bond. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, within 24 hours after
the certificate of election or appointment hereinbefore mentioned shall have
been filed with him or her, shall notify, in writing, either personally or by
mail, every person so certified to have been elected or appointed of his or
her election or appointment, as the case may be. Every person elected or
appointed to office in said City shall, before performing any of his or her
duties, take the oath of office prescribed by the Constitution of this state.
All such oaths, except that of the Mayor, which shall be filed with the Clerk
of Chautauqua County, shall be filed with the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk. If any person elected or appointed to office in said City
shall not within five days after being so notified of his or her election or
appointment take such oath of office and give the security required of him
or her by this Charter or by law or lawfully required of him or her by the City
Council, the City Council may treat such omission as a refusal to serve and
may declare vacant the office to which he or she was elected or appointed.
 C-12. Salaries. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 4-30-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
Effective January 1, 2006, and every four years thereafter, the Mayor and
City Council shall appoint a Salary Review Commission to review and
recommend the salaries of all elected officials. The Commission shall be
comprised of six voting members, three of which shall be designated by the
City Council and three by the Mayor. The Director of Human Resources,
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and the Comptroller shall
be ex officio members. In the event of a tie vote, the Comptroller shall be
authorized to cast the deciding vote. The Commission shall recommend to
the Mayor and the City Council salary adjustments for elected offices at
A. No person shall be elected to any City office unless he or she is a
resident of said City or to any district or ward office unless he or she is a
resident of the district or ward for which he or she is elected; and when
any elected City officer shall cease to be a resident of the City or any
district or ward officer shall cease to be a resident of the district or
ward for which he or she was elected, his or her office shall thereby
become vacant.
B. No person shall be appointed to any City office unless he or she is a
resident of the City or to any district or ward office unless he or she is a
resident of the district or ward for which he or she is appointed.
Exceptions shall be made subject to the provisions of the Municipal
Home Rule Law. When any appointed officer shall cease to be a resident
of the City of Jamestown or whenever any appointed ward or district
officer shall cease to be a resident of the ward or district for which he or
she was appointed, his or her office shall become vacant.
 C-10 CHARTER  C-12
C:9
least one year prior to the general election in which that office is scheduled
to be filled.
 C-13. Disposition of fees paid to officers. [Amended 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
All fees received by any paid officer of the City shall be forthwith paid
over to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and become the
property of the City.
 C-14. Removal, suspension or termination of appointed City
officers.
 C-15. Resignation of officer. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The resignation of any officer shall be made, in writing, to the Mayor and
City Council and be filed with the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk.
 C-16. Blanket bonding.
The City may obtain blanket bonding for City officers and employees in
accordance with Public Officers Law  11(2).
A. Effective January 1, 2008, the Mayor shall receive an annual salary of
$72,000 payable in installments at least semimonthly; effective January
1, 2008, through January 1, 2011.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, state law, or personnel
rules, the Mayor shall have the power to remove, suspend or terminate
any appointed City officer subject to approval by a majority vote of the
City Council.
B. Any elected officer may be removed by the City Council in accordance
with the provisions of state law.
 C-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-16
C:10
ARTICLE III
City Council
 C-17. Purpose and authority.
The legislative power, policy making, long-term and strategic planning
functions of the City are vested in the City Council. Said Council is hereby
given authority to enact legislation for the government of the City, for
the safety and well-being of its inhabitants and for the protection and
security of their property. The City Council shall likewise be vested with
the powers, rights and duties provided by the General Municipal Law and
the General City Law and any other general law of the State of New York
in relation thereto, and any subsequent amendments thereof, but which
several general laws shall be deemed to be grants of supplemental power
to the City Council and not as substitutes for any express provision of this
Charter. The City Council is vested with full authority to represent and
defend the City's interest in any and all matters as to which provision is
not otherwise made by this Charter, and it is empowered to determine
all questions of conflicting authority which may arise between the several
boards, departments and officers of the City government created by the
provisions of this Charter.
 C-18. Members.
A. The City Council shall consist of nine members. Three Council members
shall be elected at large and one member shall be elected from each
ward.
B. The City is divided into six wards. Ward boundaries shall be established
by ordinance of the City Council.
C. Members of City Council shall serve for a term of two years.
D. President.
(1) At the first meeting of the City Council held in January of each evennumbered
year, the City Council shall select by a majority vote one
Council member to serve as President of the City Council.
(2) The President of the City Council shall preside at all meetings of
the Council, appoint its standing and special committees and
discharge such other duties as may be defined by the City Council.
He or she may vote and participate in the proceedings of the City
Council and for the latter purpose may call any councilperson
temporarily to the Chair.
(3) In case of the absence from the City or inability of the Mayor to
perform his/her duties, the President of the City Council shall act as
Mayor until the Mayor returns or his/her inability ceases, and said
President of the City Council shall be vested with the powers and
perform the duties of Mayor during the absence or inability of the
Mayor. While performing the duties of the Mayor, the President of
 C-17 CHARTER  C-18
C:11
 C-19. Meetings.
The City Council shall hold regular meetings at least once each month; and
the Mayor, the President of the City Council or any three Council persons
may call a special meeting thereof, in writing, to be served personally or
by mail on all members thereof. All meetings shall be open to the public
as provided by law and all official actions shall be taken only at an open
meeting.
 C-20. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to
time and may compel the attendance of absent members.
 C-21. Voting.
Each Council person present at any meeting of the City Council shall have a
vote on every question brought before the City Council for its consideration,
except that no person whose election as Council person is contested shall
be entitled to vote on any question connected with such contest. No Council
person shall be excused from voting on any question except by a concurring
vote of 2/3 of all members present.
 C-22. Legislative acts.
the City Council shall be known and designated as "Acting Mayor."
When so serving as Mayor, the President shall remain President of
the City Council.
(4) The City Council may at any regular meeting choose a President
Pro Tempore to serve during the temporary absence or inability of
the President.
(5) If a vacancy exists in the office of Council President with more than
60 days before the next organizational meeting, the City Council
shall select by a majority vote one Council member to serve as
President of the City Council.1
A. All the legislative acts of the City Council shall be by resolution,
ordinance or local law, sponsored by one or more of the Council
members. All votes shall be by roll call, and the ayes and nays shall be
recorded in the minutes. Local laws, ordinances and resolutions shall
be adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire authorized
membership of the Council.
B. Except as otherwise provided by state law, the City Council is
authorized to create, by resolution to be adopted by a vote of not less
than 3/4 of all its members, such other boards and officers as may be
1. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding the resignation, removal from office or
death of the Mayor, was repealed 10-20-2003 by L.L. No. 8-2003.
 C-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-22
C:12
 C-23. Promulgation of rules.
The City Council shall determine the rules of its proceedings.
 C-24. Power to issue subpoenas.
The City Council and the committees thereof shall have the power to issue
subpoenas to compel persons to appear and testify before either of them
and to compel persons to produce all books, papers or documents in respect
to any matter pending before either of them.
 C-25. (Reserved)
 C-26. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The City Council may provide in any local law or ordinance that any person
guilty of an offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to
a fine to be prescribed by such local law or ordinance, but which shall not
exceed $1,000 or to imprisonment to be prescribed by such ordinance, but
which shall not exceed one year, or to both such fine and imprisonment,
or such ordinance may provide for a penalty to be prescribed therein,
which shall not exceed $1,000, to be recovered by the City in a civil action.
The City may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction the
violation of any ordinance of the City Council, notwithstanding that the
ordinance may provide a penalty for such violation. When judgment shall
have been recovered in favor of the City for any fine, penalty or forfeiture,
execution thereon may issue against the person as well as against the
property of the defendant in the manner prescribed by law for such
executions.
 C-27. Official newspaper.
The City Council shall designate a newspaper published in the City to be the
official paper, in which shall be published such matters in such form as shall
be prescribed by this Charter, by law or otherwise by appropriate resolution
of the City Council. Whenever there shall be required to be published an
official notice or other proceeding as to an ordinance or local law, it shall
be necessary to publish only the title and a brief abstract thereof unless
otherwise provided to the contrary.
 C-28. Streets and grades.
necessary for the proper conduct of the business and the promotion of
the welfare of the municipality.
C. Salaries of City officers and employees shall be fixed by City Council
and paid at least monthly.
A. The City Council shall approve the acceptance of all streets, alleys and
right-of-ways and the abandonment of same. Prior to the acceptance or
 C-22 CHARTER  C-28
C:13
 C-29. Sale or leasing of real property.
Any real estate belonging to or in control of the City may be sold at public or
private sale and may be leased. Conveyances may be authorized by a public
or by a private sale in accordance with the following procedures.
abandonment of any street, alley or right-of-way, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by
publication in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the date of
said hearing. Written notice of said hearing shall also be mailed to the
owners of the premises to be affected thereby to their last known post
office addresses, as the same appear upon the records of the City, at
least 10 days prior to the meeting at which such hearing shall be held.
B. The City Council shall enact no resolution changing the name of any
street or alley except upon the written petition of a majority of the
owners of property abutting thereon. A 3/4 vote of all the members of
said Council shall be required to approve such a change.
C. All streets, lanes and alleys in public use within said City of which a
record as public highways has been filed in the office of the Clerk of
Chautauqua County or of the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk of the City of Jamestown, and all streets, lanes and alleys therein
not recorded which have been or shall have been worked or improved
and used as public highways for 20 years or more shall be deemed
public highways of the City of Jamestown. The City Council shall have
power to cause all streets, lanes and alleys which have been opened,
laid out or dedicated to public use but not sufficiently described to be
ascertained, described and entered of record in the Department of
Public Works, in a book to be provided by the City for that purpose, in
the manner required by law of Superintendents of Highways in towns;
and the same when so ascertained, described and recorded shall be
public highways of said City. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
A. A resolution proposing public sale or other conveyance by sealed bid or
public auction shall be authorized by a 2/3 vote of the entire Council
after submission to the Council of a report on the proposed disposition
by the Planning Commission. Thereafter, notice of the proposed
conveyance shall be published once each week for a period of two
weeks in the official paper as designated under the authority of  C-27
of this Charter. Conveyance to the successful bidder at the highest bid
price shall be approved by further resolution of the Council, with 2/3 of
the Council members concurring. The City Council reserves the right to
reject any or all bids.
B. A proposed conveyance by private sale shall be authorized by a 3/4 vote
of the entire Council after a report on the proposed conveyance by the
Planning Commission and shall not be made for less than the fair
market value of the property to be conveyed as specifically determined
by a separate resolution of the Council. Notice of any intended
 C-28 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-29
C:14
 C-30. Transfers of funds
The City Council may, in any fiscal year, in accordance with Local Finance
Law, in a resolution adopted by a 2/3 vote, direct the temporary transfer of
funds to one or more of the several boards, departments and commissions
of the City. Interest shall be at a rate determined by the City Council.
conveyance of any interest of the City in real property by private sale
shall be published in the official newspaper as designated under the
authority of  C-27 of this Charter at least 10 days prior to the passage
of any resolution authorizing the conveyance. The notice shall state
the Council's determination of the fair market value of the property or
property interest to be conveyed and the proposed terms of the private
sale. Upon the request of any member of the Council therefor, the
notice shall additionally provide for a public hearing of the City Council
to be held not less than 10 days after publication of the notice and prior
to the consideration of the resolution.
 C-29 CHARTER  C-30
C:15

ARTICLE IV
Powers of Executive and Other Officers
 C-31. Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City
of Jamestown, who shall be responsible for the proper administration and
supervision of the executive and administrative branch of City government
placed in the Mayor's charge by the provisions of the City Charter and
Code and the laws of the State of New York. He/she shall execute and be
responsible for the implementation of the strategic plan and policies as
developed by the City Council and shall periodically report the progress on
same.
A. The Mayor shall be elected at large.
B. The Mayor shall be responsible for the day-to-day administration and
supervision of all City affairs, departments, offices and agencies of the
City, except offices headed by any elected official. The Mayor shall
devote full-time to performance of the duties of the office. He/she shall
be a member, and President by virtue of his/her office, of the Board of
Public Utilities and entitled to vote in the meetings of said Board.
C. The Mayor shall communicate to the City Council at the first regular or
special meeting of the City Council in January of each year a general
statement of the affairs of the City in relation to its finances,
government and improvements with such recommendations as the
Mayor may deem proper. He/she shall be responsible for fully informing
the City Council on an ongoing basis as to the financial condition and
needs of the City of Jamestown and file with the City Council an annual
report of the financial affairs of the City.
D. The Mayor shall be responsible for the preparation and submission to
the City Council of a proposed budget and capital program on or before
October 8 of each year.
E. The Mayor shall have the power of veto over every order, resolution,
local law, ordinance, audited bill and act of the City Council and Board
of Public Utilities. In addition to the customary purposes of this veto
power, it is the intent of this grant of power to enable the Mayor to
effect coordination and unity of action between the several boards of
the City government. He/she shall exercise such veto power by
disapproving, in whole or in part, the particular order, resolution, local
law, ordinance, audited bill or act, by communicating, in writing, such
disapproval, together with a statement upon which such veto is based,
to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk within five days
after the adoption of the particular item which he/she disapproves,
Saturdays and Sundays excepted. The City Council or any of the boards
specified may, at its next regular meeting after such veto, reconsider
such order, resolution, ordinance, audited bill, act or the portion thereof
disapproved, and if the same is then adopted by a concurring vote of a
 C-31 CHARTER  C-31
C:17
2/3 majority of all the members of the City Council or board concerned,
it shall have full force and effect. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
F. When authorized by the City Council so to do, the Mayor shall execute
on behalf of the City all deeds, contracts and other papers to be
executed as an act of the City. All contracts, agreements, obligations or
other instruments made, executed or issued by order of the City Council
or at the direction of the boards provided by this Charter and in behalf
of said City or boards shall be signed by the Mayor except as otherwise
provided by the Local Finance Law.
G. The Mayor shall have the power summarily to revoke any license
granted by authority of the City Council.
H. The Mayor shall have the power to suspend any appointed officer,
department head or employee found to be disqualified to perform the
duties of his/her office. He/she may appoint a qualified person to fill
such office until the disqualification is removed. All such suspensions
must conform to the New York State Civil Service Law, Public Officers
Law and other relevant statutes.
I. The Mayor shall have the power to remove for cause any appointed
officer, department head or employee only after written charges shall
have been served upon him/her. Removal of appointed officers shall be
subject to approval by a majority vote of the City Council. Cause for
removal shall include, but not be limited to, disobedience of lawful
orders or instructions; incapacity; incompetence; corruption in office;
acting as an agent or attorney for a person, company or corporation in
relation to any matter to be affected by the action of the City Council or
a board, department or officer of the City; neglect of duty; or any other
behavior prejudicial to the best interests of the City. All such removals
must conform to the New York State Civil Service Law, Public Officers
Law and other relevant statutes. A decision to remove may be appealed
to the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
J. The Mayor shall secure proper accounting for all funds through the
examination of all official books, vouchers and other papers of any
officer or employee of the City and, as often as he may deem proper, to
appoint one or more competent persons to examine, without notice, the
accounts of any such officer or employee and the money, securities and
property belonging to the City in the possession or charge of such
officer or employee and to report to the City Council the results of such
examination.
K. The Mayor may administer oaths to witnesses in all matters relating to
the affairs of the City and take affidavits and acknowledgments within
said City.
L. The Mayor shall appoint all City department heads, subject to City
Council confirmation.
 C-31 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-31
C:18
 C-32. Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
Subject to the direction of the Mayor and the general rules prescribed
by the City Council for the government of the Police Department and
Fire Department, the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety shall have
supervision and control over the Police and Fire Departments of the City
and the various members thereof. It shall be his/her duty to ensure that the
laws of the state and the local laws and ordinances of the City of Jamestown
are enforced in the City by causing the arrest and, in proper cases, the
commitment of persons alleged to have violated such laws pending
examination before a Magistrate. He/she shall maintain discipline and
efficient organization in the police force and the fire-fighting force of the
City, and he/she shall have the power to appoint, suspend from office and
to remove from the force any police officer, fire fighter or civilian employed
in either the Police Department or Fire Department who is incompetent or
guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct in office or who for other reason
is a bar to the efficiency and discipline of the police force and/or firefighting
force, which removal shall be subject to civil service laws and
under the regulations of the local Civil Service Commission. He/she shall be
responsible for the organization and administration of the Fire Department
and for ensuring the City employs a competent Deputy Fire Chief. The
Deputy Fire Chief shall have the responsibility to direct the operations of
the Fire Department to prevent and stifle conflagrations and shall report to
the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
 C-33. City Clerk. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be the Clerk of
the City Council and of such other boards, bodies and commissions as the
City Council shall direct. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
M. The Mayor, within 24 hours, shall communicate in writing all
appointments and resignations of department heads and appointed
officers to the City Council and file the same with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
N. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to City Council confirmation, the
Council members and other members to the boards and commissions as
have been or may be established by ordinance or local law.
O. The Mayor shall have the authority to create such ad hoc or advisory
committees as will, in his/her judgment, aid in the effective
administration of the City.
P. The Mayor, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
Charter and of enforcing the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
City Council, and in the case of emergencies, shall be vested with all
powers and authority which are necessary or proper and not
inconsistent with the laws of the state.
 C-31 CHARTER  C-33
C:19
shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor and maintain
accountability to the City Council.
A. The office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is
hereby declared to be a Town Clerk's office for the purpose of
depositing, filing and entering of record therein all books and papers
required by law to be deposited, filed or entered of record in a Town
Clerk's office, and he/she shall possess the powers, discharge the duties
and collect the fees of a Town Clerk except as otherwise provided in the
Local Finance Law. Such fees shall be the property of the City.
B. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall make out
separate deposit slips and deposit his/her receipts at least each four
days to the credit of the City. He/she shall make out and prepare such
checks and warrants as are specified by statute or this Charter.
C. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall keep the
minutes of the meetings of the City Council and of each board of which
he or she is Clerk.
D. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall have custody of
the Municipal Seal and shall attach it to such instruments as the City
Council or other departments of the City may direct.
E. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall give notice, in
writing, to each officer of his/her election or appointment and the
amount of his/her official bond, if any.
F. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall cause to be
made publications of all notices, advertising matter or proceedings as
required by the provisions of this Charter, by law or ordinance.
G. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall serve as
Registrar of Vital Statistics pursuant to the Public Health Law.
H. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall serve as
Records Access Officer pursuant to the Public Officers Law and Records
Management Officer pursuant to the Education Law.
I. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall receive all
notices of defect and damage claims in accordance with  C-68.
J. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall have general
supervision of City elections as provided elsewhere by this Charter and
law.
K. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall administer the
issuance of and countersign all licenses authorized by the City Council
and keep an accurate account thereof.
L. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall provide
secretarial and clerical services for the City Council in the discharge of
its official duties.
 C-33 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-33
C:20
 C-34. Comptroller.
The Comptroller shall be the Operating and Auditing Officer of Fiscal
Affairs. The Comptroller shall be subject to the direction and supervision of
the Mayor and maintain accountability to the City Council.
M. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall perform such
other duties as may be required by the Mayor and/or City Council.
A. The Comptroller shall supervise, in conjunction with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, the fiscal affairs of the City.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
B. The Comptroller shall develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system
of accounts, including forms, standards and procedures for all boards,
commissions, departments, officers and agencies of the City in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
C. The Comptroller shall maintain a payroll system, including all tax and
retirement records.
D. The Comptroller shall monitor and report the status of revenues and
appropriations on a monthly basis to the Mayor, City Council, appointed
officers and department heads.
E. The Comptroller shall monitor expenditures and report budget
variances in a timely manner to the Mayor and City Council.
F. The Comptroller shall be responsible for the audit insuring that, prior to
payment, all bills, claims and demands against the City, including
payrolls, shall contain a certification from each board, commission,
department, office and agency that the materials, supplies, equipment
or services have been received and accepted as specified, and for such
purpose he/she shall have the authority to require the attendance of
and examine under oath such persons as he/she may deem necessary.
G. The Comptroller shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual
financial statement that shall be delivered to the Mayor and City
Council no later than April 1 of each year.
H. The Comptroller shall, at the close of each fiscal year, provide all books
and vouchers required by the certified public accountant employed by
the City to perform, in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards, the annual audit.
I. The Comptroller shall, upon receipt of tax bills from the Assessor, add
all arrears thereto and send out the tax bills in accordance with New
York State Real Property Tax Law. He/she shall likewise be charged with
the duty of billing such other charges as are to be made a charge
against individuals, corporations or partnerships by the City. He/she
 C-33 CHARTER  C-34
C:21
 C-35. Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel shall be the chief legal officer of the City of
Jamestown. The Corporation Counsel shall be an attorney and counselor
in good standing licensed to practice in the State of New York and shall
either be a resident or a taxpayer of the City of Jamestown. The Corporation
Counsel shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor and
maintain accountability to the City Council.
shall prepare separate accounts of all unpaid City, state and county
taxes in the manner required by law of town tax collectors.
J. In the event of the absence or the disability of the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, the Comptroller shall assume the
duties of that office. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
K. The Comptroller shall perform such other duties as may be required by
the Mayor and City Council.
A. The Corporation Counsel shall be the legal advisor of the City Council
and of the several officers, boards and departments of the City, except
in relation to those matters affecting the Board of Public Utilities.
B. The Corporation Counsel shall appear for and protect the rights and
interests of the City in all actions, suits and proceedings brought by it or
against any City officer, board or department in such official capacity,
except the matters above referred to in which the Board of Public
Utilities has provided its own counsel.
C. The Corporation Counsel shall institute actions or proceedings in the
proper court to prosecute or prevent violations of any City ordinance or
local law and shall appear on behalf of the City in all actions or
proceedings to enforce a City ordinance or local law.
D. The Corporation Counsel shall prepare and/or approve all contracts,
bonds or other instruments in which the City is concerned and, before
execution thereof, shall endorse on each his or her approval of the form
and contents thereof.
E. The Corporation Counsel is empowered to designate an Associate
Corporation Counsel, who shall perform such duties as the Corporation
Counsel may direct. The designation of the Associate Corporation
Counsel shall be approved by a majority of all members of the City
Council. The Associate Corporation Counsel shall be an attorney and
counselor in good standing licensed to practice in the State of New York
and shall either be a resident or a taxpayer of the City of Jamestown.
F. The Corporation Counsel may employ counsel, pursuant to a contract
approved by the City Council, to assist in prosecuting and defending
any actions or special proceedings, civil or criminal, in which the City is
an interested party, or to assist in matters requiring special legal skill.
 C-34 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-35
C:22
 C-36. Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be the Chief Fiscal
Officer and Treasurer. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor and maintain
accountability to the City Council.
G. In the absence from the City or other inability of the Corporation
Counsel to act, the Mayor may appoint an Acting Corporation Counsel,
who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the
Corporation Counsel.
H. The Corporation Counsel shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Mayor and City Council.
A. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall supervise, in
conjunction with the Comptroller, the fiscal affairs of the City.
B. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall advise the
Mayor and City Council of the overall financial affairs of the City.
C. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be responsible
for the collection, receipt, custody, daily deposit, investment and
disbursement of all fees, taxes, revenues and other funds due the City.
D. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall deposit all
funds received on a daily basis in depositories authorized by the City
Council.
E. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall transmit to the
Comptroller, at the end of each business day, a detailed statement
showing the receipts and disbursements credited or debited to each
fund or account.
F. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall maintain a
reconciliation of all accounts at the end of each month for each bank
account of the City.
G. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be responsible
for debt management.
H. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall have custody of
all bonds and notes and of all investments and invested funds of the City
or in possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise
provided by law, and shall keep such funds and all monies of the City
not required for current operations invested in investments authorized
by law and approved by the City Council or deposited in interestbearing
accounts approved by the City Council, subject to such
adequate requirement of security as may be required by law or fixed by
the City Council.
 C-35 CHARTER  C-36
C:23
 C-37. Other officers.
The officers whose powers and duties are not expressly set forth in this or
the other articles of this Charter shall have such powers and perform such
other or additional duties as the Mayor and City Council may prescribe.
I. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall perform such
other duties as may be required by the Mayor and City Council.
 C-36 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-37
C:24
ARTICLE V
Finance
 C-38. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year for the City of Jamestown shall commence on January 1 and
end on December 31 of each year.
 C-39. Budget.
A. Strategic planning process.
(1) During the first quarter of each year, the City Council, with the
input of the Strategic Planning and Partnerships Commission and
in conjunction with the City administration, shall engage in a
strategic planning process. The City Council, on or before May 1 of
each year, shall formally submit identified priorities to the Mayor
for consideration during the preparation of the budget.
(2) By the end of the calendar year, the Mayor shall report the progress
having been made on the strategic plan.
B. Capital improvement program.
(1) On or before June 1 of each year, the appointed officers and
department heads of the City of Jamestown shall submit to the
Mayor and City Council a five-year capital improvement program
listing the proposed projects, their description, purpose, and
justification, recommended priority, estimated cost and method of
financing and such other information as the Mayor may deem
appropriate. The term "capital project" shall be defined as set forth
in 99-g of the General Municipal Law and 11.00 of the Local
Finance Law.
(2) Not later than July 1 of each year, the Mayor shall submit to the
Strategic Planning and Partnerships Commission and the Planning
Commission of the City of Jamestown for review and input a report
outlining the requests and his/her opinion regarding their longterm
benefits to the City of Jamestown. Not later than September 1
of each year, each of these Commissions shall submit a written
report of its review to the Mayor and City Council.
C. Development of operating budget and capital improvement program.
(1) On or before July 1 of each year, the Comptroller shall submit to the
Mayor, City Council, appointed officers and department heads a
general statement of the estimated revenues anticipated for the
next fiscal year as well as a detailed statement of the outstanding
bonded indebtedness and other lawful obligations of the City.
(2) On or before July 1 of each year, the Comptroller shall furnish to the
appointed officers and department heads of the City of Jamestown
 C-38 CHARTER  C-39
C:25
forms on which to prepare and set forth estimated revenues and
expenditures of their respective department for the ensuing fiscal
year, exclusive of items that are included in the capital
improvement program.
(3) Not later than August 1 of each year, the respective appointed
officers and department heads shall submit to the Comptroller
estimated revenues and expenditures of their respective
departments for the ensuing fiscal year, exclusive of items that are
included in the capital improvement program. In the event that an
appointed officer or department head does not submit such data,
the Comptroller shall prepare a budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
(4) The Comptroller shall review and investigate the estimates. Upon
completion of the review, the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk and the Comptroller shall prepare a tentative budget and
forward it to the Mayor for his/her review no later than September
1 of each year. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(5) The Uniform System of Accounts prescribed by  36 of the General
Municipal Law shall be followed in reviewing and preparing the
tentative budget.
(6) Not later than September 25 of each year, the Mayor shall submit
the proposed operating budgets and capital improvement program
to the respective appointed officers and department heads.
D. Budget submittal and message.
(1) On or before October 8 of each year, the Mayor shall submit his/her
executive operating budget and capital improvement program for
the ensuing fiscal year to the City Council and file the same with
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk providing a
complete financial plan of all municipal funds and activities for the
ensuing year. The budget submitted shall be balanced in that total
estimated expenditures do not exceed total estimated revenues.
The budget message shall identify in fiscal terms and in terms of
programs, policies, activities and plans the proposed financial
policies of the City of Jamestown for the ensuing year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes in
financial policies, expenditures and revenues from the current year,
together with the reasons for the changes, summarize the City's
debt position and include other material the City Council may
request or the Mayor may deem advisable. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(2) The City Council shall review with the Mayor the executive
operation budget and capital improvement program and may
change any items of the executive operation budget and capital
improvement program. The changes shall be balanced in that total
 C-39 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-39
C:26
estimated expenditures do not exceed total estimated revenues.
The Council shall not amend any items relating to the City debt,
appropriations required to be made by law, or judgments against
the City. The City Council shall file a report with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk outlining any amendments to
the executive operation budget and capital improvement program
on or before November 10 of each year. Said amendments shall
immediately be delivered to the Mayor for review. [Amended
6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(3) This submitted executive operation budget and capital
improvement program, with or without amendments, shall become
known as the City Council's budget.
E. Public inspection and public hearing on budget. On or before November
20, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the City Council's
budget and capital improvement program for the ensuing fiscal year
including any proposed amendments. The City Council shall publish in
the official newspaper a summary of the City Council's budget and a
notice stating the times and places where copies of said budget are
available for public inspection and a time and place for a public hearing
on said budget. The notice must be published at least seven days prior
to the public hearing. [Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
F. Adoption of budget.
(1) On or before December 1 of each year, the City Council shall vote
upon the question of whether to pass the City Council's budget.
[Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(2) Upon adoption of the City Council's budget, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall forward same to the Mayor
for examination and consideration. If the Mayor approves the City
Council's budget, he/she shall affix his/her signature to a statement
thereof and return the budget, together with such statement to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk within five days of its
adoption, Saturdays and Sundays excepted. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(3) If a budget has not been adopted by the City Council as provided
herein, then the executive operation budget and capital
improvement program submitted in accordance with  C-39,
Budget, Subsection D(1), shall become the budget for the ensuing
fiscal year.
(4) If the Mayor objects to the City Council's budget, or any portion
thereof, he/she shall submit a veto statement within five days to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, Saturdays and
Sundays excepted. The Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall immediately forward a copy of said veto statement to
 C-39 CHARTER  C-39
C:27
the City Council. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(5) The City Council, after such veto, may reconsider any or all of the
vetoed item(s) and may override said vetoed item(s) by a
concurring vote of 2/3 of its membership. If the City Council fails to
override said vetoed item(s) by December 15, the budget item(s) in
question as presented in the executive operation budget and
capital improvement program submitted in accordance with  C-39,
Budget, Subsection D(1), shall be deemed adopted.
(6) If the Mayor fails to approve the City Council뭩 budget by affixing
his/her signature to a statement in accordance with  C-39, Budget,
Subsection F(2), or to submit a veto statement in accordance with
 C-39, Budget, Subsection F(4), then the City Council뭩 budget
shall be deemed adopted. [Added 6-20-2005 by L.L. No.
1-20052]
(7) The adopted budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be balanced in
that total estimated expenditures do not exceed total estimated
revenues.
G. Annual tax levy. The City Council, at the meeting at which the annual
budget is adopted, shall levy on all taxable property within the City as
shown in the annual assessment roll, the amount required to be raised
by tax in the annual budget, and as otherwise required by law.
H. Budget amendments. When advised that monies available for such year
will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated, the City Council
may reduce any appropriation or appropriations by resolution so as to
prevent the making of expenditures in excess of monies available. An
appropriation shall not be reduced below the minimum amount
required by law to be appropriated, nor shall an appropriation be
reduced by more than the balance therein less outstanding and unpaid
claims chargeable to such appropriation.
I. Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the City Council may, during the
year, make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are not
available any unencumbered or unappropriated revenues to meet such
emergency appropriations, the City Council may authorize the issuance
of budget notes in accordance with the Local Finance Law.
J. Budget monitoring. The Comptroller shall submit to the Mayor and the
City Council, within 45 days of the close of the first, second and third
fiscal quarters of the City's fiscal year, a report summarizing the actual
revenues and expenditures for such quarter as compared to such
estimates in the budget. Prior to submitting the report to the Mayor and
the City Council, the Comptroller shall submit a draft report to the
2. Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection F(6)
as F(7).
 C-39 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-39
C:28
 C-40. Miscellaneous provisions.
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk for review and comment.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
A. Lapse of appropriations. All appropriations shall lapse at the close of
the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or
encumbered.
B. Purchases by competitive bid. All contracts for the performance of any
work and all purchase contracts involving expenditures in excess of the
amounts provided for in General Municipal Law  103 shall be awarded
by competitive bids unless, by a 3/4 vote of the entire City Council or
Board of Public Utilities, it is decided to be impracticable to secure such
articles, supplies, work or materials by such contract or bids, in which
case the City Council or Board of Public Utilities shall instruct the head
of the department involved to procure such work or purchase such
materials, supplies or articles. The City Council shall also have the
power to purchase supplies or construct improvements by direct
municipal supervision without advertising for bids.
C. Purchases of supplies.
(1) Unless otherwise directed by the City Council, the head of each
department of the City government shall purchase at the lowest
market price all materials, supplies, machinery and equipment
used by his/her department, but no head of department shall,
however, make any purchase exceeding the amount provided in
Subsection B of this section for the competitive bid of purchase
contracts without having previously obtained from the City Council
consent to make such purchase; nor shall any head of department
make any purchase, either below or in excess of said sum, without
having first filed a requisition with the Comptroller, stating the
article or articles desired to be purchased and the quantity of the
same, together with the department or purpose for which the
articles or materials purchased are to be used. Upon the
presentation of the requisition signed by the head of a proper City
department as herein provided, the Comptroller, if in his/her
judgment the article or materials to be purchased are necessary
and do not exceed in purchase price the limited amount prescribed
in this section or the investment or purchase to be made is not in
violation of this instrument or the resolutions relating thereto or
adopted thereunder by the City Council, shall countersign the said
requisition, make a duplicate thereof for filing in his/her office and
return the countersigned original to the head of the particular City
department desiring to make the aforesaid purchase. When so
countersigned and returned, the original requisition shall be the
only authority of the head of the department for making the
purchase of the supplies or material therein described. The
Comptroller shall file with the City Council, on the occasion of the
 C-39 CHARTER  C-40
C:29
first regular meeting in each month, a report showing the
requisitions issued, the department for which they were issued,
the articles or materials purchased, from whom and the several
amounts paid therefor.
(2) Each head of department shall, at the first regular meeting of the
City Council in each month, make a written verified report of all
his/her purchases for the preceding month. Such report shall show,
in detail, the articles purchased, from whom and the price paid for
each article.
(3) The Board of Public Utilities shall make its respective purchases
through its several officers.
(4) Any supplies or material the purchase of which has not been
heretofore provided for shall be made by the Comptroller upon
requisition. The City Council may from time to time prescribe the
quantity and quality of purchases and make such other regulations
in reference thereto as may seem needful.
D. Audit and payment of claims.
(1) Each claim and demand for services rendered or materials
furnished to the City must be presented to the Comptroller within
30 days after the rendition of the last services or the last delivery of
materials charged for therein. Except as provided in Subsection
E(3) and (4) of this section, the Comptroller shall present all claims
to the Finance Committee of the City Council, in writing, along with
a certification that the claim is in proper form, is correctly
computed, that it is legally due and payable, that an appropriation
has been made therefor, and that such appropriation has a
sufficient balance to meet the obligation.
(2) Claims against the City shall be reviewed by the Finance
Committee of the City Council at least once each month. It shall be
the duty of said Committee to inquire into such claims and report
thereon to the City Council, with its reasons for approval or
disapproval of said claim, and the City Council shall then vote upon
the claim. The City Council shall not pay any claim prohibited by
law.
(3) The Comptroller is authorized to make payments on claims or
demands prior to review and audit by the Finance Committee and
City Council of amounts up to $1,000 or in the event that a claim or
demand offers a discount or incurs a late penalty if not paid by a
date certain and the claim or demand is not received by the
Comptroller in time for presentation to the Finance Committee
prior to the expiration of the date certain. Any payment made
pursuant to this subsection shall be reported to the Finance
Committee at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
 C-40 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-40
C:30
(4) Fixed salaries, debt service, amounts becoming due on lawful
contracts for periods exceeding one year and the compensation for
services of employees or officers regularly engaged at agreed
wages may be paid without prior audit. All payrolls for personal
services rendered by any person other than an elected City officer
shall be certified by the officer or employee having direct
supervision to the effect that services indicated on the payroll were
actually performed by the person or persons mentioned therein.
E. Independent audit. The City Council shall provide for an independent
annual audit of all municipal funds by a certified public accountant. It
may provide for more frequent audits, as well as special audits if it
deems necessary.
F. Annual financial report. No later than three months after the close of
each fiscal year, the Comptroller and Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall provide to the Mayor and City Council a
detailed report of all revenues, receipts, disbursements and
indebtedness for the preceding fiscal year and other data requested by
the Mayor and City Council. Said report shall include a projection of
trends, based upon any material revenue and expenditure trends or
other factors that the Comptroller reasonably believes may influence
the City's finances, probable fiscal year-end results as compared to the
budget; and the impact of such trends or factors on the following fiscal
year and such other future fiscal years as the Comptroller deems
appropriate to consider. The report shall be placed on file in the office of
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk for public inspection
as well as with the Office of the State Comptroller. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
G. Fees charged by Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. The
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of said City of Jamestown
shall be entitled to charge and receive for copies and records, searches,
certificates and other documents relative to taxes and tax sales the
same fees which by law the State Comptroller is now authorized and
required to charge therefor. All such fees shall be paid into the City
treasury, and a record thereof shall be kept by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. The City of Jamestown shall retain
all penalties or interest paid on the county tax rolls or bills in return for
collecting and handling county taxes prior to the return of such taxes to
the county pursuant to  C-45 hereunder. [Amended 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
 C-40 CHARTER  C-40
C:31

ARTICLE VI
ASSESSMENT
 C-41. Assessor and Board of Assessment Review
 C-42. Collection of taxes, assessments, lien.
All taxes and assessments for City purposes shall be a lien upon the real
estate upon which they are assessed within the City as of the date levied and
shall remain a lien until paid. Such liens shall be superior to any mortgage,
judgment or other lien of any nature affecting said premises.
 C-43. Collection of taxes and assessments, water rents and
electric light charges. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
to collect and receive at his or her office all taxes and assessments laid
upon said City or upon any portion thereof in the manner prescribed by
this Charter and also all water rents fixed and assessed by the Board of
Public Utilities and all charges for electricity or any other charges for any
public service made and fixed by the Board of Public Utilities. He or she
shall retain at his or her office possession of all warrants and assessment
rolls delivered to him or her for collection.
 C-44. Tax sales.
The City Council is authorized to sell and convey lands acquired by it at
tax sale at public or private sale, after initially offering such land at sealed
public bid or public auction. The City Council may reserve the right to reject
any or all bids received. No such sale shall be effective unless and until such
sale shall have been approved and confirmed by a majority vote of the City
Council.
A. The Assessor, subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor,
shall perform all the duties required by this Charter in relation to the
assessment of property in the City of Jamestown and shall perform all
the duties required and possess all the powers and authority as
conferred on Assessors by the Real Property Tax Law. The Assessor
shall also meet the qualifications for office and comply with training
requirements as imposed under Article 3 of the Real Property Tax Law.
B. There shall be a Board of Assessment Review consisting of five
members. The Board of Assessment Review shall be constituted as
provided for in the Real Property Tax Law and shall possess all the
powers and perform all the duties as conferred by the Real Property Tax
Law.
 C-41 CHARTER  C-45
C:33
 C-45. Taxes for county purposes. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
Upon the County Legislature equalizing taxes for county purposes in
accordance with the Real Property Tax Law and following receipt of the
assessment roll and warrant, the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall collect the county taxes levied on properties located in the City
on behalf of the county. Upon the expiration of the county tax warrant, he or
she shall settle and return annually to the collecting officer of Chautauqua
County all county taxes received by him or her in the manner and within the
time required by Article 9 of the Real Property Tax Law, and shall not act as
guarantor of the collection of county taxes. The City shall have the authority
to retain all interest and penalties paid on the county taxes as payment for
the collection and handling of the county taxes as provided in  C-40 prior
to their return to the county pursuant to this section.
 C-46. Taxes for school purposes. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The Board of Education, upon equalizing taxes for school purposes in
accordance with Article 13 of Real Property Tax Law, shall levy taxes
for the school district and enter and extend same on the original and
certified copies of the assessment roll and annex thereto a warrant to
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and deliver same all
as provided by Article 13 of the Real Property Tax Law. The Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall collect the school taxes levied on
properties located in the City on behalf of the school district. Upon final
settlement with the School District Treasurer, the Comptroller shall pay
from the general funds of the City the amount of uncollected school taxes
and thereafter any of such taxes collected shall belong to the City.
 C-47. Collection of unpaid taxes.
The City Council shall provide, by ordinance or local law, additional
remedies for the collection of unpaid taxes.
 C-48. Local improvement assessments.
A. Special assessments. The City Council is empowered to levy and collect
taxes in the form of special assessments upon property in a limited and
determinable area for special benefits conferred upon such property by
any municipal work, service or improvement and may provide for the
payment of all or any part of the cost of the work, service or
improvement out of the proceeds.
B. Payment. Special assessments, for whatever purpose levied, may be
made payable in installments over a period not to exceed 10 years,
together with interest thereon, in annual or more frequent installments;
however, assessments for current services shall be payable within the
year during which the service is rendered.
 C-45 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-48
C:34
C. Limitation on assessments. The amount assessed against any property
for any work, improvement or action shall not exceed the value of the
benefits accruing to the property therefrom, nor shall any special
assessment be levied which shall cause the total amount of special
assessments levied by the City and outstanding against any property at
any time, exclusive of delinquent installments and assessments for
current services, to exceed 25% of the current estimated market value
of the property as determined by the Assessor, after giving effect to the
benefit accruing thereto from the work, improvement or action for
which assessed.
D. Declaration of intention. Prior to the levying of any special assessment,
the City Council shall adopt a resolution stating its municipal purpose
or project and directing the Director of Public Works and Assessor to
have reports prepared thereon. The resolution shall also specify the
portion of the projected cost of the proposed project to be assessed, the
limits of the proposed area of assessment, the recommended method of
spreading the assessment over the parcels of property within the area,
the number of installments in which the assessments may be paid and
the rate of interest to be paid on outstanding amounts of installment
payments.
E. Plans and estimates of cost and apportionment. The report of the
Director of Public Works and Assessor shall consist of a detailed
estimate of the cost of the proposed work, service or improvement;
estimates of the value of and proposed awards or compensation for any
land or other property proposed to be taken or damaged; estimates of
the amount of assessment for benefits to be levied against each parcel
of property affected; a statement showing the amount of any delinquent
taxes or assessments outstanding against each parcel and showing the
amount of any special assessment levied but not yet delinquent
outstanding against each parcel, including assessments levied by other
taxing agencies; and a statement by the Assessor of the full value as
determined for the assessment of taxes for the last preceding year of
each parcel of property against which any benefit is to be assessed. A
copy of the report when completed shall be placed on file available for
public inspection in the office of the Assessor.
F. Cost and apportionment. The cost of any work, service or improvement
to be paid, in whole or in part, by assessments on property specially
benefited shall include the direct cost thereof, the damage occasioned
thereby and the interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the
collection of assessments, and the amount to be assessed against all
property specially benefited by any such proposed work, service or
improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in
proportion to their respective special benefits in substantially the
manner recommended by the Council in its preliminary resolution. For
any property deemed benefited which by reason of any provision of law
may be exempt from assessment, a proportionate share of the cost shall
 C-48 CHARTER  C-48
C:35
be assessed against such property, and such assessment shall be paid
by the City.
G. Notice of hearing. Prior to making reports to the Council, the Assessor
shall give notice in the same manner as provided in  C-60 to all
affected property owners, as shown by the local assessment roll, of the
preparation of proposed reports and of a public hearing thereon, and
such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days
after the mailing of the notice.
H. Report. After the hearing upon any proposed work, service,
improvement or action, the Director of Public Works and Assessor may
submit as originally made or may modify the reports prepared in any
way deemed necessary or proper to accomplish a fair and equitable
assessment of benefits not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter. Thereafter the report shall be presented to the Council for
approval.
I. Setoff of assessments against awards. If an assessment of benefits is
made against any property and an award of compensation or damages
is made in favor of the same property, the Assessor shall, in his/her
report to the Council, assess against or state in favor thereof only the
difference between such assessment of benefits and the award of
damages or compensation.
J. Consideration by Council. Reports made to the City Council as above
provided shall lie over until the next regular meeting of the Council
occurring not less than one week after the receipt thereof. Thereafter,
the Council may approve the reports as submitted or refer them for
further hearings, consideration and reports. Upon such further referral,
upon submission of subsequent reports, the Council shall proceed as in
the case of an original report.
K. Final report and ordinance. Whenever the Council determines to
proceed with the work, service, improvement or action described in the
reports of the Director of Public Works and Assessor, it shall pass an
ordinance or local law confirming the reports and directing that such
work, service, improvement or action be carried out in accordance with
its preliminary resolution and the reports as finally approved by
Council. The passage of such local law or ordinance shall authorize any
work, service, improvement or action provided for therein, subject to
the provisions of this article, and shall constitute a levy of special
assessments for benefits so provided. The amount of such levy shall be
as apportioned and assessed against the respective properties and shall
constitute a lien against such property from the date of the levy
collected in the same manner as real estate assessments made for
general purposes
 C-48 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-49
C:36
 C-49. Collection of paving tax.
The City Council shall have the power and it shall be its duty annually
thereafter at the time of levying the annual taxes in and for said City to levy
the installments and interest due and payable that year as charged against
such land and the owner or owners thereof and against each and every
street that shall by law be required to pay any portion of the expense of said
improvement, and the same shall be collected and enforced as other taxes
are collected and enforced in said City. If obligations are issued to finance
such improvement, the monies assessed and collected for installments and
interest charged against the abutting property and the owner or owners
thereof and against each and every street liable to pay any portion of the
expense of such pavement shall be used in paying the portion of such
obligations which were applied to the share of the cost of the improvement
so assessed.
 C-49 CHARTER  C-49
C:37

ARTICLE VII
Board of Public Utilities
 C-50. Establishment; membership; procedures.
A. A Board of Public Utilities is hereby established. It shall consist of seven
appointive members, two of whom shall be Council persons, together
with the Mayor and the Director of Public Works by virtue of their
respective offices. The Mayor and the Director of Public Works shall be
entitled to vote on all questions. The majority of the members of the
Board of Public Utilities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board may make, from time to time, alter or amend
bylaws, rules and regulations not in conflict with law for the transaction
of its business.
B. The terms of office of the seven appointive members of the Board of
Public Utilities hereafter shall be as follows: of the two members who
have been appointed in 1930, one shall hold office until the expiration of
his/her term January 1, 1932, and his/her successors shall be appointed
for terms of two years each from that date; one shall hold office until the
expiration of his/her term, and his/her successors shall be appointed for
full terms of four years each from that date; of the three remaining
members to be appointed, one shall hold office until January 1, 1932,
and his/her successors shall be appointed for full terms of four years
each from that date, and two shall hold office until January 1, 1934, and
their successors shall be appointed for full terms of four years each
from that date. The Council persons appointed to such office shall be
appointed for their terms of office only. The Mayor, in his/her
appointment, shall designate the term for which each is appointed.
C. The members of the Board of Public Utilities shall receive no salaries.
The members of such Board shall be reimbursed their actual expenses
incurred in the discharge of their duties. This section shall not prevent
such Board from employing one of its number as Secretary or other
executive officer and paying him/her proper compensation.
D. The Board of Public Utilities may fix the salaries and compensation of
its several superintendents, employees, counsel and the like, except
that in the event of such Board requiring the City Council to insert in a
given budget a sum to be levied upon the taxpayers to meet the deficit
in the operation of its utility system, then the budget of such Board
containing the proposed salaries for that and succeeding years, until
such Board ceases to require the insertion of its deficit in the tax levy,
shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.
E. The officers appointed to or elected by the Board of Public Utilities
under  C-8B of this Charter may likewise be removed by the Board
upon its own motion, following a hearing, by a 2/3 vote of all of the
members of the Board taken by roll call and recorded in the minutes of
the meeting. Such removal shall become effective as and from the hour
 C-50 CHARTER  C-50
C:39
 C-51. Powers and duties.
that a certified copy of the resolution is served upon the officer named
therein.
A. All the properties, records, rights, privileges and prerogatives
constituting the water and lighting system of the City of Jamestown and
the district heating system of the City of Jamestown are hereby
transferred to the Board of Public Utilities, and such systems shall be
under the control and supervision of the Board of Public Utilities.
Neither the City Council of said City nor the Board of Public Utilities
shall have the power or authority to sell or lease any public utility
system to any person or persons, corporation or corporations except
when authorized by a vote of the resident taxpayers of the City at a
special election. The Board shall keep such systems in repair and may
from time to time improve the same and may extend the plant and
facilities thereof within said City and within the Village of Falconer or
the Village of Celoron or elsewhere in the Town of Ellicott. All the
earnings, revenues and monies belonging to each system shall be kept
separate and apart from the other systems and shall be carried in
separate accounts, and no funds or revenues belonging to one system
shall be applied or used in the conduct and operation of the others
except with the approval of the City Council. The surplus earnings of
any of said systems, after the costs of operation, management,
maintenance and ordinary improvements have been paid and the
payment of accrued interest upon outstanding bonds issued by said City
on account of any and after the requirements of the sinking fund have
been fully met, may, in the discretion of said Board, be applied toward
improving and extending said systems respectively.
B. The Board of Public Utilities shall have the control of the construction
of all improvements and additions to the public utility systems and the
extensions thereof and shall have the power to make all contracts
necessary or incidental to the execution thereof. All contracts for the
performance of any work and all purchase contracts involving
expenditures in excess of the amounts provided for in General
Municipal Law  103 shall be awarded by competitive bids by
advertisement by said Board for bids, with the power to reject any and
all bids received.
C. Such Board shall appoint a General Manager, who shall have the power
to appoint and remove a deputy who shall act in his/her stead and such
advisors and other employees necessary to efficiently operate the
electric, water and district heating systems, and who shall have the
further power to fix the duties and compensation for his/her Deputy and
other employees within the guidelines established by the Board. The
Board, in its discretion, shall also have the power to employ attorneys at
law of the State of New York to act as legal advisors for the Board and to
appear for and represent it in any or all actions, matters and
proceedings relating to the Board or the conduct of its business. Such
 C-50 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-51
C:40
 C-52. Additional powers.
The City is hereby vested with the power to acquire by purchase any and all
of the public utilities required for its City purposes and for the convenience,
service and welfare of its inhabitants. All public utility systems acquired
or hereafter created shall be under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Utilities. The Board is hereby authorized to expend monies derived from the
commercial operation of its public utility systems in the further promotion
and development of the commercial business of those systems. The Board
is authorized to employ technical experts to make necessary investigations
precedent to the exercise of the powers conferred by this section. Following
such necessary investigations by the Board and its technical experts, the
City is hereby authorized through this Board to:
employment may be terminated by the Board at any time. The
compensation of such counsel shall be determined and paid by the
Board of Public Utilities.
D. All agents and employees handling monies belonging to the City shall
give a bond in the form usual for City officers in the penal sum
prescribed by said Board.
E. Said Board shall have full control of the public utility systems and
everything pertaining thereto and shall exercise the powers and fulfill
the duties connected with the management and regulation thereof and
of the use and sale of the products thereof and may enforce the
observance thereof by cutting off the supply or services of the public
utilities systems or by the imposition of penalties. It shall establish a
scale of rents, rates or charges to be not less than the cost thereof to
said Board at the place of delivery for the use and consumption of
water, electricity, hot water and other public utility services, to be paid
at such times as the Board may prescribe by the consumers thereof and
may from time to time either modify, increase or diminish such rents,
rates or charges, not, however, below cost, and employees shall be
authorized at all times to enter into any building or building where
water, electricity, hot water or other public utilities service is used from
said systems to examine, as to the pipes, water, electricity, hot water or
other public utility service, the fittings, fixtures and appliances and the
quantity of water, electricity, hot water or other public utility service
used and the manner of using it.
F. The water, electric light, district heating and other public utility
revenues, when collected, shall be kept in separate funds, to be known
respectively as the "Water Rent Fund," the "Electric Light Fund" and
the "District Heating Fund," and shall be paid out by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk to the respective parties entitled
thereto upon the warrant of said Board of Public Utilities. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
A. Create and operate gas, power, electric, steam or hot-water heating
plants and systems.
 C-51 CHARTER  C-52
C:41
B. Drill for natural gas and pipe the same into the City for municipal
purposes and for the use of its inhabitants.
C. Enter into contracts for the purpose of the mains, equipment and
properties of any natural gas company now operating within the City,
and to utilize the same as part of a plant for providing fuel for the City
and its inhabitants.
D. Enter into contracts for the purchase of natural gas from private
corporations to be used in connection with other public utility plants
hereby authorized.
E. Install ornamental streetlighting. "Ornamental streetlighting" is hereby
defined as a means, method or system of electric illumination provided
by lights located on posts placed along or adjacent to the curbline of a
given public highway and which lights are fed or supplied with current
by underground cables as distinguished from overhead feed wires. The
Board of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to install, maintain and
operate services and systems of ornamental streetlighting on a given
public highway or portion of a street located within the City, but under
the limitation of this section.
(1) A majority of the resident owners of land abutting on a given public
highway or portion thereof shall have a right to petition this Board
for the installation of ornamental streetlighting within the district
specified in the petition. The Board of Education and the City
Council shall have the right to join in such petition as to the land
within their respective jurisdictions abutting on the particular
highway. If the Board of Public Utilities approves of the petition, it
shall signify its approval by due resolution and transmit a certified
copy of the resolution, with the original petition, to the City
Council. The latter shall request the Assessor to determine and
certify whether the signatures attached to the petition are the
names of those owning the abutting land in fee on the public
highway or portion thereof specified in the petition and whether
such persons are a majority of the resident owners of land abutting
on the highways or portion thereof described in the petition. If the
Assessor shall certify that the signatures on the petition are the
names of a majority of the resident owners of the fee to the
abutting land on the particular highway or portion thereof specified
in the petition, then the City Council may approve of the petition.
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall certify
such approval to the Board of Public Utilities, which shall then be
empowered to install the service or system of ornamental
streetlighting on the public highway or portion thereof specified in
the petition, but upon the condition that the Board of Public
Utilities shall have the right to determine the type, design and
number of posts and lights to be installed on the particular public
highway or portion thereof and to fix the other conditions in
relation thereto. When the installation specified in the particular
petition shall have been completed, the Board of Public Utilities
 C-52 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-52
C:42
shall certify that fact, together with the total cost of the labor
and materials, plus 10% of such total cost which is hereby fixed
as the standard charge for engineering, supervision and the use
of tools and machinery, and accompanied by any other pertinent
information to the Assessor. The cost as thus defined for the
installation of such ornamental streetlighting shall be paid by the
lands abutting on the street or portion thereof thus improved as
described in the petition and according to the benefits received
by each abutting lot or parcel, each lot or parcel paying the
proportionate amount of the entire benefit of that improvement
which has been received by that lot or parcel. The Assessor shall
proceed to make a special assessment of several amounts to be
paid by such abutting lands, in the manner provided by  C-48
of this Charter, for the determination of individual paving
assessments. Upon the completion of such assessments, the
Assessor shall designate a review day and hold a review on such
assessments as provided by  C-48 of this Charter. After this roll
shall have been affirmed, revised or adopted by the Assessor, it
shall be submitted to the City Council for its action and approval.
The Assessor and the City Council shall proceed in relation thereto
in the manner provided by  C-48 of this Charter for the approval
of the paving roll. Within 60 days after the filing of this assessment
roll with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, any
person who is assessed hereunder a certain amount for such
improvement may pay the whole or any part thereof. The person
or owner thus assessed shall be liable for the tax, and the special
assessment shall be a lien on the abutting land as provided by
 C-42 of this Charter. The property owner shall have a right to
elect to pay such assessment one year from the date of the filing of
the roll with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, but
in that event there shall be added to and collected by the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk 6% of such assessment. The
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall credit the sums
thus collected to the Special Improvement Fund of the Board of
Public Utilities. If such special assessments, with the added per
centum, shall not have been paid one year from the date of the
filing of the assessment roll with the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, then the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk shall proceed to sell the lands which are subject to the
lien of the assessment as provided by  C-53 of this Charter. Article
VI and Article VIII of this Charter are hereby made applicable
except as otherwise provided herein. The Board of Public Utilities
is authorized to use its surplus funds for the purposes of this
section, pending the payment of the special assessment. The
expense of maintaining and operating ornamental streetlighting
shall be a City charge. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(2) Whenever ornamental streetlighting has been installed on a portion
of a public highway by petition of the resident abutting owners, the
 C-52 CHARTER  C-52
C:43
Board of Public Utilities is hereby empowered to recommend, in
writing, to the City Council the installation of ornamental
streetlighting on a part or all of the remaining portion of that
public highway and without a petition therefor. The City Council is
hereby authorized to proceed in relation to such recommendation
in the same manner as is provided by  C-60 of this Charter for
the consideration, hearing and approval of a recommendation by
the Director of Public Works for the construction of pavements
without the petition and consent of the abutting property owners.
Following such consideration and hearing, as provided by  C-60
of this Charter, the City Council is hereby authorized to direct
the Board of Public Utilities to proceed with the installation of
ornamental streetlighting on a part or all of the remaining portion
of such public highway without the petition and consent of the
abutting owners. The construction cost, assessment, operation and
maintenance of the ornamental streetlighting thus installed shall
be governed by Subsection E(1) of this section.
F. Acquire, own and operate transit facilities of any nature within its
boundaries and, subject to the consent of the municipalities involved,
between the City and neighboring communities. The operation and
maintenance of any such transit facilities may be carried on by the City
utilizing its municipal employees, or the City may contract with private
persons or corporations for the management, operation and
maintenance of such City transit facilities. A separate board or
commission may be established by appropriate local law, which shall
supervise the operation and maintenance of such transit facilities
whether the same are performed by municipal employees or by a
private person or corporation under contract. The City Council, subject
to the Mayor's veto power, shall have the authority to sell or lease any
and all transit facilities acquired, operated or owned by virtue of the
provisions of this subsection.
G. In addition to the powers of the Board of Public Utilities, otherwise
enumerated in Article VII of the City Charter, the City Council may, by
ordinance, determine that sanitary sewer collection, treatment and
disposal, as well as solid waste collection, recycling and disposal, may
be designated as additional utility functions to be transferred to the
Board of Public Utilities and, thereafter, owned and operated by the
City, under the control and supervision of the Board of Public Utilities
pursuant to the other provisions of Article VII of this Charter. In the
event the City Council adopts such an ordinance or ordinances, any
references to the Director of Public Works in the Charter and the City
Code as such relate to sanitary sewer or solid waste functions shall be
deemed to refer to the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities.
 C-52 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-53
C:44
 C-53. Water, electric and other rents. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The water, electricity, hot-water and other rents and charges for supplies
and services furnished by any public utility owned by the City may be
based on actual consumption as determined by meter or apportioned to
the different classes of buildings and different conditions of delivery and
consumption in the City or elsewhere with reference to their ordinary use
for dwellings, stores, shops, factories, stables or places, for the number
of families or occupants, for the sprinkling of lawns, for fire protection
or for the consumption of water or electricity or other service of supply
as nearly as practicable. Such rents and charges, as well as the amount
due and unpaid for the introduction and measurement of the supply of
water, electricity, hot water or other public utility, supply or service to
such premises and buildings, shall be, like other taxes of the City, a lien
and charge upon such premises and buildings as herein provided. The
Board shall estimate annually the sum which shall be paid by the City of
Jamestown for the use of water, electricity and hot water or for other public
utility supplies and service for its public purposes, which estimate shall be
based upon the actual cost thereof. The City Council shall annually levy
and raise the amount of money thereby established by the Board, and the
amount so to be raised shall be levied and collected at the same time and
in the same manner as other general taxes of the City are levied and raised,
and in addition thereto, the sum thus raised shall be paid by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk into the water, electric, district heating
funds and other public utility funds, respectively.
 C-54. Furnishing water, sanitary sewer, district heat or electricity
to other municipalities.
A. If water mains are or shall be laid into or through a town or village, the
Board of Public Utilities may contract through an intermunicipal
agreement with the Town Board on behalf of the town or with the
Trustees of the village on behalf of the village to furnish water for the
extinguishment of fires and for sanitary and other public purposes
within the town or village as the case may be. Any such intermunicipal
agreement shall not become effective until approved or ratified by a
majority vote of the entire City Council. Any intermunicipal agreement
or contract by and between the Board of Public Utilities and a town or
village for the furnishing of water in effect as of January 1, 1995, shall
not thereafter be modified, amended, renewed or extended without
prior approval or ratification by a majority vote of the entire City
Council.
B. If sanitary sewer lines, district heating lines or electric lines are or shall
be laid or placed through a town or village, the Board of Public Utilities
may contract through an intermunicipal agreement with the Town
Board on behalf of the town or with the Trustees of the village on behalf
of the village to furnish any or all of such utilities for public purposes,
use or consumption within the town or village as the case may be. Any
 C-53 CHARTER  C-54
C:45
 C-55. Sinking funds.
Any sinking fund heretofore created for the purpose of taking care of any
water or electric light bonds now outstanding shall be continued, and such
other sinking funds shall be created from time to time as may be necessary
to liquidate at their maturity any bonds now outstanding or hereafter issued
in connection with the existing utilities or any other utilities placed under
the jurisdiction of this Board. Such sinking funds shall be created and
maintained as follows:
such intermunicipal agreement for the delivery of any or all of such
utility services shall not become effective until approved or ratified by a
majority vote of the entire City Council. Any intermunicipal agreement
or contract by and between the Board of Public Utilities and town
or village for the furnishing of sanitary sewer lines, sanitary sewer
services, district heating or electricity in effect as of January 1, 1995,
shall not thereafter be modified, amended, renewed or extended
without prior approval or ratification by a majority vote of the entire
City Council.
A. Out of the surplus earnings of the operation of the water system,
electric light system, district heating system or any other public utility,
after the payment of the cost of operation, management, maintenance,
improvements and extensions of said systems and the payment of the
interest upon the outstanding bonds issued therefor by said City, the
Board of Public Utilities shall, upon the issuing of any bonds for any of
the purposes authorized hereby, create a sinking fund for the payment
of such bonds, principal and interest at the maturity thereof by setting
apart annually an amount sufficient to produce at the maturity of said
bonds a sum equal to the principal then to become due. If and whenever
the revenues as aforesaid shall be insufficient to enable said Board to
provide for the sinking fund requirements and the interest upon any of
said bonds, said Board shall report the fact and the amount of the
deficiency to the City Council. It shall thereupon become the duty of the
City Council to provide for such deficiency and pay the same in the
same manner as it may provide for the payment of the principal and
interest upon other bonded indebtedness of said City.
B. Said City, in addition to the power which it now possesses to raise
money for all other purposes by taxation, shall have the power to raise
by a general tax annually, and it shall be the duty of the City Council to
levy and raise annually, upon the real and personal property assessed
for taxation in said City and as a part of the general tax levy such sums
as may be necessary to provide for the payment of such bonds and
interest as aforesaid. If the City Council shall have raised and paid any
sum of such deficiency arising from the insufficiency or the revenue of
any said systems, the Board of Public Utilities, as soon as practicable,
by exercising the powers conferred upon it by law shall increase the
revenues of said system sufficiently to prevent a further deficiency and
also to raise the amount of the deficiency that shall have been paid by
 C-54 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-55
C:46
 C-56. Payments out of public utility funds.
said City Council, and said Board of Public Utilities shall pay the
amount of said deficiency when raised into the general fund of said City.
C. The sinking funds herein provided for and the monies belonging thereto
shall be kept by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and
deposited in such banks, trust companies or savings banks as shall be
designated by the Board of Public Utilities at such rate of interest
thereon as may be agreed upon between said banks or trust companies
and the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, subject to the
approval of said Board. No such deposit in any such bank or trust
company, however, shall at any time be authorized in excess of 50% of
the capital stock of such bank or trust company. Each and every bank or
trust company receiving such deposit shall, before receiving the same,
execute and give to the City a bond with sufficient sureties, conditioned
to save the City harmless in any event from loss by reason of such
deposits, such bonds to be approved by said Board. All such deposits
shall be made in accounts separate from other City funds and shall be
properly distinguished and designated. No money shall be withdrawn
from any such fund except upon the warrant of the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk authorized by the resolution of the
City Council for the payment, redemption or purchase of the bonds or
some part thereof, for the payment of which said sinking fund was
created or for the transfer of such fund or some part thereof to another
depository designated or approved therefor by the Board. Any bond
paid, redeemed or purchased shall at once be canceled and returned
with the report thereof to the City Council. The funds remaining in said
sinking funds at any time or any part thereof may, however, be invested
by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk upon resolution of
said Board of Public Utilities and of the City Council, approved by the
Mayor, in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or the State
of New York or any municipality thereof, and the Board may at any time,
having the funds for that purpose, purchase at no more than par any of
the bonds issued for said systems and cancel and pay the same.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
D. The surplus earnings of the operation of the water, electric lighting or
any other public utility systems on hand at any time after the payment
of the costs of operation, management, maintenance, improvements
and extensions and after the payment of the interest upon the
outstanding bonds issued by said City in connection with said utilities
and after the requirements of said sinking funds may have been fully
complied with and provided for may be applied by the City Council, with
the consent of the Board of Public Utilities, toward the payment of any
bonded or other indebtedness of the City of Jamestown now or
hereafter contracted.
 C-55 CHARTER  C-56
C:47
 C-57. Records and annual report. [Amended 11-28-2016 by L.L.
No. 2-2016]
Said Board of Public Utilities shall keep books showing, in detail, the cost
of the maintenance of said water, electric, district heating or other public
utility systems and of extending the same and all its collections, rents,
expenditures and proceedings and shall furnish whenever required by the
City Council such information, in writing, as to the business and affairs of
the Board of Public Utilities as may be required by the Mayor and City
Council. All the books, records, vouchers, contracts and all other papers
kept by said Board or in its possession or under its control shall be deemed
A. Any monies now or hereafter belonging to the Water, Electrical Lighting
or District Heating Fund or any other public utility fund of the City of
Jamestown shall be paid out only on checks or warrants numbered
consecutively as issued and signed by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk and countersigned by the City Comptroller, except
as hereinafter provided. No order or warrant for the payment of monies
from any of said funds shall be issued except upon the resolution of said
Board duly entered upon its minutes, a certified copy whereof shall be
filed in the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
The voucher or other paper document for which said order was issued
shall be filed with the Chairman of said Board and shall bear the
number corresponding with the number of the warrant issued thereon.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
B. The Board may, however, by suitable standing resolutions, authorize the
payment of wages and salaries of municipal employees under its
jurisdiction.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Board of Public Utilities
from creating and designating by appropriate name special public
utility funds by drawing a check or warrant in the manner above
provided for the refunding of overpayments and overcharges to the
consumers of the water, lighting, district heating or other public utility
systems owned and operated by the City of Jamestown, which powers or
fund creation and refund are hereby authorized. Checks or warrants
drawn on such special public utility funds may be signed by the Mayor
or the fiscal officer or officers of the municipality designated by the
Board in the resolution or resolutions creating such special public
utility funds. Certified copies of such resolutions shall be filed in the
office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
D. The Board may, likewise, at any time, by resolution or order, direct the
transfer by the proper City officers of any fund from any bank or trust
company to any other bank or trust company the funds so transferred,
and all interest accruing thereon shall be held and paid out by such
banks, trust company or trust companies only in the manner above
provided.
 C-56 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-57
C:48
to be public records. The Board shall each year pay into the general fund
of the City the sum of $36,000 to reimburse the City for collecting the
revenues accruing to said systems. Said Board shall, at least 10 days before
the first day of April each year, make and file with the City Council a
statement of the following facts:
A. The amount of money on hand at the beginning of the preceding fiscal
year and the amount received during said year.
B. The amount paid out during said year and the balance on hand.
C. The outstanding indebtedness of said department, either bonded or
otherwise, separately stated.
D. The estimated deficiency, if any, in the amount necessary to be paid,
principal or interest, after applying thereto the probable amount of
rents and other income to be received and any amount from the sinking
fund.
E. The amount of extensions made during the last preceding year and the
general condition of the systems.
F. Such other facts as the Board deems important for the information of
the City, together with such recommendations concerning said
departments as may be deemed proper.
 C-57 CHARTER  C-57
C:49

ARTICLE VIII
Local Improvements
 C-58. (Reserved)
 C-59. Taxpayers' election.
If a proposed improvement or project is submitted to a vote of the taxpayers
and the majority of all votes cast at the taxpayers' election is in favor of said
improvement or project, the City Council shall forthwith proceed to carry
out the same. If necessary, the City Council shall raise by tax the sum of
money so voted for such purpose. No such tax shall be raised except as
provided in the statement and for the purposes approved by the taxpayers'
election.
 C-60. Consent of abutting owners required for street
improvements.
A. No street, alley or highway in said City shall hereafter be paved, curbed
or guttered except upon written petition to the City Council of said City
signed by a majority of the taxpayers of said City owning land abutting
upon the street, alley or highway or the portion thereof proposed to be
improved or upon written petition to the City Council of said City signed
by the owner or owners of a majority with front footage abutting upon
the street, alley or highway or the portion thereof to be improved,
except as herein otherwise provided. Joint tenants, tenants by the
entirety, tenants in common or other cotenancies shall be considered to
constitute a single owner for computation of a majority. Upon the
presentation of such a petition to the City Council, the Council shall
proceed to consider the same, and, if by resolution it shall determine to
grant such petition, the same shall be referred to the Director of Public
Works and Assessor in accordance with  C-48D for hearings and
reports to the City Council.
B. Whenever the Director of Public Works shall submit a recommendation,
in writing, to the City Council that any specified street, alley or highway
or portion thereof be paved, curbed or guttered, together with reports
of the Director of Public Works and the Assessor made in accordance
with  C-48E, such recommendations shall be considered by the City
Council, which may preliminarily accept the same, notwithstanding the
fact that no petition as herein provided for or otherwise shall have been
presented. The Council shall thereupon fix a date for a hearing thereon
and cause notice thereof to be mailed in postpaid envelopes to the
owners of the land abutting upon said street or way or portion thereof
proposed to be paved, to their addresses as the same may appear on the
last assessment roll, notifying said owners of proposed action by the
City Council regarding the improvement of such street, alley or
highway. Said property owners shall have the right to appear and be
heard thereon before said City Council at the hearing, which shall be
held not less than 10 days subsequent to the mailing of notices as
 C-58 CHARTER  C-60
C:51
 C-61. Costs of constructing street improvements.
The City Council may determine that the entire cost of all original
pavement, curbs and gutters shall be a general City charge or that the
entire cost shall be raised by assessment upon the abutting property or
owners; or it may determine and provide that a portion of the cost of such
improvements shall be borne by the abutting property or owners and a
portion thereof by the City and what said portions shall be.
 C-62. Costs of street and sidewalk repairs.
 C-63. Liens and charges. [Amended 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
Every tax and assessment imposed under any of the provisions of this article
shall be a lien upon all real estate against which the same shall be assessed
from the time of the assessment and levy thereof by the City Council and
for 10 years thereafter, unless sooner paid, with interest. The cost and
expense of engineering and inspection in the course of construction of all
public improvements constructed in said City shall be borne and paid by the
aforesaid. The City Council shall have the power, after hearing such
property owners or, in default of their appearing as above provided,
by a 3/4 vote of the entire Council to order that such street, alley or
highway or portion thereof be improved, specifying in such resolution
the approved recommendations contained in the reports of the Director
of Public Works and the Assessor.
A. The City Council shall have the power to resurface, repair or rebuild all
or any portion of existing pavement, curbs and gutters and sidewalks.
To meet the expenditure for this purpose, the Council is authorized to
include all or a portion of that expenditure in the annual budget and
levy the same by direct tax. The expenditure authorized by this section
for pavement and curbs and gutters shall be borne by the City at large.
The cost of sidewalk repairs and any driveway repairs necessitated by
other repairs authorized by this section shall be borne entirely by the
record owner of the abutting property; provided, however, that the cost
to abutting property owners shall not exceed the actual value of the
benefit received. The Director of Public Works must approve all
specifications prior to the initiation of work by a private contractor of
any sidewalk repairs and/or driveway repairs. Reports prepared in
accordance with  C-48E et seq. for sidewalk and driveway repairs may
be submitted after completion of the improvements, and the authority
to select actual improvements or repairs to be made in any specific year
may be delegated to the Director of Public Works at the time of the
approval of the budget for general improvements and repairs.
B. Upon successful completion of sidewalk repair work and approval by
the Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee, the property
owner shall be reimbursed $1 per square foot as a materials rebate for
any and all newly installed sidewalk blocks.
 C-60 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-63
C:52
City at large. There shall not be charged any fees or commissions for the
collection of any paving tax or tax or assessment for putting in any sewer
connections, provided that such tax or assessment is paid to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk when the same is due and payable.
 C-63 CHARTER  C-63
C:53

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
 C-64. (Reserved)
 C-65. Ethical conduct.
A. Conflicts of interest. No member of the City Council shall, during the
period for which he/she is elected, be capable of holding under the
appointment or election of the City Council any other City office the
emoluments of which are paid from the City treasury or paid by fees or
compensation directed to be paid by any act or ordinance of the City
Council, nor shall the Mayor or any Council person or other public or
City officer be directly or indirectly interested either as principal,
surety or in any other manner in any contract, sale, lease, concession or
other agreement to or in which the City is a party, but this section shall
not affect the right to any fees or emoluments belonging to any office.
The terms "City officer" or "public officer" shall mean and include the
Mayor, a Council person and any elective or appointive officer or deputy
of the City receiving salary or compensation for services from funds
appropriated by the City. No City officer or public officer shall
voluntarily be pecuniarily or individually interested, directly or
indirectly, in any contract, sale, lease, concession or other agreement
with the City except for lawful compensation and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of official duties. Any such contract, sale,
lease, concession or other agreement made to or with the City shall be
null, void and unenforceable. No City officer or public officer
representing or acting for the City shall accept any consideration,
commission or gratuity from any vendor of real or personal property
purchased or acquired by the City or from any contractor of services to
be rendered the City. The City Council may allow the sale of City bonds,
notes or other obligations to or may designate as a depository of City
funds any corporation in which any City officer or public officer paid
his/her compensation for services from City funds is a director, officer,
stockholder or employee of such corporation, provided that not more
than 25% of the capital stock of the corporation is owned by all such
City officers or public officers paid their compensation from City funds,
who shall be deemed not interested individually in such sales or
contracts under such conditions, and provided further that neither the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk nor the Comptroller nor
any Deputy in their respective offices shall be a director, officer,
stockholder or employee in any corporation which purchases City
bonds, notes or other obligations or which is designated as a depository
of City funds. The provisions of this entire section shall not apply to
members of boards or commissions appointed or created by the Mayor
and/or the City Council who receive no compensation or salary for
services, but no such board or commission shall consider and act on any
contract, sale, lease, concession or other agreement in which any
member thereof has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest.
 C-64 CHARTER  C-65
C:55
 C-66. Confidential Information
No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information concerning the City, nor shall such information be
used to advance the individual's financial or other private interest.
 C-67. (Reserved)
 C-68. Prior notice of defects; damage claims. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
No civil action shall be maintained against the City for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained in consequence of any public street or
highway or public place, land or building, including but not limited to any
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, opening, drain, sewer, park
or playground or equipment located herein or thereon being in a defective,
out-of-repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition, unless it appears
that prior to the occurrence resulting in such damages or injuries written
notice of the existence of such condition relating to the particular place or
equipment was actually given to the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk and filed in his/her office and that there was a failure or neglect
within reasonable time after receipt of such notice to repair, remedy or
remove the condition complained of. No such action shall be maintained
against the City for damages or injuries to person or property sustained
in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any public street or
highway or public place, land or building, as aforesaid, unless written notice
thereof relating to the particular place was actually given to the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk and filed in his/her office and there
was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice to cause such snow or ice to be removed or the place otherwise made
reasonably safe. The City shall not be liable in a civil action for damages or
injuries to person or property or for invasion of personal or property rights
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
B. Declaration of policy. The proper operation of the City government
requires that its officers and employees be independent, impartial and
responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be
made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public
office not be used for personal gain; that public officers and employees
observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and
discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
consideration; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government and the officers and employees thereof. In recognition of
these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for all officers
and employees of the City of Jamestown, as defined in Chapter 21 of the
Code of the City of Jamestown. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this Charter and Code and the provisions of Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law, the latter shall control.
 C-65 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-68
C:56
of any name or nature whatsoever, whether casual or continuing, arising
at law or in equity, alleged to have been caused or sustained, in whole or
in part, by or because of any omission of duty, wrongful act, fault, neglect,
misfeasance or negligence on the part of the City or any of its agents,
officers or employees, unless a notice of claim shall have been made and
served in compliance with  50-e of the General Municipal Law or unless
an action shall be commenced thereon within one year after the happening
of such accident or injury or the occurrence of such act, omission, fault or
neglect; but no action shall be commenced to recover upon or enforce any
such claim against the City until the expiration of three months after the
service of said notice. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to
revive any claim or cause of action now barred by any existing requirement
or statute of limitations or to waive any existing limitation now applicable
to any claim or cause of action against the City. No judgment recovered or
award made against the City shall be collectible by execution or otherwise
until after an annual tax shall have been levied and collected subsequent to
such judgment or award.
 C-69. Franchises.
No person or corporation shall erect any pole or string any wire along, in or
over any street, bridge or sidewalk or along, in or over any land owned by
said City or lay any track or any additional track in or upon such street or
bridge or on any land owned by the City or erect any signboard, post, pillar
or other obstruction in, upon or over any such street, bridge or sidewalk
or upon any land owned by the City, unless a franchise or permit therefor
shall have been granted by the City Council of said City. It is made the
duty of the Mayor and the Chief of Police summarily to remove any pole,
wire, track, post or signboard erected in violation of this provision. No
franchise shall be granted hereafter for a period exceeding 50 years, and
any such franchise shall specifically prohibit any sublease, assignment or
other transfer of all or any part of the rights obtained under such franchise
without the consent of the City Council. A grant of any franchise by said
Council shall not become valid and take effect unless made as aforesaid, and
no grant of a new franchise or for the extension of a franchise now existing,
shall become valid without a 3/4 vote of all the members of the City Council.
 C-70. Construal of provisions; word usage.
This Charter is hereby declared to be a public act, and it shall be construed
favorably for all beneficial purposes thereof. The word "person" as used
in this act, shall be construed to include all persons, firms, companies,
corporations and associations. The word "corporation" herein shall be
likewise construed. No person shall be an incompetent judge, justice,
referee, commissioner or juror by reason of his/her being an inhabitant of
said City or liable to taxation therein in any action or proceeding in which
said City is a party or interested. If dates specified within this Charter fall
on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, said date shall mean the next business
day.
 C-68 CHARTER  C-71
C:57
 C-71. When effective.
This revised Charter shall take effect on October 1, 2003.
 C-71 JAMESTOWN CODE  C-71
C:58
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
 C-71 CHARTER  C-71
C:59

ARTICLE I
Penalties
[Adopted 1-13-1992]
 1-1. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of
this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
 1-2. Mandatory court costs. [Amended 11-23-2009]
Whenever pursuant to this Code or any ordinance of the City a violation
occurs resulting in the issuance of an appearance ticket by the Building
Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector, the Fire Inspector or the Electrical
Inspector for enforcement by Jamestown City Court, there shall be imposed
against each defendant mandatory court costs in the amount of $50 for
each and every appearance which is required in Jamestown City Court by a
representative of the City of Jamestown or by the party so cited, except in
those cases where the City Court Judge makes a determination that there
was no legal basis for the service of the appearance ticket. Said mandatory
court costs shall be separate and independent from any fines or penalties
imposed elsewhere under this or any other chapter or ordinance of the City
Code.
 1-1 CHARTER  1-2
C:61

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
 1-3. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of  20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Jamestown,
as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 300, shall be known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Jamestown," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference
is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained
in the "Code of the City of Jamestown" to any other local law, ordinance
or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number where such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
 1-4. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the City Council of the City of Jamestown, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of  1-5 below.
 1-5. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Jamestown in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
 1-6. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in  1-5 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Jamestown prior to the effective date
 1-3 CHARTER  1-6
C:63
 1-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of
Jamestown or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Jamestown.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Jamestown.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Jamestown providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the City of Jamestown or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Jamestown appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City
of Jamestown or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries or employee benefits.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation pertaining to vehicles and traffic.
M. Any legislation adopted subsequent to March 23, 1992.
 1-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  1-8
C:64
 1-8. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown and
shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action
is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such
copy shall be certified to by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk of the City of Jamestown by impressing thereon the Seal of the City
of Jamestown, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
said Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the said
Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
 1-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Jamestown" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the City Council deems desirable.
 1-10. Code book to be kept up-to-date. [Amended 11-27-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code of
the City of Jamestown required to be filed in the office of the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in
said Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
City Council subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form
as to indicate the intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions
until such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
 1-8 CHARTER  1-11
C:65
 1-11. Sale of Code book; supplementation. [Amended 11-27-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown upon the payment of a fee to
be set by resolution of the City Council, which Council may also arrange by
resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
 1-12. Penalties for tampering with Code. [Amended 11-27-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Any person who, without authorization from the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, changes or amends, by additions or deletions, any part
or portion of the Code of the City of Jamestown or who alters or tampers
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation
of the City of Jamestown to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any
other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
 1-13. Construction of terms.
 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear in any
provision of the Code, unless the sense of the sentence indicates
otherwise, they shall be deemed to refer to both male and female
persons. This construction shall apply to gender indicative suffixes or
prefixes as well as to gender indicative words.3
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the City of Jamestown, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsections B, C and D hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such as of the date of their
original adoption.
B. Nomenclature changes throughout the Code: "Councilmen" and
"Councilman" shall be changed to "Council persons" and "Council
person" throughout the Code.
C. The following sections are amended to delete a specific fee amount for a
permit or licenses and replace it with a reference to Chapter 175,
Licenses and Permits.4
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding L.L. No. 1-1992 and the words "City Clerk"
and "City Treasurer" being deemed to mean "City Clerk Treasurer," as amended, was
repealed 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995.
 1-11 JAMESTOWN CODE  1-14
C:66
 1-15. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Jamestown, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered ㎣ 1-3 to 1-16, inclusive.
 1-16. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
D. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to take effect retroactively as of the date of adoption of the
original provisions. (Chapter and section number references are to the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered
and appear in the Code.)5
4. Pursuant to  1-14C, the following sections were amended: ㎣ 97-6A, 101-3, 125-9, 131-5,
131-6B and C, 204-4B, 204-5D, 204-6, 210-1, 229-7, 235-4, 235-8A, 245-5B, 252-3, 252-11,
274-11, 300-83A and 300-92B.
5. Editor's Note: Pursuant to  1-14D, the following chapters, articles or sections were added
or amended: ㎣ C-6, C-8, C-9B(3), C-10A, C-10B, C-13, C-15, C-37, C-39, C-40, C-42, C-44,
C-47A, C-59, C-62B, C-76, C-82B, C-83E(1), C-87B, C-93, C-116, C-121, 1-1, 21-2, 21-3A,
47-1, 72-2A, 72-4A, 83-4, 97-1, 97-11, 97-13, 101-8, 107-1, 107-10, 112-1, 112-8, 120-12,
125-7, 131-4, 131-20, 140-8, Ch. 142, ㎣ 145-7, 145-9, 160-10, 165-4, 175-3A, 185-3B,
185-7, 193-1, 193-2, 193-6, 193-8, 193-9, 193-10, 193-11, 193-13, 193-14A, 193-15,
198-1B, 198-5, 204-14, 215-5, 215-6A, 229-12, 245-11, 252-25, 252-26, 252-27, 265-1,
265-2A, 265-10, 274-14, 280-2, 280-17, Ch. 292, ㎣ 300-19, 300-20, 300-40 and 300-46G.
In addition, the following original sections were deleted: ㎣ 10(g), 17(c), 37, 38, 64, 66,
68a and 114 and Title VIIIA of the Charter; Section 16.3 of former Ch. 16; Sections 20.1
through 20.4, 20.7, 20.10 and 20.11 of former Ch. 20; Sections 22.8, 22.9 and 22.10 of
former Ch. 22; Sections 26.14E and 26.17 of former Ch. 26; Sections 31.20, 31.21 and
31.22 of former Ch. 31; and Sections 2 and 3 of L.L. No. 3-1981. A complete description of
each change is on file in the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 1-14 CHARTER  1-16
C:67
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission  See Ch. 13.
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Historian  See Ch. 28.
Commission on Human Rights  See Ch. 32.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
Ombudsman/Director of Human
Resources  See Ch. 51.
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Planning Commission  See Ch. 61.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Commission on Reapportionment  See Ch.
72.
Strategic Planning and Partnerships
Commission  See Ch. 80.
Veterans Memorial Commission  See Ch. 82.
 1-16 JAMESTOWN CODE  1-16
C:68
ARTICLE I
City Council Procedures
 5-1. Appointment of Council Committees. [Amended 8-8-1966 by
L.L. No. 1-1966; 1-1-1968; 1-1-1970; 1-24-1972]
The President of the Council is hereby authorized to appoint members of
the following Council Committees:
 5-2. Proceedings of Council. [Amended 7-25-1966; 11-28-1967;
1-1-1968]
The proceedings of the Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of
Order, except as hereby provided:
A. The Finance, Tax Sale and Personnel Committees, covering the fiscal
administration of the City, including taxes, bonds, accounts and the like.
B. The Public Works Committee, including highways, streets, alleys,
bridges, sidewalks, pavements, gutters, sewers, sewage treatment,
public projects and the like.
C. The Housing Committee, covering aspects of housing, property
rehabilitation, code compliance and enforcement. [Added 1-20-20046]
D. The Public Safety, City Affairs and Claims Committees, including
investigations, reports on suggested public policies, ordinances and
attention to any other City matter for which a committee does not
otherwise exist.
A. A motion need not be seconded.
B. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall adopt every
possible measure to expedite the submission of matters in the first
instance or immediate matters which precede final action. Thus to
illustrate: When the initial petition is presented for the paving of a
street, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall say, in
substance, "I have a standard form of petition for the pavement of
_______________ Street." The President shall then say, if there is no
immediate objection, "This petition is referred to the Director of
Assessments to certify it under the provisions of the Charter." The
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall enter in his
minutes, "The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk read a
standard form of petition for the paving of _______________ Street, and it
was referred by unanimous consent to the Director of Assessments for
investigation and report." [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
C. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall summarize the
variety of communications from outside civic bodies, chambers of
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C as Subsection D.
 5-1 CHARTER  5-2
C:69
commerce and similar propaganda bodies having no immediate
responsibility of the citizens and taxpayers of the City. The President
shall then say, "These communications shall be filed unless some
member of the City Council makes an immediate motion to the
contrary." The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall note
the receipt of the communications and the decisions thereon in his
minutes. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
D. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is instructed to make
every effort to diminish the number of formal roll calls and to include in
one resolution and in one roll call the action of the Council on a similar
group of matters. To illustrate: If there are several sidewalk or curb
bonds to be submitted and approved, the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall announce the names of the bondsmen and
their sureties in succession and then submit one prepared resolution
approving such bonds and directing their filing. The roll shall then be
called on the one resolution. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
E. Any person desiring to address the Council may exercise that privilege
only at the time set up in the order of business.
(1) A citizen addressing the Council shall be entitled to speak for five
minutes. No person addressing the Council shall speak for more
than five minutes or more than one time on a given topic on the
same evening without the further consent of the Council.
(2) Any person having special interest in any business taken up by the
Council may address the Council at the time the business is being
discussed, provided that arrangement to do so has been made with
the President of the Council before the meeting.
(3) In view of the larger amount of public business requiring the
attention of the City Council under the Charter and the growth of
the City, department officials and citizens will be expected to
formulate their particular proposals with precision.
F. Resolutions shall be prefiled no later than 11:00 a.m. on the Thursday
preceding the regular Monday Council Meeting. The Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall mail or e-mail a copy of each
such resolution and an agenda of all matters to be dealt with at each
such regular meeting of the Council no later than 5:00 p.m. on the same
day resolutions are prefiled. He/she also shall make copies of the
agenda available to the news media no later than 5:00 p.m. on the day
following the mailing of the agenda to Council members. [Amended
12-21-2005; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
G. The City Council shall hold regular meetings at least once in each
month. Such regular meeting shall be held on Monday beginning at
7:30 p.m. The Mayor, the President of the Council or any three
Councilpersons may call a special meeting by notice thereof, in writing,
 5-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  5-2
C:70
 5-3. Order of business of Council.
The order of business of the Council at its meetings shall be as follows:
to be served personally or by mail on all other members thereof. All
meetings of the City Council shall be public except when, in the
judgment of the City Council, the Mayor or the Corporation Counsel, a
conference is necessary. No record need be made of such conferences,
nor shall any action be taken except in open meetings. [Amended
1-20-2004]
H. In addition to the powers vested in the Mayor under the Charter to
convene the City Council in session, the President of the Council is
hereby authorized to convene the Council in special session by a notice
published in the official paper at least 12 hours prior to the hour fixed
for meeting. The President of the Council is likewise authorized to
convene the Council in special session for the consideration of
important public business by a written notice delivered to each Council
person by an officer of the City or left at the home address of the
particular Council person at least three hours prior to the hour fixed for
the meeting. Three Council persons are hereby authorized to file in the
office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk a notice
requiring a special session of the City Council, which notice shall be
filed and delivered personally to each Council person at least 12 hours
prior to the hour fixed for the meeting. A notice thus filed in the office of
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall state the special
business to be presented to the meeting, and no business other than
that specified in the notice shall be considered at the special meeting
unless the entire membership of the City Council is present and
consents thereto. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
I. Any radio or television station may broadcast or telecast only public
proceedings of the Council.
A. Roll call.
B. Pledge of allegiance to the flag.
C. Invocation.
D. Approval of minutes of preceding meetings.
E. Messages from the Mayor.
F. Opportunities for persons present to address the Council.
G. Presentation of petitions and communications.
H. Report of standing committees.
I. Report of special committees.
 5-2 CHARTER  5-3
C:71
J. Report of City officers.
K. Report from Council persons on administrative boards.
L. Unfinished business.
M. New business.
N. Adjournment.
 5-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  5-3
C:72
ARTICLE II
Department of Development
[Added 9-15-2003]
 5-4. Establishment; functions.
A Department of Development is hereby established to coordinate and
carry out the directives and policies of planning, urban renewal, housing,
improvement of the Central Business District, industrial development and
related functions as established by the Planning Commission, the Industrial
Development Commission, the Housing Authority, the Urban Renewal
Agency and the Urban Development Corporation and their successors and
any other board, commission, agency or function designated by the Mayor
or City Council.
 5-5. Director of Development; other employees.
The Department of Development and all of the activities of said Department
shall be under the general supervision of a Director of Development. He
may appoint such deputies and other employees as authorized to do so
by the Mayor, the City Council or responsible agencies. The Director of
Development and any deputies responsible to him shall be appointed for a
term of office not to exceed the term of the Mayor.
 5-4 CHARTER  5-5
C:73

ARTICLE III
Department of Youth Services
[Added 9-15-2003]
 5-6. Director of Youth Services.
The Department of Youth Services and all of the activities of said
Department shall be under the general supervision of a Director of Youth
Services. He or she shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of
a majority of the members of the City Council, for a term to run concurrent
with the term of the Mayor, at such salary as the City Council shall provide.
He or she shall be responsible for planning, initiating, coordinating,
directing, reviewing and administering the activities of public and private
youth and recreational service agencies devoted to the welfare and
protection of youth within the policies established by the Mayor, City
Council, Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board of Directors, the Youth
Services Board of Directors and New York State Office of Children and
Families. He or she shall provide technical assistance to the community
service providers and contractors regarding grant preparation, program
and accessible youth services for all youth in the community. He or she shall
perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor, City Council,
Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board of Directors and Youth Services
Board of Directors. The Director of Youth Services shall attend the meetings
of the City Council and shall keep such City Council advised of the overall
youth-related activities of the City.
 5-7. Youth Services Board of Directors.
A. The Youth Services Board of Directors is hereby created to be the
official agency for planning, initiating, coordinating, directing,
reviewing and administering the activities of public and private youth
and recreational service agencies devoted to the welfare and protection
of youth. The Youth Services Board of Directors shall be responsible to
the Mayor of the City of Jamestown.
B. The Youth Services Board of Directors shall consist of 15 members, nine
of whom shall be adult members over the age of 21 years and six of
whom shall be youth members between the ages of 14 and 20 years of
age at the time of appointment. A representative of the City Council
appointed by the Mayor shall also serve as a liaison of the Commission.
The term of office of the Board of Directors shall be for two years. The
terms of five adult members and four youth members shall expire at the
conclusion of the same year. Vacancies on the Board of Directors
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be as original
appointments. The members of the Youth Services Board of Directors
shall serve without remuneration. [Amended 3-17-2008]
C. At the first meeting of each year, members of the Youth Services Board
of Directors shall select from their own number a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary and other necessary officers to serve for a
 5-6 CHARTER  5-7
C:75
one-year period. Eight members of said Board of Directors should
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Said Board of
Directors shall hold regular meetings at least once per month and may
hold special meetings at the call of the Chairperson or upon the request
of any three members of the Board of Directors.
D. The Youth Services Board of Directors shall undertake the following
functions:
(1) To obtain local and state funding in order to promote the activities
of private and public youth and recreational service agencies.
(2) To make decisions regarding the policies and programs of the
Department of Youth Services.
(3) To appoint advisory committees from the community deemed
necessary to carry out the projects of the Department of Youth
Services.
(4) To monitor the programs funded by the Department of Youth
Services in accordance with applicable regulations of the State of
New York.
(5) To execute working agreements with public and private agencies
subject to authorization of the City Council of the City of
Jamestown.
 5-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  5-7
C:76
Chapter 9
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Constables  See Ch. 14.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Alarm systems  See Ch. 89.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Plumbing  See Ch. 210.
Vehicles and traffic  See Ch. 290.
 9-1. Issuance authorized.
Pursuant to Subdivision 4(a) of  10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Fire Inspector, Electrical Inspector,
Housing Inspectors, Director of Public Works or his agent, and parking
meter attendants of the City of Jamestown are hereby authorized and
empowered to issue appearance tickets as such tickets are defined by
 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law to persons allegedly violating any
statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to fire prevention,
safety, health and sanitation, building, zoning and planning, housing and
parking ordinances of the City of Jamestown, which by virtue of their
respective offices the Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Fire
Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Housing Inspectors, Director of Public
Works or his agent, and parking meter attendants of the City of Jamestown
are authorized or required to enforce.
 9-2. Extension of power; limitation.
The Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Fire Inspector, Electrical
Inspector, Housing Inspectors, Director of Public Works or his agent, and
parking meter attendants of the City of Jamestown may issue and serve
upon a person an appearance ticket when such Inspector or Inspectors
has or have reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed
a misdemeanor or has committed a petty offense in his or their presence.
The authority to issue appearance tickets herein granted shall not extend
to offenses that are felonies. The authority of parking meter attendants to
issue appearance tickets herein granted shall only extend to violations of
the parking ordinances of the City of Jamestown.
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
 5-7 APPEARANCE TICKETS  9-2
9:77
CONSTABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Suspension or removal  See  C-14.
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Appearance tickets  See Ch. 9.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
 14-1. Appointment and terms.
There shall be three City Constables for the City of Jamestown, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for terms to
run concurrently with the Mayor's term.
 14-2. Suspension or removal from office.
A City Constable may be suspended by the Mayor or removed from office
upon the recommendation of the Mayor during his or her term. Proceedings
for the suspension or removal of a City Constable shall be in accord with the
provisions of  C-14 of the Charter of the City of Jamestown.
 14-3. Powers and duties; bond.
A. The powers, duties, liabilities, compensation and fees of the Constables
provided for by this chapter shall be the same as those of constables of
towns, and all provisions of law applicable to town constables and their
sureties shall apply to said City Constables and their sureties.
B. In accordance with New York State Criminal Procedure Law  2.1(1), a
Constable is classified as a peace officer.
C. A City Constable shall not receive any compensation from the City of
Jamestown. The City Constables shall be required to comply with New
York State law in the assessment of fees. The only exception to the
above is that the City Constable maintains the ability to determine
whether the fees are payable in advance.
D. A City Constable shall execute a hold harmless agreement and provide
to the City of Jamestown a bond or insurance policy in an amount of no
less than $1,000,000 naming the City of Jamestown as an insured party
and indemnifying the City of Jamestown from any liability with respect
to any duties performed by the City Constable.
E. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result
in the immediate suspension and removal of the individual from the
office of Constable. Said individual will not be eligible for
reappointment until such time as the individual submits verification
that he/she has complied with all the provisions contained herein.
 9-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  14-4
13:78
 14-4. Training and accounting practices.
 14-5. Issuance of identification card.
 14-6. Transition of accounts and funds.
A. Pursuant to New York State Criminal Procedure Law  2.3, an individual
appointed to serve as a City Constable shall be required within one year
after the appointment to successfully complete at least a thirty-fivehour
peace officer training course and any other training prescribed by
the municipal police training council. The cost of said training will be
borne by the individual.
B. Failure to successfully complete the peace officer training within the
first year following the appointment will result in the individual's
immediate removal from the office of Constable. Such individual will
not be eligible for reappointment to the office of Constable until such
time as that individual submits proof of successful completion of peace
officer training.
C. Additionally, an individual appointed to serve as Constable shall comply
with additional training as required by the City of Jamestown
throughout the term of the office. This training shall include, but not be
limited to, accounting practices, which shall include maintenance of a
separate bank account for purposes of collection, deposit and
disbursement of all funds collected in such capacity.
D. Every Constable shall submit to the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk on or before the 10th of each month a monthly report
outlining the number of matters outstanding and an up-to-date
accounting of each matter. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
A. A City Constable shall, within one week of confirmation of his or her
appointment, report to the Chief of Police who shall thereafter issue
such Constable a City photo identification card which shall be displayed
by such Constable to all persons with whom the Constable conducts
official business.
B. Under no circumstances shall an individual serving as a Constable
subcontract or have another individual perform the official services of
the office of Constable.
A. Any individual who has previously served as a Constable of the City of
Jamestown shall immediately render to the Corporation Counsel's office
a full and complete accounting of all unsettled judgments, enforcement
actions and income executions currently in his or her possession and
shall immediately deposit with the Jamestown City Court all collected
but undisbursed funds which may have been received in connection
with income executions previously issued in his or her name as a City
Constable. Any uncollected or unsatisfied judgments shall be turned
 14-4 (RESERVED)  14-6
13:79
Chapter 15
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government  See Ch. 5.
Constables  See Ch. 14.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 15-1. Benefits conferred.
Pursuant to the provisions of  18 of the Public Officers Law of the State
of New York, the City Council of the City of Jamestown hereby agrees that
the City of Jamestown shall be held liable for costs incurred under the
provisions of such section by conferring upon the officers and employees of
the City of Jamestown the benefits of  18 of such law.7
Chapter 18
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260. Zoning  See Ch. 300.
over to current City Constables for enforcement by appropriate means
including, but not limited to, income executions.
B. Current and future Constables shall be required to render the same
accountings and deposits within 30 days after resignation or expiration
of their term of office.
C. Upon receipt of the aforesaid accountings from former Constables, and
upon resignation or expiration of the term of office of any current or
future Constable, the Corporation Counsel's office shall cause to be
mailed by certified mail to each judgment creditor and each judgment
debtor's employer, a notice that no funds shall be deposited or remitted
to the former Constable named on income executions or other
enforcement orders in their possession, and that to preserve their
priority, all funds to be paid thereunder shall be remitted directly to the
Jamestown City Court in escrow until new income executions listing
duly qualified and authorized collection officers have been issued as
substitutes for the documents referring to the former Constable.
7. Editor's Note: Original Sections 2 and 3, which immediately followed this section and
dealt with the repeal of L.L. No. 1-1980 and the effects of such repeal, were deleted
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992.
 14-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  15-1
15:80
 18-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the City of Jamestown to prepare
and submit an application for designation of an area within the City of
Jamestown, Village of Falconer and Town of Ellicott as an economic
development zone.
 18-2. Boundaries of Greater Jamestown Economic Development
Zone. [Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995; 10-27-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997]
A. PARCEL A.
(1) A-1. Beginning at the southeastern corner of the intersection of
Winsor Street and Falconer Streets in the City of Jamestown,
proceed south along the eastern curbline of Winsor Street to the
northern boundary of the Conrail property where it intersects with
Winsor Street. From that point, following the northern boundary of
the Conrail property in a northeasterly direction to the conjoining
of the Chadakoin River and the Conrail property. From that point,
along the northern boundary of the Chadakoin River to its
intersection with Alberta Street in the Village of Falconer. From
that point following the western curbline of Alberta Street in a
northerly direction to the southwestern corner of Alberta and West
Main Street. From that point west on the southern curbline of W.
Main Street in the Village of Falconer to the political boundary
between the Village of Falconer and the City of Jamestown at the
southwestern corner of Tiffany Avenue and E. Second Street. From
that point, north on the western curbline of Tiffany Avenue to the
southwestern corner of Tiffany Avenue and Falconer Street. From
that point, follow the southern curbline of Falconer Street to the
intersection with James Street in the City of Jamestown. From that
point, cross Falconer Street in a northerly direction to the
northeast corner of James Street. From that point, follow the
eastern curbline of James Street to the fourth entrance to the
Jamestown Community College campus adjacent to the Forum
Building. From that point, proceed in a westerly direction to the
Hundred Acre Brook. From that point, proceed north along the
brook to the boundary of Jamestown Community College where it
meets with the Hundred Acre Lot. From that point, proceed in an
easterly direction to the western curbline of James Street. From
that point, follow the western curbline of James Street south to its
intersection with Falconer Street. From that point, crossing
Falconer Street to the southern curbline, follow said street to the
beginning point at the southeastern curb of the intersection of
Falconer Street and Winsor Street in the City of Jamestown.
 15-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  18-2
18:81
(2) A-2. Beginning in the City of Jamestown at the southeastern corner
of the intersection of Third Street and Jefferson Street, proceed
south to the lands of the former Erie Railroad Station and then
along the southern boundary of same to its intersection with the
southwestern corner of Rose Alley. From that point, cross Rose
Alley at its southernmost point and proceed along the southern
boundary of Parcel 411-4-1 to its southwestern intersection with
Washington Street. From that point, proceed south to the
intersection with the Washington Street Bridge. From that point,
following the middle line of the Washington Street Bridge, proceed
south over the tracks to southern boundary of the lands of CAE
Blackstone, formerly the AVM Corp. and proceed eastward along
the boundary of this property to its eastern edge at Main Street.
From that point, crossing Main Street in an easterly direction,
proceed northward along the eastern boundaries of the commercial
property under the Conrail bridge and owned by Conrail to the
northern boundary, of the Conrail tracks. From that point, follow
the northern boundary of the Conrail tracks to their intersection
with Institute Street. From that point, turning south on Institute
Street, continue under the Conrail tracks along the middle of
Institute Street crossing to the northwestern corner of the present
known boundaries of the Zone at the property formerly known as
4-in-1 Screwdriver, Parcel 414-6-1. From that point, following the
eastern curbline of Institute Street, proceed south along same to
the northern bank of the Chadakoin River to its intersection with
Institute Street. From that point, proceed eastward along said
northern riverbank to conjoining with the Conrail tracks at Buffalo
Street. From that point, following the southern boundary of the
Chadakoin in an easterly direction to its intersection with Alberta
Street in the Village of Falconer. From that point, east along the
southern boundary of the Village of Falconer property, 104-12-4 to
its intersection with Phetteplace Street. From that point, south
along Phetteplace Street to its intersection with Lister Avenue.
From that point, east along the southern curbline of Lister Avenue
to its intersection with South Street. From that point, north on the
western curbline of South Street to its intersection with West
Elmwood Avenue. From that point, crossing West Elmwood in a
northerly direction, proceed east along the northern curbline of
West Elmwood to the western boundary of the Village of Falconer
property, 105-18-19.2. From that point, northeast along the eastern
boundary of Parcel 105-18-19.2 and 105-18-33.1 to the intersection
with South Work Street. From that point, follow a northwesterly
direction along the western curbline of South Work Street to Parcel
104-18-25, Quality Markets. From that point, west along the
southern boundary of Parcel 104-18-25 to its southwest corner,
then north along said boundary to its intersection with W. Everett
Street. From that point, west along the southern curbline of West
Everett Street to southwest corner of Phetteplace Street. From that
point, north along the eastern curbline of Phetteplace to its
 18-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  18-2
18:82
intersection with West Main Street. From that point, east along
the southern boundary of West Main Street to its intersection with
Moon Brook. From that point, south along the western bank of
Moon Brook to its intersection with West Everett Street. From that
point, east along the northern curbline of West Everett Street to
its intersection with S. Work Street. From that point, crossing S.
Work to the southeast corner of E. Everett Street, proceed east
on southern curbline of E. Everett to the northeastern corner of
Parcel 105-3-1.1, Fancher Chair. From that point, south along the
boundary of Parcel 105-3-1.1 and Parcel 105-3-2.1 crossing the
intersection of East Elmwood Street. From that point, northeast
along the southern curbline of East Elmwood to the political
boundary of the Village of Falconer and the Town of Poland. From
that point, east along the political boundary with the Town of
Poland to the northeast corner of Parcel 107-12-5.2. From that
point, south along said boundary to the northern boundary of the
Conrail property. From that point, west following the northern
boundary of the Conrail property to its intersection with Chadakoin
River in the City of Jamestown. From that point, under the Conrail
Bridge, continue west along the northern boundary of the
Chadakoin River to its intersection with the southwest corner of
Institute Street and Harrison Street. From that point, crossing
Harrison Street to the northeast corner of Institute Street, proceed
north along the eastern curbline of Institute Street to the beginning
point at the northwest corner of Parcel 414-6-1. From that point,
return north along the eastern curbline of Institute Street crossing
at the northern boundary of Parcel 413-4-16; then proceed along
this boundary to the eastern boundary of Parcel 413-4-7.1. From
that point, proceed north along this boundary to the northern
boundary of the Parcel 413-4-7.2 at its intersection with the
property formerly known as the Broadhead Mills. From that point,
proceed northward along this boundary to the southern curbline
of 1st Street and along this curbline to the intersection of N. Main
Street and First Street. From that point, proceed southward along
the eastern curbline of N. Main Street to the southwest corner
of the commercial property under the Conrail Bridge owned by
Conrail, crossing N. Main Street to the northern boundary of the
lands of CAE Blackstone, formerly the AVM Corp. From that point,
proceed along the northern boundary of same to the northwestern
corner of CAE Blackstone at its intersection with the Washington
Street Bridge; then north along the eastern curb of the bridge
to the southern boundary of the property known as the Furniture
Mart Building. From that point, proceed east along the southern
boundary of same to its intersection with Foundry Alley; then north
along the western curbline of Foundry Alley to its intersection with
W. 2nd Street. From that point, crossing W. 2nd Street, proceed
along the northern curbline eastward to its intersection with
Cherry Street. From that point, proceed along the western curbline
of Cherry Street northward, crossing W. 3rd Street and W. 4th
 18-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  18-2
18:83
Street to the southeastern corner of the property known as the
Holiday Inn. From that point, following the eastern boundary of the
Holiday Inn property, proceed northward to its intersection with
W. 5th Street. From that point, proceed in a westerly direction
along the southern curbline of W. 5th Street to its intersection
with the southwestern corner Washington and W. 5th Street. From
that point, proceed south along the eastern curbline of Washington
Street to its intersection with Third Street. From that point,
proceed along the southern curbline of Third Street in a westerly
direction to the beginning point at the intersection of Third Street
and Jefferson.
(3) A-3. Beginning at the northwest point of the southern bank of the
Chadakoin River at its intersection with Foote Avenue, continue
south along Foote Avenue to its intersection with Water Street.
From that point, east along the northern curbline of Water Street to
its intersection with Winsor Street. From that point, cross Winsor
Street to the southwest corner of the Crawford Furniture, Atlas
Division property, Parcels 613-1-1, 18-22, and 17.2, follow along the
southern boundary of said properties to the intersection with
Willard Street. From that point, crossing Willard Street in a
northeastern direction, follow the northern curbline of said street
to its intersection with Allen Street. From that point, east along the
northern curbline of Allen Street to Scioto Street. From that point,
crossing Allen Street, proceed east along the northern curbline of
Scioto to its intersection with Barrows. From that point, north
following the western curbline of Barrows Street to its intersection
with Allen Street. From that point, north along the eastern curbline
of Allen Street to its intersection with Buffalo Street. From that
point, follow the southern curbline of Buffalo Street to Parcel
305-1-6; turning southwest, follow the boundary of same to the
southwestern corner of the property. From that point, proceed
along the southern boundary of same and Parcel 305-1-7 to Parcel
305-1-9.1; proceed along the boundary of this parcel to the
southeastern corner; then east to Buffalo Street. From that point,
following the southern curbline of Buffalo Street back to the
northeast corner of Parcel 305-1-7. From that point, crossing
Buffalo Street, proceed in an easterly direction along the northern
curbline of Buffalo Street to the political boundary between the
City of Jamestown and the Town of Ellicott which is Tiffany Avenue.
From that point, proceed north along the eastern curbline of
Tiffany Street to the northern property line of Parcel 35-6-28 to the
northeast corner thereof, then continuing north along the property
boundaries to the northwestern corner of the property designated
as Parcel 35-6-1.2. From that point, east along the northern
boundary of Parcel 35-6-1.2 to Elam Street. From that point,
crossing Elam Street, proceed south along the eastern curbline of
Elam Street south to the intersection of Elam and Superior Street
(a paper street). From that point, east along the northern line of
Superior Street to Dow Street. From that point, south along the
 18-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  18-2
18:84
eastern curbline of Dow Street to a point even with the southern
boundary of that property designated Parcel 35-2-10. From that
point, east along the southern boundary of Parcel 35-2-10 to a point
across the 90' right of way of Niagara Mohawk Power Corp on
Parcel 10-57-11.1, at N 67 degrees -47'-33" E, 1,083.85 feet to a
point. From that point, then S 11 degrees-061'33"E, 500 feet to a
point. From that point, then S 78 degrees-53'-27" W, 668.63 feet to
a point. From that point, then S 01 degrees-32'-56" E, 361.62 feet
to a point. From that point, then S 88 degrees-27'-04" W, 457 feet to
a point. From that point, then N 00 degrees-19'48" E, 583.66 feet
to a point N 00 degrees 19'-48" E, then back to the beginning point.
From that point, north along 90' right of way of Niagara Mohawk
Power Corp to the southwestern corner of Parcel 35-2-4. From that
point, continue along the southern boundary of Parcels. 10-57-2.2,
10-57-4.2, 10-57-3 to Mason Drive in the Town of Ellicott. From that
point, crossing Mason Drive to the northeastern corner of Parcel
10-57-8, follow the eastern boundary of same to its southeastern
point. From that point, proceed west to the southwestern corner of
same. From that point, turn north and continue to the intersection
of said Parcel and Mason Drive. From that point, crossing Mason
Drive to the northeastern boundary of Parcel 10-57.9.1. follow
the northern boundary of said Parcel, turning southwest at the
northwest corner. From that point, at the southwest corner of
same, turn east along the boundary of said Parcel to its joining
with Parcel 10-21-3.5, known as the Bush property. From that
point, south along the westerly boundary of Parcel 10-1-21.3.5
to the southernmost boundary of Parcel 10-1-21.3.5, then east to
the intersection with the northeastern corner of Parcel 10-1-26.2.
From that point, south along the westerly boundary of 10-1-26.2
to the western curbline of Chautauqua County Highway 106, also
known as Willard Street Extension. From that Point, north along
the western curbline of Chautauqua County Highway 106 to the
political boundary between the Town of Ellicott and the Town of
Poland. From that point, north along the political boundary to the
southern boundary of the Conrail property. From that point, west
along said boundary to its intersection with the Chadakoin River
in the City of Jamestown. From that point, continuing west along
the southern boundary of the Chadakoin River to the being point at
Foote Avenue.
B. PARCEL B. Airport Industrial Park: Beginning at the northeastern
corner of the intersection of NY Route 60 and Girts Road at Parcel
5-1-150, known as Clark Laboratories, proceed southeasterly along
Route 60 along the eastern boundary of same. From that point,
continuing along the eastern boundary of Parcel 5-1-149.2 and
5-1-149.1, also known as Clark Laboratories to the southeastern corner
of Parcel 5-1-149.1 From that point, proceed west along the southern
boundary of same, and Parcels 51-149.3, 5-1-146.2, 5-1-146.1, known as
Jamestown Advanced Products, and 5-1-145, known as Johnson Air
Design. From that point, at the southwestern corner of Parcel 5-1-145,
 18-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  18-2
18:85
 18-3. Certification Officer.
The economic development zone Certification Officer shall be a title position
employee of the County of Chautauqua Industrial Development Agency,
but such officer shall not be the Administrative Director of the County of
Chautauqua Industrial Development Agency.
 18-4. Administrative Board.
The economic development zone Administrative Board for the economic
development zone described in  18-2 above shall consist of 14 members
representing the following constituency with powers pursuant to  963 of
the General Municipal Law:
proceed north to its northwestern intersection with Girts Road; then
along the southern curbline of Girts Road back to the beginning point
the Girts and NY Route 60.
C. PARCEL C. Beginning at the southeast corner of Parcel 2-1-79.1, known
as the Producto property, and its intersection with Turner Road,
proceed along the northern curbline of Turner Road to the southwest
corner of same. From that point, proceed north along the western
boundary of the property to its northwest corner, then along this
northern boundary to its northeast corner. From that point, proceed
south along the eastern boundary to the beginning point at of the
Producto property at its intersection with Turner Road.
A. The Mayor of the City of Jamestown, who shall serve as chairperson.
B. The Supervisor of the Town of Ellicott.
C. Mayor of the Village of Falconer.
D. The Administrative Director of the County of Chautauqua Industrial
Development Agency.
E. The Director of Development of the City of Jamestown.
F. The Executive Director of the Private Industry Council.
G. One representative from a commercial business enterprise within the
economic development zone described in  18-2 above, who shall be
selected by the Jamestown Area Chamber of Commerce.
H. One member from an industrial facility located within the economic
development zone described in  18-2 above, who shall be selected by
the Manufacturers Association of the Jamestown Area.
I. One representative from Jamestown Community College, to be
appointed by the President of Jamestown Community College.
J. One legislator from the Chautauqua County Legislature whose
legislative district represents any portion of the economic development
 18-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  18-4
18:86
 18-5. Authorization for application.
The City of Jamestown is hereby authorized to submit an application for
designation of an area within the City of Jamestown, Village of Falconer
and Town of Ellicott described in  18-2 above as an economic development
zone.
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commission on Reapportionment  See Ch.
72.
zone described in  18-2 above, to be appointed by the Chairman of the
Chautauqua County Legislature.
K. One representative from organized labor, to be jointly appointed by the
Mayor of the City of Jamestown, the Mayor of the Village of Falconer
and Supervisor of the Town of Ellicott.
L. One representative from a commercial/financial institution, to be jointly
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Jamestown, the Mayor of the
Village of Falconer and Supervisor of the Town of Ellicott.
M. One representative from a community group, to be jointly appointed by
the Mayor of the City of Jamestown, the Mayor of the Village of Falconer
and Supervisor of the Town of Ellicott.
N. One representative who is a resident of the economic development zone
described in  18-2 above, to be jointly appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Jamestown, the Mayor of the Village of Falconer and Supervisor
of the Town of Ellicott.
 18-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  18-5
18:87

ARTICLE I
Ward Boundaries
 19-1. Ward boundaries established.
The City of Jamestown shall be divided into six wards, as follows:
A. College Ward I. Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
Pleasantview Drive with the centerline of Marvin Parkway, being the
northerly boundary of Jamestown, running thence southerly along the
centerline of Pleasantview Drive to the centerline of Buffalo Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Buffalo Street to the centerline
of Thayer Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Thayer Street
to the centerline of Newton Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of Newton Avenue to the centerline of Bowen Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of Bowen Street to the centerline of Price
Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Price Street to the
centerline of Winsor Street; thence southerly along the centerline of
Winsor Street to the centerline of Allen Street; thence northeasterly
along the centerline of Allen Street to the centerline of Scioto Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Scioto Street to the centerline of
Hedges Ave.; thence northerly along the centerline of Hedges Ave. to
the centerline of Benedict Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline
of Benedict Avenue to the centerline of Vega Street; thence southerly
along the centerline of Vega Street to the centerline of Willard Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Willard Street to the easterly
boundary of Jamestown; thence northerly along the east boundary of
Jamestown to the north boundary line of Jamestown; thence westerly
along the north boundary line of Jamestown to the place of beginning.
B. Lakeview Ward II. Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
Pleasantview Drive with the north boundary of the City of Jamestown;
running thence southerly along the centerline of Pleasantview Drive to
its intersection with the centerline of Buffalo Street; thence easterly
along the centerline of Buffalo Street to the centerline of Thayer Street;
thence southerly along the centerline of Thayer Street to the centerline
of Newton Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Newton
Avenue to the centerline of Bowen Street; thence southerly along the
centerline of Bowen Street to the centerline of Price Street; thence
westerly along the centerline of Price Street to the centerline of Winsor
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Winsor Street to the
centerline of the Erie Railroad right-of-way; thence westerly along the
centerline of said right-of-way to the centerline of Institute Street;
thence northerly along the centerline of Institute Street to the
centerline of East Second Street; thence westerly along the centerline
of East Second Street to the centerline of Prendergast Ave.; thence
northwesterly along the centerline of Prendergast Ave. to the centerline
of East Eighth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of East
Eighth Street to the centerline of North Main Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of Fluvanna
 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  19-1
18:89
Ave.; thence westerly along the centerline of Fluvanna Ave. to the west
boundary of Jamestown; thence northerly along the west boundary of
Jamestown to the north boundary of Jamestown; thence easterly along
the north boundary of Jamestown to the place of beginning.
C. Chadakoin Ward III. Beginning at a point where the centerline of
Livingston Avenue intersects the west boundary line of Jamestown;
running thence northerly along the west boundary of Jamestown to the
centerline of the Erie Railroad right-of-way; thence westerly along the
centerline of said right-of-way to the westerly boundary of Jamestown;
thence northerly along the westerly boundary of Jamestown to the
centerline of the Chadakoin River; thence easterly along the centerline
of the Chadakoin River continuing northerly along said city boundary to
the centerline of Fluvanna Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline
of Fluvanna Avenue to the centerline of North Main Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of
East Eighth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of East Eighth
Street to the centerline of Prendergast Ave.; thence southerly along the
centerline of Prendergast Ave. to the centerline of East Second Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of East Second Street to the
centerline of Institute Street; thence southerly along the centerline of
Institute Street to the centerline of Allen Street; thence easterly along
the centerline of Allen Street to the centerline of Foote Avenue; thence
southerly along the centerline of Foote Avenue to the centerline of
Prather Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Prather Avenue
to the centerline of South Main Street; thence southerly along the
centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Newland Avenue;
thence westerly along the centerline of Newland Avenue to the
centerline of Prospect Street; thence northerly along the centerline of
Prospect Street to the centerline of McKinley Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of McKinley Avenue to the centerline of Forest
Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Forest Avenue to the
centerline of McKinley Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of
McKinley Avenue to the centerline of Barrett Avenue; thence southerly
along the centerline of Barrett Avenue to the centerline of Stearns Ave.;
thence westerly along the centerline of Stearns Ave. to the centerline of
Charles Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Charles Street
to the centerline of McKinley Ave.; thence westerly along the centerline
of McKinley Avenue to the centerline of Colfax Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of Colfax Street to the centerline of Baker Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Baker Street to the centerline of
Chapman Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Chapman
Street to the centerline of Palmer Street; thence westerly along the
centerline of Palmer Street to the centerline of Francis Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of Francis Street to the centerline of
Front Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Front Street to the
centerline of Sprague Street; thence northerly along the centerline of
Sprague Street to the centerline of the Erie Railroad right-of-way;
thence westerly along the centerline of the said right-of-way to the
centerline of West Sixth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of
 19-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  19-1
18:90
West Sixth Street to the centerline of Whitley Avenue; thence southerly
along the centerline of Whitley Avenue to the centerline of Harding
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Harding Avenue to the
centerline of Catlin Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of
Catlin Avenue to the centerline of Fairmount Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of Fairmount Avenue to the centerline of Lovall
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Lovall Avenue to the
centerline of Livingston Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline
of Livingston Avenue to the point of beginning.
D. Bergman Park Ward IV. Beginning at the point of the intersection of the
centerline of Livingston Avenue with the west boundary of the City of
Jamestown; thence southerly along said western boundary of
Jamestown to the south boundary of Jamestown; thence easterly along
said south boundary of Jamestown to the centerline of Chautauqua
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Chautauqua Avenue to
the centerline of Hazeltine Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline
of Hazeltine Avenue to the centerline of Sampson Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of Sampson Street to the centerline of
Newland Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Newland
Avenue to the centerline of Norwood Avenue; thence northerly along
the centerline of Norwood Avenue to the centerline of McKinley
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of McKinley Avenue to the
centerline of Colfax Street; thence northerly along the centerline of
Colfax Street to the centerline of Baker Street; thence easterly along
the centerline of Baker Street to the centerline of Chapman Street;
thence northerly along the centerline of Chapman Street to the
centerline of Palmer Street; thence westerly along the centerline of
Palmer Street to the centerline of Francis Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of Francis Street to the centerline of Front Street;
thence westerly along the centerline of Front Street to the centerline of
Sprague Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Sprague
Street to the Erie Railroad right-of-way; thence westerly along the
centerline of the said right-of-way to the centerline of West Sixth Street;
thence westerly along the centerline of West Sixth Street to the
centerline of Whitley Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Whitley Avenue to the centerline of Harding Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of Harding Avenue to the centerline of Catlin
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Catlin Avenue to the
centerline of Fairmount Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of
Fairmount Avenue to the centerline of Lovall Avenue; thence northerly
along the centerline of Lovall Avenue to the centerline of Livingston
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Livingston Avenue to
the point of beginning. Also all that tract or parcel of land previously
situate within the Town of Ellicott, County of Chautauqua and State of
New York, and being a part of Lot 56, Town 1, and Range 11 and also
Lot 49, Town 2, and Range 11 of the Holland Land Company's survey
and being further bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a set
rebar with cap on the easterly bounds of said Lot 56, old city boundary,
at its intersection with the northerly bounds of improved Baker Street;
 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  19-1
18:91
thence south 57 13' 36" west, along said highway boundary, a distance
of 283.31 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence north 15 04' 27" west,
a distance of 404.32 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence south 70
34' 40" west, a distance of 95.44 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence
north 15 18' 19" west, a distance of 1650.50 feet to an existing iron pin
thence south 74 40' 19" west, a distance of 811.00 feet to an existing
rebar with cap; thence north 00 27' 41" west, a distance of 77.18 feet
to an existing iron pipe; thence north 02 59' 08" west, a distance of
871.47 feet to an existing iron pipe on the northerly bounds of said
Lot 56; thence south 89 50' 58" west, along said lot and town line,
a distance of 438.51 feet to an existing rebar with cap; thence north
00 54' 47" west, a distance of 120.00 feet to an existing rebar with
cap; thence north 89 50' 58" east, a distance of 121.49 feet to an
existing iron pipe; thence north 00 24' 53" west, a distance of 260.43
feet to an existing rebar at the southwesterly corner of Holmstead
Boulevard; thence north 89 35' 07" east, a distance of 100.00 feet to an
existing iron pipe; thence north 00 24' 53" west, a distance of 125.00
feet a point on the centerline of Glenwood Avenue, passing through
an existing iron pipe 25.00 feet southerly of the last described point;
thence north 89 35' 07" east, along the centerline of Glenwood Avenue,
a distance of 1131.18 feet to a set rebar with cap on the easterly bounds
of said Lot 49, old city boundary; thence south 00 21' 05" west, along
said lot line, a distance of 511.11 feet to an existing iron pipe at the
southeasterly corner thereof; thence south 89 32' 31" east, along the
northerly bounds of said Lot 56 which line is also a town line, old city
boundary and centerline of Newland Avenue, a distance of 596.04 feet
to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 56; thence south 04 24' 30"
east, along said lot line and old city boundary and passing through an
existing iron pipe 25.09 feet southerly of the last described point, a
distance of 2535.47 feet to the point and place of beginning. Containing
64.61 acres more or less according to a boundary survey prepared by
Steven R. Gustafson, P.L.S. dated November, 1992.
E. Forest Ward V. Beginning at the point of the intersection of the
centerline of Chautauqua Avenue with the south boundary of the City of
Jamestown; running thence northerly along the centerline of
Chautauqua Avenue to the centerline of Hazeltine Avenue; thence
easterly along the centerline of Hazeltine Avenue to the centerline of
Sampson Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Sampson
Street to the centerline of Newland Avenue; thence easterly along the
centerline of Newland Avenue to the centerline of Norwood Avenue;
thence northerly along the centerline of Norwood Avenue to the
centerline of McKinley Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of
McKinley Avenue to the centerline of Charles Street; thence southerly
along the centerline of Charles Street to the centerline of Stearns
Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Stearns Ave. to the
centerline of Barrett Ave.; thence northerly along the centerline of
Barrett Ave. to the centerline of McKinley Ave.; thence easterly along
the centerline of McKinley Avenue to the centerline of Forest Avenue;
thence northerly along the centerline of Forest Avenue to the centerline
 19-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  19-1
18:92
of McKinley Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of McKinley
Avenue, to the centerline of Prospect Street; thence southerly along
the centerline of Prospect Street to the centerline of Newland Avenue;
thence easterly along the centerline of Newland Avenue to the
centerline of West Virginia Boulevard; thence easterly along the
centerline of West Virginia Boulevard to the centerline of Camp Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Camp Street to the centerline of
East Virginia Boulevard; thence south and easterly along the centerline
of East Virginia Boulevard to the centerline of Hughes Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of Hughes Street which becomes
Elizabeth Avenue to the centerline of Springdale Avenue; thence
westerly along the centerline of Springdale Avenue to the centerline of
Martin Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Martin Road to
the centerline of Brad Street; thence westerly along the centerline of
Brad Street to the centerline of Foote Avenue; thence southerly along
the centerline of Foote Avenue to the southerly boundary of the City
of Jamestown; thence westerly along said boundary to the point of
beginning.
F. Willard Heights Ward VI. Beginning at the point of the intersection of
the centerline of Willard Street with the east boundary of the City of
Jamestown; running thence westerly along the centerline of Willard
Street to the centerline of Vega Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of Vega Street to the centerline of Benedict Avenue; thence
westerly along the centerline of Benedict Avenue to the centerline of
Hedges Ave.; thence southerly along the centerline of Hedges Ave. to
the centerline of Scioto Street; thence westerly along the centerline of
Scioto Street to the centerline of Allen Street; thence southwesterly
along the centerline of Allen Street to the centerline of Winsor Street;
thence northerly along the centerline of Winsor Street to the centerline
of the Erie Railroad right-of-way; thence westerly along the centerline
of said right-of-way to the centerline of Institute Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of Institute Street to the centerline of
Allen Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Allen Street to the
centerline of Foote Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Foote Avenue to the centerline of Prather Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of Prather Avenue to the centerline of South Main
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of South Main Street to
the centerline of Newland Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline
of Newland Avenue to the centerline of West Virginia Boulevard; thence
northerly along the centerline of West Virginia Boulevard to the
centerline of Camp Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Camp
Street to the centerline of East Virginia Boulevard; thence south and
easterly along the centerline of East Virginia Boulevard to the
centerline of Hughes Street; thence southerly along the centerline of
Hughes Street which becomes Elizabeth Avenue to the centerline of
Springdale Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Springdale
Avenue to the centerline of Martin Road; thence southerly along the
centerline of Martin Road to the centerline of Brad Street; thence
westerly along the centerline of Brad Street to the centerline of Foote
 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES  19-1
18:93
Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Foote Avenue to the
south boundary of Jamestown; thence easterly along said southern
boundary of Jamestown to the centerline of Manchester Road; thence
northerly along the centerline of Manchester Road to the centerline
of Camp Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Camp Street
to the east boundary of Jamestown; thence northerly along said east
boundary of Jamestown to the point of beginning.
 19-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  19-1
18:94
Chapter 21
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government  See Ch. 5.
Civil Service Commission  See Ch. 13.
Constables  See Ch. 14.
Defense and indemnification See Ch. 15.
Historian  See Ch. 28.
Commission on Human Rights  See Ch. 32.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
Ombudsman/Director of Human
Resources  See Ch. 51.
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Planning Commission  see Ch. 61.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Public works  See Ch. 68.
Commission on Reapportionment  see Ch.
72.
Strategic Planning and Partnerships
Commission  See Ch. 80.
Veterans Memorial Commission  See Ch. 82.
 21-1. Findings and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of  806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Council of the City of Jamestown recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the City of Jamestown. These rules shall serve as a guide for official
conduct of the officers and employees of the City of Jamestown. The rules
of ethical conduct of this chapter as adopted shall not conflict with but shall
be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law
or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
 21-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST  A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a
municipal officer or employee as a result of a contract with the municipality
which such officer or employee serves. A municipal officer or employee shall
be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:[Amended 8-10-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992]
A spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
A.
 19-1 ETHICS, CODE OF  21-2
21:95
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE  An officer or employee of the
City of Jamestown, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being
a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a chief engineer or
assistant chief engineer.
 21-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the City of Jamestown shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer is a member or
employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift nor accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or
could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his
official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
part. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such an agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Council and any officer or employee of the City of
 21-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  21-3
21:96
 21-4. Claims by present or former employees.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the City of Jamestown or any agency thereof on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
 21-5. Distribution.
The Mayor of the City of Jamestown shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the City within 60 days
after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected
or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the
duties of his office or employment.
 21-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Jamestown, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion
or gives official opinion to the Council on any legislation before the
Council shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and
extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has
in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City of Jamestown in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
 21-3 ETHICS, CODE OF  21-6
21:97
Chapter 28
HISTORIAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15. Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 28-1. Office created.
The office of City Historian is hereby created.
 28-2. Responsibilities.
Such office is to assume the following responsibilities:
Chapter 32
HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission  See Ch. 13.
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 32-1. Establishment; membership; terms of office.
A. To develop and administer for the City a program of cataloging,
preserving and making use of all available historical materials and
records relating to the City.
B. To encourage and assist the Fenton Historical Society in its historical
work for the benefit of the community, and to urge other groups to seek
out their own historical materials.
C. To encourage observances of past historical events, to encourage all
local groups in their anniversary observances and to increase
awareness in the City of its history through various types of public
presentations.
D. To cooperate with educational, civic and cultural institutions in new
methods of securing, recording and presenting the history of the
community.
E. To prepare an annual report, with copies to the County and State
Historians.
 21-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  32-1
28:98
 32-2. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Commission shall serve without salary but may be
reimbursed for their actual and authorized expenses necessarily incurred in
the discharge of their official duties.
 32-3. Appointments.
In making appointments to the Commission, the Mayor shall take into
consideration the various religious, racial, nationality and political groups
in the community.
 32-4. Employment of staff.
The Mayor shall have the power and authority, subject to the applicable civil
service requirements, to employ an executive director, a secretary and such
attorneys, experts and other employees as may be necessary, whenever
such positions shall be created by and within the amount made available by
the City Council.
 32-5. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission, as provided in Article 12-D of the
General Municipal Law, to:
A. A Commission on Human Rights is hereby established by the City in
accordance with Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law.
B. The Commission shall consist of not more than 12 members to be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
The Mayor shall designate one of such members to be Chairman, who
shall serve as Chairman at the pleasure of the Mayor.
C. Of the members first appointed, four shall be appointed for terms of
office of one year, four shall be appointed for terms of office of two years
and four for terms of office of three years each. Thereafter, all
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for terms of office of
three years each. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of
terms of office shall be filled for the unexpired terms of the offices so
filled.
A. Foster mutual respect and understanding among all racial, religious
and nationality groups in the community.
B. Make such studies in any field of human relationships in the community
as in its judgment will aid in effectuating its general purposes.
C. Inquire into incidents of tension and conflict among or between various
racial, religious and nationality groups, and to take such action as may
be designed to alleviate such tension and conflict.
 32-1 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON  32-5
32:99
 32-6. Obligations.
The Commission shall discharge the following obligations as provided by
Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law:
 32-7. Effect of statutory amendments.
In the event that the provisions of Article 12-D of the General Municipal
Law are amended, such amendments shall be effective with respect to the
Commission on Human Rights created by this chapter.
D. Conduct and recommend such educational programs as in its judgment
will increase good will among inhabitants of the community and open
new opportunities into all phases of community life for all inhabitants.
A. Receive complaints of alleged discrimination because of race, creed,
color or national origin; seek the active assistance of the State
Commission for Human Rights in the solution of complaints which fall
within the jurisdiction of the State Commission for Human Rights; and
prepare its own plans in the case of other complaints with a view of
reducing and eliminating such alleged discrimination through the
process of conference, conciliation and persuasion.
B. Hold conferences and other public meetings in the interest of a
constructive resolution of racial, religious and nationality group
tensions and the prejudice and discrimination occasioned thereby.
C. Issue such publications and reports of investigation as in its judgment
will tend to effectuate the purposes of Article 12-D of the General
Municipal Law.
D. Enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial, religious
and nationality groups, community organizations, industry and labor
organizations, media or mass communication, fraternal and benevolent
associations and other groups in an international campaign devoted to
fostering among the diverse groups of the community mutual esteem,
justice and equity.
E. Encourage and stimulate agencies under the jurisdiction of the city
which created the Commission to take such action as will fulfill the
purposes of Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law.
F. Submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council.
 32-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  32-7
32:100
Chapter 47
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government  See Ch. 5.
Constables  See Ch. 14.
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Historian  See Ch. 28.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Public works  See Ch. 68.
 32-7 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON  32-7
32:101

ARTICLE I
Travel Advances
[Adopted 12-13-1971 by L.L. No. 6-1971]
 47-1. Advance. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Any officer or employee of the City who has been authorized to travel
outside the City with expenses to be paid pursuant to  77-b of the General
Municipal Law shall be entitled to receive, prior to such travel, an advance
of his estimated expenses, limited however to actual travel cost, necessary
tuition or registration fees, plus an amount not to exceed $100 per day for
meals and lodging.
 47-2. Voucher and audit.
Such officer or employee shall within 10 days of his return to the City submit
to the Comptroller a travel expense voucher, which shall be audited and
paid in the same manner as ordinary claims against the City.
 47-3. Payment settled. [Amended 8-28-2017]
The Comptroller and the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk are
hereby authorized to deduct any advances made pursuant to  47-1 from
such audit and to pay the balance, if any, of the approved voucher amount to
the officer or employee submitting the same. Any amount drawn in excess
of such voucher amount shall be repaid within such ten-day period.
 47-1 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON  47-3
32:103

ARTICLE II
Compensation for Mileage
[Adopted 9-24-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
 47-4. Rate established; funds to be used.
For the purpose of compensating officers and employees of the City of
Jamestown for the use by them of their privately owned automobiles while
engaged in City business, a mileage rate equal to the mileage rate permitted
by the Internal Revenue Service and Internal Revenue Service Code, as
from time to time amended, is hereby fixed. Such mileage rate shall be
payable out of funds appropriated to the respective departments, boards or
offices in which such officers or employees are employed on claim vouchers
approved by the head of the department, board or office.
 47-4 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON  47-4
32:105
Chapter 51
OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Council  Charter, Art. III.
Civil Service Commission  See Ch. 13.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
 51-1. Position established: appointment, term and compensation.
The office of Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources is hereby
established in and for the City of Jamestown. The Ombudsman/Director of
Human Resources shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval
of a majority of all the members of the City Council, for a term to run
concurrent with the term of the Mayor, at such salary as the Council shall
provide.
 51-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall have the power
and duty to receive complaints, suggestions and requests for
information from any person concerning administrative matters of
government and to assist citizens with problems in dealing with City
government or any department, board or agency thereof.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, if any suggestion or complaint
relates to the Police Department or any member thereof, the
Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall immediately forward
the suggestion or complaint to the Chief of Police, who shall make such
investigations as he shall deem necessary. The Ombudsman/Director of
Human Resources may, however, in his/her sole discretion, decline to
investigate any complaint he/she may receive. The Ombudsman/
Director of Human Resources is also authorized to perform such other
and further duties as may be assigned to him/her by the Mayor. The
Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall have the power to
appoint, employ and supervise such other personnel in his/her office,
within the limits of any authorization and appropriation made by the
City Council, as may be necessary to carry out its functions.
B. In addition to the powers and duties described above, the Ombudsman/
Director of Human Resources shall also have the following duties and
responsibilities:
(1) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall serve as the
City's chief negotiator and spokesman for all matters pertaining to
the City's collective bargaining agreements with its recognized
public employee labor organizations, with the exception of public
 47-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  51-2
51:106
employee labor organizations under the jurisdiction of the Board of
Public Utilities.
(2) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for the day-to-day administration of all collective
bargaining agreements between the City and its recognized public
employee labor organizations, with the exception of public
employee labor organizations under the jurisdiction of the Board of
Public Utilities.
(3) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for the administration of the City's self-insured medical
insurance program and all matters pertaining thereto.
(4) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall have primary
responsibility for the administration of all personnel matters,
including but not limited to the development and enforcement of
personnel policies and procedures, with the exception of personnel
matters under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utilities.
(5) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for the administration of the City's workers'
compensation plan, including overseeing all employee incident
reports, as well as all New York State compensation reports.
(6) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for administration of the City's hiring process in
accordance with applicable Civil Service Law and the rules and
regulations pertaining thereto.
(7) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall serve as the
City's Affirmative Action Officer and shall oversee the activities of
the City's Human Rights Coordinator and Senior Citizen Advocate,
who shall report directly to the Ombudsman/Director of Human
Resources.
(8) The Ombudsman/Director of Human Resources shall have primary
responsibility for all other matters involving the personnel
administration of the City not specifically referred to herein.
 51-2 OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN  51-2
51:107
Chapter 57
PARKS, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
Planning Commission  See Ch. 61.
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 57-1. Creation.
The Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission is hereby created to
construct, maintain and operate all public parks and recreational facilities
and to conserve the environment of the City of Jamestown.
 57-2. Membership; vacancies. [Amended 10-16-1995; 1-31-2000]
The Commission shall consist of 12 members, 10 of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council to serve for
terms of five years or until their successors are appointed, except that the
member of such Commission first appointed shall be appointed for terms
in a manner such that the term of one Commissioner shall expire annually
thereafter. In addition, this Commission shall consist of two members of
the City Council, the Mayor, one member of the Board of Education of
the Jamestown City School District to be selected by the President of the
Board of Education, one member of the Planning Commission to be selected
annually by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, and other members
that may be hereafter designated by the City Council shall be ex officio
members of the Commission. Vacancies in such Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiation of term shall be as original appointments.
 57-3. Officers; quorum; meetings.
At the first meeting of each year, members of the Parks, Recreation and
Conservation Commission shall select from their own number a Chairman
and Secretary and other necessary officers to serve for a one-year period.
Six members of said Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but no resolution involving expenditure of money
shall be passed and no appointee or employee shall be removed except
by the concurring vote of six members of the Parks, Recreation and
Conservation Commission. Said Commission shall hold regular meetings
at least once a month and may hold special meetings at the call of the
Chairman or upon the request of any three members of the Commission.
 51-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  57-4
51:108
 57-4. Powers and duties.
The Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission shall undertake the
following functions:
A. To direct, supervise, care for and manage the parks of the City.
B. To acquire, construct, install and maintain recreational facilities,
equipment and other recreational property of the City.
C. To arrange, provide for, operate and conduct public recreation
programs in the parks and schools of the City and on other City
property where permitted, subject to the regulations of the Board of
Education, where applicable.
D. To care for the shade trees of the City.
E. To establish, by regulation, the schedule of fees for use of parks and
recreational facilities.
F. To grant, on approval of the Council, concessions to be operated within
the parks and other recreational facilities.
G. To advise the City Council on all matters involving the reclamation,
preservation, utilization, development, public access and management
of that portion of the Chadakoin River, riverbanks and watershed that
traverses the City of Jamestown and to further advise the City Council
on all other matters affecting the preservation, development,
management and use of the natural and man-made features and
conditions of the City of Jamestown insofar as beauty, quality, biologic
integrity and other environmental factors are concerned and, in the
case of man's activities and developments, with regard to any major
threats posed to environmental quality, so as to enhance the long-range
value of the Chadakoin River basin and the overall environment to the
people of the City of Jamestown. [Amended 6-23-1997]
H. To develop and conduct a program of public information in the
community which shall be designed to foster increased understanding
of the nature of environmental problems and issues and support for the
solutions.
I. To maintain liaison and communications with public and agencies and
organizations of local, state and national scope whose programs and
activities have an impact on the quality of the environment or who can
be of assistance to the Commission.
J. To perform such other and further duties as may be necessary and
required for carrying out the purpose of this chapter or as may be
assigned from time to time by the City Council.8
8. Editor's Note: An unnumbered paragraph, which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with the Director and other employees, was deleted 4-5-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976. See
now  57-5, Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation; Deputy.
 57-4 OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN  57-5
51:109
 57-5. Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation; Deputy.
[Added 4-5-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976]
 57-6. Riverfront Management Council. [Amended 6-23-1997;
7-28-2014]
Powers and duties affecting the environment (as set out by  57-4G through
J) shall be effectuated by the Riverfront Management Council. The
Riverfront Management Council shall be under the jurisdiction and control
of the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission and shall consist of
15 members composed of 14 citizen members and one City Council Member.
Five members shall be citizen appointments and shall be residents of the
City of Jamestown. Three members, including the Councilmanic member,
shall be members of the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission.
Seven members, who need not be residents of the City of Jamestown as
a qualification for appointment, shall be the Chairman of the Chautauqua
County Watershed Conservancy or his or her designated representative,
the Chairman of the Roger Tory Peterson Institute or his or her designated
representative, the Chairman of the Audubon Society or his or her
designated representative, one representative of Jamestown High School
and three student representatives of Jamestown High School. Members of
said Riverfront Management Council shall be appointed by the Mayor to
serve for terms of five years or until their successors are appointed. With
the exception of the Councilmanic member, none of the members of the
Riverfront Management Council shall be deemed to be officers of the City
of Jamestown.
A. The powers vested in the Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission shall be exercised through a Director of Parks, Recreation
and Conservation, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council. In performing his functions, the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation shall have the authority to appoint and
remove such foremen, advisors and employees as may be required to
carry out the purposes of this section and under the express
authorization of the City Council. In addition, the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation, subject to the approval of the City
Council, shall have the power to do all other acts and to give effect to
the purposes set forth in the law.
B. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation is empowered to
designate and employ a Deputy Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation. The Deputy Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation shall perform such duties as the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation may direct and in the absence of the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation shall have the power
and authority to act as the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation.
C. The appointment of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation
and employment of his Deputy shall be for a term of two years, to run
concurrently with the term of the Mayor.
 57-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  57-7
51:110
 57-7. Compensation.
The Commission shall recommend to the City Council the salaries or other
compensation to be paid to the several officers and employees in its
jurisdiction. The several amounts to be fixed as said salary or compensation,
however, shall be determined by the City Council. The members of the
Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission shall serve without pay.
Chapter 61
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointment  See  C-8.
Oaths of office  See  C-11.
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Public works  See Ch. 68.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 61-1. Applicability of state law.
The City shall be governed by the provisions of General City Law ㎣ 26
through 39.
 61-2. Official Map. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
The City shall prepare, adopt and file an Official Map within the authority
and meaning of General City Law  26. It shall be filed in the proper public
offices as the first and initial Official Map of the City for the purposes
contemplated in General City Law ㎣ 26 through 39. The Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk is directed to file in the office of the
County Clerk an instrument certifying that the City has established an
Official Map and Plan as provided in General City Law  26.
 61-3. Creation; membership; limitation of powers.
The City Planning Commission is hereby created. The Mayor shall appoint
seven members of the Commission in accordance with  C-8 of the City
Charter.9 The Commission shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
vested in it by the Code of the City of Jamestown and ㎣ 26 through 39 of the
General City Law, except as the Council holds in abeyance certain powers or
reserves the right to pass upon certain decisions of the Commission under
the discretionary provisions of such sections.
9. Editor's Note: See Charter  C-8.
 57-7 OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN  61-4
51:111
 61-4. Authority to approve plats. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
In accordance with General City Law  32, the Commission shall be vested
with the power to approve plats showing new streets or highways pursuant
to General City Law ㎣ 32, 33 and 34. The Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk is directed to file with the County Clerk an instrument
certifying that the Commission has been authorized to approve plats and to
exercise the powers in relation to the same provided by General City Law
㎣ 26 through 39 and that the Building Inspector is the City official who
shall issue, in the name of the Commission, a certificate of failure to take
action in relation to such plats, within the meaning of such  32.
 61-5. Authority to change zoning regulations.
The Commission is authorized to exercise the powers contemplated by the
General City Law  37 relating to the authority of the City Council to grant
to the Commission the power to make changes in zoning regulations.10
 61-6. Executive officer.
The Building Inspector shall be the executive officer of the Commission.
He shall issue the permits, certificates and instruments contemplated by
General City Law ㎣ 26 through 39. He shall retain copies in his office as
part of the public records of the City.
 61-7. Secretary; minutes. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
 61-8. Technical advisor.
The Director of Public Works shall act as the technical advisor of the
Commission, and his staff shall prepare the maps, descriptions and records
required by it.
A. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall act as secretary
of the Commission. He shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
publish the same in the official paper annually designated by the City
Council.
B. Following the publication of the official minutes as provided by the
preceding subsection, the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall transmit a copy of the printed minutes to each
Commissioner, the Corporation Counsel, the Building Inspector, the
Director of Public Works, the Director of Assessments and the
Superintendent of Public Utilities. He is authorized to certify minutes of
the proceedings of the Commission upon the request of the person in
interest.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
 61-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  61-9
51:112
 61-9. Legal advisor.
The Corporation Counsel shall act as the legal advisor of the Commission.
 61-10. Procedure and conduct of proceedings.
 61-11. Oaths; compensation.
A. Determination of rules of procedure; records to be kept; stenographer.
The Commission shall determine the rules of its procedure. It shall keep
a record of its hearings and the testimony and statements of persons
relative to proposals pending before it. The stenographer assigned to
the Board of Appeals shall act as the stenographer of the Commission.
B. Use of parliamentary procedure. Except as otherwise provided by this
chapter or by the laws of the state, the Chairman shall conduct all
proceedings of the Commission under the customary rules of
parliamentary procedure.
C. Method of making motions; recording of vote. All proceedings,
decisions and resolutions of the Commission shall be initiated by the
appropriate motion of one Commissioner. The motion need not be
seconded. The vote upon every motion, resolution and decision shall be
recorded by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. The members of the Commission shall take and file with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk their oaths of office in the form
provided by the City Charter.11 [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. The members shall serve without compensation but shall be paid for
necessary expenses in the performance of the duties of their office. No
administrative or appointive officer of the City required to render
services to the Commission under this chapter shall receive additional
compensation.
C. The Chairman is authorized to administer the oath to persons
appearing before the Commission and submitting verbal statements in
connection with applications or other matters pending before it. The
stenographer shall transcribe all statements of such persons as part of
the record of the proceedings.12
11.Editor's Note: See Charter  C-11.
12.Editor's Note: Former  61-12, Stenographer, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 11-23-1992 by ordinance which also renumbered former ㎣ 61-13 and 61-14 as
㎣ 61-12 and 61-13, respectively.
 61-9 OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN  61-12
51:113
 61-12. Special meetings. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
The Chairman is authorized to call special meetings at any time. Two
members of the Commission shall have the right to invoke a special meeting
by filing a written request with the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk stating the purpose of the meeting. The Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, upon receiving such request, shall give written notice
to each member of the time of the meeting. The Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall give 24 hours' written notice of each regular
and special meeting. He shall mail this written notice to each member
of the Commission, Corporation Counsel, Building Inspector, Director of
Public Works and stenographer to the Commission, to the official newspaper
designated annually by the City Council and to citizens or other individuals
having particular matters pending before the Commission on the day of the
proposed meeting.
 61-13. Petition and application procedure.
A. All petitions or applications authorized by General City Law ㎣ 26
through 39 and this chapter shall be in writing, signed by the owner of
the property or his agent, with full address specified. Three copies of
each petition or application shall be submitted, accompanied by maps,
whenever possible, indicative of the proposal in detail. These shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector in the first instance. If the
application or petition is of routine nature, he shall grant the same, if
clearly within his authority and power, but if the power or authority of
the Building Inspector is doubtful in relation to the same, he shall
submit the petition or application, with such additional information as
he deems expedient, together with his recommendations, to the
ensuing meeting of the Commission. He shall communicate the decision
of the Commission, in writing, to the applicant.
B. Applications for the approval of plat or allotment maps, within the
contemplation of General City Law ㎣ 32, 33, 36 and 37 and sections of
this Code in relation thereto, shall be submitted, in writing, in triplicate,
accompanied by appropriate maps and blueprints based upon the
survey of a competent civil engineer and under his certificate, showing
the complete dimension of the property and its boundaries, the
proposed layout of individual lots and the suggested park, recreational,
school or other civic centers or sites with the proposed lands to be
devoted to mercantile, factory or other purposes not permitted within
the residential district under Chapter 300, Zoning. The Building
Inspector shall not entertain these applications unless detailed,
complete and adequate petitions, maps and data are thus submitted in
triplicate. Following the submission of these applications in the
required form, the Building Inspector shall at once convene the
Director of Public Works, Director of Assessments, Chairman of the
Board of Public Utilities and Superintendent of Public Utilities in
conference for the purpose of determining and certifying the following:
 61-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  61-13
51:114
(1) Whether sewers and water mains exist on the allotment and, if not,
whether such sewers and water mains may be constructed through
the allotment on a sound financial basis and the prospective income
therefrom both in taxes and rentals, together with a statement as to
the probable date as to when the City Council and the Board of
Public Utilities will be prepared to extend water mains and sewers
through the particular tract of land.
(2) Whether the proposed streets or highways to intersect the
allotment have been worked and, if not worked, whether the owner
is willing to work the same under the uniform rules of the City, and
if the owner is not willing to do so, the cost of placing such
proposed streets or highways in condition apart from the
assessable cost of paying the same.
(3) If the allotment is in the residential district, whether the proposed
layout will promote the convenience and welfare of the inhabitants
of the City within the meaning of Section 33 of Chapter 690 of the
Laws of 1926.
(4) Whether the proposed layout of the allotment within the residential
district contemplates certain mercantile sites and other community
service sites, whether the administrative officers specified
recommend such sites and just what specific variations will be
required in the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, otherwise
applicable to the particular plat or allotment.
(5) Whether an existing allotment map is already on file in the office of
the Director of Assessments and in the office of the County Clerk, to
what extent the proposed allotment map as forming a part of the
Official Map of the City changes that situation, and the
recommendation of the Director of Assessments in relation thereto.
(6) All other data or information relative to the proposal available in
the administrative departments of the City, together with the
suggestions and recommendations of the specified administrative
officers in relation to the proposal.
C. Since a final decision must be reached within 45 days by the
Commission on applications for the approval of plat or allotment maps,
the Building Inspector is directed to perform the acts and procure the
information contemplated by this chapter with all convenient speed.
When such information is reduced to writing, he shall give notice of a
hearing upon such applications by printing a notice in the official paper
designated annually by the City Council showing the time, place and the
nature of the proposal to be considered not less than 10 days prior to
the date fixed for such hearing. The notice shall state that citizens may
be heard for or against the proposed allotment plat and map. The notice
shall be signed by the Building Inspector, and, in addition to being
transmitted to the person specified in this chapter, it shall be mailed at
once to the petitioner or applicant, his agent, attorney, engineer and
 61-13 OMBUDSMAN/DIRECTOR OF HUMAN  61-13
51:115
Chapter 65
POLICE DEPARTMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Chief of Police  See  C-32.
Appearance tickets  See Ch. 9.
Constables  See Ch. 14.
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 65-1. Special policemen.
The Chief of Police shall have authority, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., during such time or upon such occasions as the necessities of the
public welfare warrant or demand, to designate, swear in and employ upon
his own initiative special policemen.
 65-2. Authority to control and manage police force.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to make regulations for the
control of the police force and for the management and control of the City
jail and police headquarters. Extension of such authority to the Chief of
Police shall in no sense divest the Mayor of the City of the power to order
or direct or of the right of the City Council to order or direct the Chief of
Police and his force to do or perform acts or services other or contrary to
such regulations provided by the Chief of Police as the public interest may
demand or warrant.
Chapter 68
PUBLIC WORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Sewers  See Ch. 240.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
other persons in particular interest. Following the hearing, the
Commission shall reach and record its decision by formal vote on its
minutes.
 61-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  68-1
65:116
 68-1. Director of Public Works.
The office of Director of Public Works is hereby created. He or she shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of the
members of City Council, for a term to run concurrently with the term of the
Mayor, at such salary as the City Council shall provide. The Director shall be
a certified professional civil engineer and resident of Chautauqua County.
He or she shall be a member of the Board of Public Utilities by virtue of the
office for the express purpose of coordinating construction work through
the public highways of the City. The Director of Public Works shall have
jurisdiction of the highways, sidewalks, pavements, sewers, public places
and parks, the maintenance of all other public properties of the City except
as otherwise provided herein, and shall perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by the City Council. All of the properties, records, premises
and the like now under the jurisdiction of the various departments of the
City government are hereby transferred to the jurisdiction and supervision
of the Director of Public Works as herein provided. The Director shall select
such foreman, advisors and employees as may be required for the purposes
of this Department, under the express authorization of the City Council.
 68-2. Control of street right-of-way; planting of trees.
The Director of Public Works shall have the control and management of
that part of every street, square and highway in said City lying between the
sidewalk and the curbline of the street, square or highway and shall have
the power, after proper investigation, to recommend to the City Council
that the property owners on any street, square or highway be required to
grade, improve and plant trees on that portion of the property between
the sidewalk and curb opposite or adjacent to their respective properties.
If the City Council approves of such recommendation, that fact shall be
communicated to the particular property owner, together with a specific
statement of the things required to be done by him as herein specified.
If the property owner fails to do the things required of him under the
authority of this section, then the City Council shall have the power to direct
the Director of Public Works to do the same, and the cost thereof shall
become a lien upon the adjacent property. The procedure in such cases as to
review, assessment, levy and collection of such cost shall be the same as is
prescribed for the collection in the City of the cost of constructing sidewalks
ordered and constructed by the City Council. The Director of Public Works
shall have the power to prescribe the variety and number of shade trees to
be set out upon and along any street in said City and to prohibit or regulate
the cutting and trimming of any such trees which now are or hereafter may
be set out. The authority hereby given shall be exercised with the consent
of the City Council, and except as it may give contrary directions in the
premises, the power of the Director in establishing the grade of any street,
alley or highway shall be limited to recommendations to be submitted to and
approved by the City Council.
 68-1 PUBLIC WORKS  68-3
68:117
 68-3. Placement of pipes, poles or wires in public places.
No person or corporation shall place any pipes, poles or string any wires
through, under or over any highways, parks or other public places of the
City without first filing an application, in writing, for permission so to do
with the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall cause
the summary removal of any poles, pipes, wires and the like which may have
been placed or erected other than at the place and in the manner lawfully
authorized by the City Council.
 68-4. Conduit system.
 68-5. Project proposals and recommendations.
A. The Director of Public Works, by the direction of the City Council, is
hereby authorized to prepare plans and estimates for the construction
of a conduit system through the highways and other public places of the
City. The City shall have a right to secure by purchase or by
condemnation necessary private lands required in the construction of
such conduit system. In the construction of such conduit system for the
accommodation of the wires, pipes and the like of the several public
utilities of the municipality, the City is hereby authorized to make it of
sufficient size to accommodate and provide ways for the private wire
companies operating within the City to the end that poles and wires
may be eliminated from the public highways.
B. The City Council is authorized to determine the sum which the several
public utilities and boards, having jurisdiction thereof, shall pay for the
use of such conduit system, and the City Council is hereby empowered
to lease to the private wire companies the privilege of placing their
wires within such conduit system. The City may provide funds to pay for
the expense of construction and provide, in the manner provided by law
or in the City Charter, for the payment of the principal of and interest on
any obligations issued for such purpose.
C. The City Council is hereby authorized from time to time to make such
reasonable and impartial regulations requiring the wires of publicservice
corporations and of the municipality to be placed underground
and to enter into all necessary contracts or agreements in reference
thereto in its discretion. The wires of a public service corporation shall
not be required to be placed underground unless the wire owned or
used by the City on the same street or highway for and in connection
with a service which competes with the service rendered by the public
service corporation affected by the exercise of this power is likewise
required to be placed underground.
A. Any City department or board shall have the power to present to the
City Council a written statement that a specified public improvement or
project within its jurisdiction is desirable, accompanied with details as
to the most expedient plan for construction, the probable cost of
construction and maintenance and the prospective revenue therefrom,
 68-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  68-5
68:118
Chapter 72
REAPPORTIONMENT, COMMISSION ON
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Ward boundaries  See Ch. 19.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 72-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Commission, to be known as the "Commission
on Reapportionment." Such Commission shall be constituted whenever a
reapportionment or redefinition of the ward boundaries of the City of
Jamestown is to be made concerning the appropriate number of ward and
at-large City Council seats for the election of City Council members and
shall have the powers, duties and obligations as provided herein.
 72-2. Membership; appointment of members; vacancies.
together with such other information as it may deem desirable. The City
Council shall have the power to direct any particular department or
board to submit such detailed plans, specifications, estimates and the
like as to any particular contemplated public project placed under the
jurisdiction of the board or department by this Charter.
B. The City Council may likewise direct a proper committee of citizens or
its chosen technical advisers to present such a report, accompanied by
specifications, estimates and the like as herein defined, in relation to
any contemplated public project either within or without the
jurisdiction of a particular department or board. Upon receipt of such
statement and report from any board, department, committee or
technical advisors, the City Council may approve the recommendations
therein contained and proceed to carry them into effect.
A. No later than January 1, 2012, and each 10 years thereafter following
completion of the decennial census and whenever a reapportionment or
redefinition of ward boundaries of the City of Jamestown is to be made
concerning the appropriate number of ward and at-large City Council
seats for the election of City Council members, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall solicit nominations from the
President of the Jamestown Bar Association, the Chairpersons of the
three political parties receiving the largest votes in the most recent
gubernatorial election through their City Committees, the President of
the City Council and the Mayor of the City of Jamestown the names of
individuals to be considered for appointment to the Commission of
Reapportionment. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
 68-5 PUBLIC WORKS  72-2
68:119
 72-3. Officers; voting.
B. No later than February 1, 2012, and each 10 years thereafter following
completion of the decennial census and whenever a reapportionment or
redefinition of ward boundaries of the City of Jamestown is to be made
concerning the appropriate number of ward and at-large City Council
seats for the election of City Council members, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall forward to the Mayor and the
President of the City Council the names of the individuals to be
considered for appointment to the Commission on Reapportionment.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. No later than March 1, 2012, and each 10 years thereafter following
completion of the decennial census and whenever a reapportionment or
redefinition of ward boundaries of the City of Jamestown is to be made
concerning the appropriate number of ward and at-large City Council
seats for the election of City Council members, such appointments,
except the elected or appointed officers of the City, shall be confirmed
by a majority vote of the entire City Council.
D. No later than April 1, 2012, and each 10 years thereafter following
completion of the decennial census and whenever a reapportionment or
redefinition of ward boundaries of the City of Jamestown is to be made
concerning the appropriate number of ward and at-large City Council
seats for the election of City Council members, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall notify the individuals
appointed to the Commission on Reapportionment of the date of the
first meeting which shall be held no later than May 1st. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
E. The Commission shall consist of 11 members, to be appointed as
follows: one attorney recommended by the Jamestown Bar Association;
one citizen recommended by each of the three political parties
receiving the largest votes in the last gubernatorial election through
their City Committees; two Councilpersons designated by the Council
President; the Corporation Counsel; the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk; and three citizens nominated by the Mayor.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
F. In the event of a vacancy by death, resignation, expiration of elective or
appointive office or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by a
nomination of the body which nominated the member whose absence
created the vacancy, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
A. The Commission shall choose from its membership at its initial meeting
a Chairman and a Vice Chairman. The Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall act as Secretary to the Commission.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. All resolutions and motions shall be adopted upon the affirmative vote
of a majority of a quorum present, except the election of officers and the
 72-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  72-3
68:120
 72-4. Powers and duties.
 72-5. Effect of redistricting plan.
No change in the boundary of any ward and no other provision of a
redistricting plan shall operate to abolish or terminate the term of office of
any City Council member prior to the expiration of the term of office for
which the member was elected.
confirmation of the final report, which shall be adopted upon the
affirmation vote of a majority of the entire authorized membership of
the Commission.
C. A member shall lose his or her voting privilege if not present for a
majority of meetings.
A. The Commission shall have such powers as are necessary to carry out
its functions, including the power to hold public hearings as it deems
necessary and advisable. The Commission shall meet no later than May
1, 2012, and each 10 years thereafter following completion of the
decennial census and whenever a reapportionment or redefinition of
ward boundaries of the City of Jamestown is to be made concerning the
appropriate number of ward and at-large City Council seats for the
election of City Council members at least twice in each month until such
time as it has rendered its final report. The Commission shall be
reactivated every 10 years after completion of the census and shall
meet at least twice in each month until such time as it has rendered its
final report which shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council of
the City of Jamestown no later than September 1, 2012, and each 10
years thereafter following the completion of the decennial census.
B. The Commission shall investigate, consider and determine the
compliance or noncompliance of the present ward and district
boundaries of the City with the United States Supreme Court's mandate
popularly referred to as the one-man, one-vote doctrine. If the
Commission shall determine that such ward and district boundaries and
the mode of election of the City Councilperson is not in full compliance
therewith, the Commission shall determine and report to the City
Council its determination of the most advantageous redistricting of the
City to comply with such one-man, one-vote rule, together with its
recommendation for implementation of the same.
C. The Commission shall make such further recommendations, as it may
deem advisable with regard to the necessity of a comprehensive
Charter revision, election of County Legislators for the City and such
other matters as it may deem appropriate and proper within its overall
function.
 72-3 PUBLIC WORKS  72-5
68:121
Chapter 80
STRATEGIC PLANNING AND PARTNERSHIPS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
Planning Commission  See Ch. 61.
 80-1. Creation.
The Strategic Planning and Partnerships Commission is hereby created to
continuously consider, develop and make recommendations for strategic
initiatives to the City Council and other organizations within the City of
Jamestown.
 80-2. Membership; vacancies. [Amended 6-17-2002; 2-27-2007]
The Commission shall consist of 15 members, two of whom shall be citizen
residents of the City of Jamestown and shall be appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the City Council to serve for terms of five years or
until their successors are appointed. In addition, this Commission shall
consist of the Mayor, two members of the City Council, each of different
political affiliation, a member of the Jamestown Planning Commission, the
Superintendent of Schools of the Enlarged School District of the City of
Jamestown, the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities, one
member of one of the foundations headquartered in the City of Jamestown
to be appointed by the Mayor, the President or designee of Jamestown
Community College, the Chief Executive Officer or designee of WCA
Hospital, the President or designee of the Jamestown Area Labor Council,
the President or designee of the Jamestown Area Chamber of Commerce,
the Chairman or designee of the Manufacturers Association of the
Jamestown Area and the Executive Director or designee of the Downtown
Jamestown Development Corporation. Except for the Mayor, the City
Council members and citizen members of this Commission, residency within
the City of Jamestown shall not be a qualification for membership. Vacancies
in such Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
as original appointments.
 80-3. Officers; quorum; meetings. [Amended 6-17-2002;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 2-27-2007; 8-28-2017]
At the first meeting of each year, members of the Strategic Planning and
Partnerships Commission shall select from their own number a Co-chairman
and other necessary officers to serve for a one-year period. An additional
Co-chairman of this Commission shall be elected by the City Council to
serve for a period of one year. The Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall serve as Secretary. Eight members of said Commission shall
 72-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  80-3
68:122
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Commission shall
have no authority for the adoption of a resolution involving the expenditure
of money unless such resolution be one of recommendation only for
consideration by the City Council. Said Commission shall hold regular
meetings at least once a month and may hold special meetings at the call of
either of the Co-chairmen or upon the request of any three members of the
Commission.
 80-4. Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Commission to consider,
develop and make recommendations for strategic initiatives to the City
Council and other organizations within the greater Jamestown area with
respect to issues involving economics, the quality of life, equity and
opportunity and to develop and establish community-wide goals and
objectives for the future and to make recommendations to the City Council
and other organizations within the greater Jamestown area to accomplish
such goals and objectives. In the development and making of its
recommendations, the Commission shall utilize as resources the
departments of the City of Jamestown, the Chautauqua County Industrial
Development Agency, public and private housing and development
organizations, private enterprise and the Metro Six which is comprised of
the City of Jamestown, Town of Ellicott, Town of Busti, Village of Falconer,
Village of Celoron and Village of Lakewood.
Chapter 82
VETERANS MEMORIAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Code of Ethics  See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees  See Ch. 47.
 82-1. Creation.
The Veterans Memorial Commission is hereby created.
 82-2. Membership; vacancies. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Commission shall consist of nine members. The members of such
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City
Council. The terms of the members shall be three-year terms, except that
the members of such Commission first appointed shall be appointed for
terms in a manner such that the term of three members expire in one
year, three members' terms expire in two years and three members' terms
expire in three years. Members shall serve until the appointment and
 80-3 PUBLIC WORKS  82-2
68:123
qualification of their successors. The Mayor shall designate one member
of the Commission to serve as Chairperson, who shall preside at meetings
of the Commission and who shall execute the duties normally conferred by
this section. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall serve
as Secretary to the Commission. Commission members shall be residents of
the County of Chautauqua and shall be nominated by virtue of their active
membership in one of the Chautauqua County veterans organizations or
shall be private citizens who are interested in supporting the activities of
veterans affairs in the City of Jamestown.
 82-3. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Commission to oversee the
preservation, maintenance and further development of the Veterans
Memorial that is located on Tracy Plaza, the ongoing upgrade and
maintenance of the Veterans Memorial multimedia program, the
coordination, in cooperation with the United Veterans Council, regarding
the scheduling of events at the Veterans Memorial located on Tracy Plaza
and any and all other matters deemed appropriate by the Mayor and City
Council concerning the Veterans Memorial.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 83
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gasoline sales  See Ch. 165.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Special sales  See Ch. 229.
Signs  See Ch. 245.
 83-1. Distribution restricted.
No person shall distribute or hand out handbills, pamphlets, circulars or
advertising matter upon any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys of the City,
nor shall any person place within or attach the same to any automobile
parked anywhere in the City. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit
the distribution of handbills or pamphlets announcing political, labor or
civic meetings or other meetings pertaining to the public welfare. No person
shall distribute handbills authorized by this chapter if the same are thrown
upon the sidewalks or streets of the City by the recipients thereof, and any
person distributing any such handbills who shall continue to distribute them
after the recipients of any such handbills have thrown them upon the streets
or sidewalks shall be guilty of violating this section.
 82-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  83-2
83:124
 83-2. Distribution to students.
No person shall stand in front of or near any school of this City for the
purpose of giving students on their way to or entering therein or proceeding
therefrom handbills, free tickets, posters, circulars, packages or medicines.
 83-3. Dropping from airplanes.
No person shall drop any handbills, pamphlets, circulars, advertising matter
or packages of any kind whatsoever from any airplane or airship except over
a landing field and then only upon the written consent of the Chief of Police.
 83-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 89
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Fire prevention  See Ch. 140.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
 89-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect and promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Jamestown
by reducing the number of avoidable alarms to the City's 911 Emergency
Operations Center. Avoidable alarms contribute to ineffective utilization
of public safety personnel and equipment. In addition, avoidable alarms
require emergency responses which may contribute to the potential of
accidents and delayed responses to genuine emergencies. This chapter
intends to assure that police and fire communications and facilities will be
available to dispatch police and fire personnel for actual emergencies and
to alleviate the nuisance of avoidable alarms within the City of Jamestown.
Additionally, this chapter is intended to provide the City of Jamestown with
the names of responsible individuals to contact in case of activation of an
alarm.
 89-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM  A device or an assembly of equipment which emits an
audible response which is intended to alert persons outside of premises
 83-2 ADVERTISING MATERIALS  89-2
83:125
to the existence of a hazard or emergency or which is intended to alert
emergency agencies by automatically dialing an emergency agency or
which is connected to a private answering point for the purpose of reporting
such alarms to emergency agencies or which is directly connected to the
911 Emergency Operations Center of the City of Jamestown or other
emergency agency.
ALARM USER  Any person who owns, leases or uses an alarm system
within the City of Jamestown, except for a person whose alarm system is
on a motor vehicle or is a proprietary system; provided, however, that if an
alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a
premises (other than a proprietary system) in the City of Jamestown, the
person using such system is an alarm user.
AVOIDABLE ALARM  The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of
the owner, user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees
or agents or through any other cause which is a direct connection to an
emergency agency or which through notification of the emergency by a
private answering point or automatic dialing service, or a Fire Department
alarm system or which through notification to an emergency agency by
a second party or means indicates that an emergency situation exists
requiring a response within the City of Jamestown when, in fact, an
emergency situation does not exist. An avoidable alarm also includes the
knowing or intentional activation of an alarm to an emergency agency
when the activator knows an emergency situation does not exist. Avoidable
alarms shall not include alarms activated by violent conditions of nature
such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other similar causes beyond
the control of the user of an alarm system. Activation of an alarm system
under any circumstances when the activator reasonably believes that an
emergency situation exists shall not be deemed an avoidable alarm.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, the defective
installation of an alarm system, the failure to repair or cause to be repaired
an alarm system or the use of defective equipment in connection with an
alarm system shall not constitute extraordinary circumstances beyond the
reasonable control of the alarm user.
EMERGENCY AGENCY  The Police Department and Fire Department of
the City of Jamestown.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM  A signaling system which when activated causes
an audible signaling device to be activated outside the premises within
which the system is installed.
NOTICE ADDRESS  The address which an alarm user designates on the
application for a permit and the address to which notices are to be sent.
PERSON  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE ANSWERING POINT  A business which offers the service of
receiving emergency signals, monitoring said signals and relaying them to
an emergency agency.
 89-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  89-2
83:126
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM  An alarm sounding and/or recording within the
premises protected by the alarm which is not intended to alert persons
outside the premises on which the alarm system is located of a possible
hazard and not intended to alert an emergency agency, the control center
being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If
the proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly to or by
means of an automatic device through an emergency agency or to a private
answering point or to a local alarm system, it shall be deemed an alarm
system as such is defined in this chapter.
 89-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to proprietary systems.
Permits shall be required for all alarm systems located at buildings at
federal, state or local governmental agencies or authorities or at public or
private schools; provided, however, that such alarm systems shall be exempt
from the permit fees, but subject to the fines and penalties herein provided
for avoidable alarms and, where applicable, to the master box fire alarm fee
of the Fire Department.
 89-4. Permit required.
No person shall own, use, lease, operate or maintain an alarm system within
the City of Jamestown, nor shall any person cause an alarm system to be
connected directly to the 911 Emergency Operations Center of the City of
Jamestown, unless such person shall have first obtained from the City a
permit for such alarm as herein provided.
 89-5. Permit application.
A. In order to obtain an alarm user permit, any person who operates an
alarm system shall submit an application for such permit to the
Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk in the form
designated by the City of Jamestown, which application shall contain
the following: [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
(1) The name, home address and telephone number of the person
applying.
(2) The address of the premises upon which the alarm system is or will
be located.
(3) The address to which notice is required under this chapter shall be
sent.
(4) The type of alarm system for which a permit is sought.
(5) The name of the alarm business or businesses selling, installing,
monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm
system, if applicable.
 89-2 ADVERTISING MATERIALS  89-5
83:127
 89-6. Permit fees and issuance; transferability.
 89-7. Term of permit.
An alarm user permit shall expire on December 31 next following its date of
issuance.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of one or more persons
who can be reached at any time and who are authorized by the
owner of the premises in which the system is installed to open the
premises and secure the alarm.
(7) Any other information relating to the alarm system or user as the
City of Jamestown may from time to time require.
B. The information required on the permit application shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be made available to members of the general
public. The Jamestown City Council Council finds that the release of
such information would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy and could possibly endanger the life or safety of persons and
premises wherein an alarm system is located. Accordingly, the
information on a permit application shall be used by the City of
Jamestown for public safety purposes only and shall be used for no
other purpose whatsoever.
A. Except as provided in  89-3 of this chapter, every application for an
alarm user permit for alarm systems connected directly to the 911
Emergency Operations Center of the City of Jamestown shall be
accompanied by a permit fee as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and
Permits. In addition to such permit fee, alarm users connected to the
master box fire alarm system of the Fire Department shall pay an
additional fee as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, which
shall be separate from the permit fee herein provided. Applications for
alarm user permits for all other alarm systems shall be accompanied by
a permit fee as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits. With the
exception of the master box fire alarm fee, anything herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding, no permit fee shall be required for
applications submitted by any alarm user on or before January 31,
1991, nor for applications submitted after said date if the application is
submitted prior to the installation of an alarm system. [Amended
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
B. Upon receipt of a properly executed permit application and permit fee,
the Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall
issue an alarm user permit to the applicant. [Amended 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. The alarm user permit shall not be transferable and shall be kept on the
premises where the alarm system is located and made available for
inspection by emergency agency officers.
 89-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  89-8
83:128
 89-8. Renewal of permit.
 89-9. Notice of excessive use fees. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall notify
an alarm user, in writing, by means of first-class mail sent to the notice
address listed on the permit application when an alarm user has had seven
avoidable alarms during the permit year. The notice shall inform the alarm
user that additional avoidable alarms will subject the alarm user to the
excessive-use fee as specified in this chapter for each additional avoidable
alarm. At the end of the permit year, the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk shall notify each alarm user having more than seven avoidable
alarms of the number of avoidable alarms incurred during the preceding
year and the amount to be charged for the renewal of the alarm user permit.
Notice shall be in writing and shall be sent by first-class mail to the notice
address listed on the application.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment of the
appropriate renewal fee as provided in Subsection B hereof, an alarm
user permit may be renewed by the alarm user.
B. The annual permit renewal fee shall be based upon the number of
avoidable alarms recorded for each alarm user as follows: [Amended
1-25-1993; 12-21-2005; 11-23-2009; 11-27-2012]
(1) For all alarm users with zero to two avoidable alarms during the
preceding permit year, no renewal fee shall be charged. The
provisions herein shall not be deemed to exempt alarm users
connected to the master box fire alarm system of the Jamestown
Fire Department with zero avoidable alarms from the annual
master box fire alarm fee of $225.
(2) For all alarm users with three avoidable alarms during the
preceding year, a base permit renewal fee of $75 shall be charged.
(3) For all alarm users with more than three avoidable alarms during
the preceding year, a base permit fee of $75, plus an additional
excessive use fee for each avoidable alarm in excess of three shall
be charged as follows: for the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh
avoidable alarms, $75 each; for the eighth, ninth and 10th
avoidable alarms, $125 each; for the 11th, 12th and 13th avoidable
alarms, $150 each; and for every avoidable alarm after the 13th,
$175 each. At the time of renewal, an alarm user shall receive
credit for any amounts paid during the permit year to reinstate a
revoked permit.
C. No renewal of a permit shall be granted unless the appropriate renewal
fee is submitted with the application.
 89-8 ADVERTISING MATERIALS  89-10
83:129
 89-10. Revocation of permit. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
An alarm user permit shall be revoked whenever 10 or more avoidable
alarms are recorded for a system in any one permit year. Notice of such
revocation shall be sent by the Jamestown Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk via first-class mail to the notice address listed on the
permit application at least 15 days prior to the effective date of permit
revocation. An alarm user may reinstate a revoked permit by the payment
of the excessive-use fee for each avoidable alarm in excess of three (the
excessive-use fee shall be as specified in  89-8B of this chapter) and by
submission of proof that modifications have been made to the alarm system
or other steps have been effected so as to reduce the number of avoidable
alarms. An alarm user permit shall not be revoked under this section if said
alarm system is required by federal, state or local law; provided, however,
that all other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such systems, and the
user thereof shall remain responsible for the payment of all authorized fees.
 89-11. Avoidable alarm incident report. [Amended 3-19-1992 by
L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Whenever an emergency agency responds to an avoidable alarm as herein
provided, said agency shall file with the Jamestown Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk an avoidable alarm report, which report
shall contain the following information:
 89-12. Silencing of local alarms.
A. The alarm user's name and address.
B. The date and location of the avoidable alarm.
C. The reasons why the alarm was determined to be an avoidable alarm.
D. Any other pertinent information.
A. All local alarm systems as defined by the provisions of  89-2 of this
chapter shall become deactivated and silenced automatically after a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes of activation.
B. Any person utilizing the local alarm system within the City of
Jamestown by virtue of such utilization of a local alarm shall be deemed
to have given consent to the police and/or fire officials of the City of
Jamestown to disable an audible alarm signal that has not been silenced
prior to the expiration of the fifteen-minute period referred to in
Subsection A of this section, and neither the City of Jamestown nor its
officers and employees, including but not limited to such police and fire
officials, shall be liable for any damages which may result from the
disabling of an audible alarm signal as herein provided.
 89-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  89-13
83:130
 89-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-23-2009]
In addition to any other fees or penalties provided for in this chapter, a
violation of  89-4 of this chapter shall be deemed an offense and shall
be punishable by a mandatory fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$250; provided, however, that no person shall be charged with such offense
until the expiration of 15 days after the date of written notice mailed to
such person by certified mail that he is required to obtain an alarm user
permit, and further provided that no charge shall be filed against a person
so notified if he obtains a permit during said fifteen-day period. A person
found guilty of violating  89-4 of this chapter shall not be excused from
obtaining the required permit.
 89-14. Applicability.
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all persons
who are alarm users on the effective date of this chapter and to all persons
who subsequently become alarm users.
Chapter 93
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
 93-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  All beverages as defined by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law of the state.
OPEN CONTAINER  Any container used to hold or carry liquids which is
either open or which is sealed with a cap or other seal, which cap or seal
has been removed or broken.
 93-2. Public consumption.
No person shall consume beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverages
on or in any public alley, highway, playground, sidewalk, street or other City
property unless otherwise authorized by the Public Safety Committee of the
City Council.
 89-13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  93-3
93:131
 93-3. Possession of open container.
Possession of an open container, glass, can or other similar container having
any beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverage upon one's person while
in any of the public places enumerated in  93-2 in this chapter shall be
presumptive evidence of a violation of  93-2.
 93-4. Responsibility of licensee.
No person licensed to sell beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverages
shall permit consumption of the same in or upon any of the public places
mentioned in  93-2 within 25 feet of such person's place of business.
 93-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 97
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Bingo  See Ch. 112.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 97-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-10-1989; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE  Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, skill
ball, mechanical grab machines, pool tables, video games and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated. For the purposes of this chapter, mechanical amusement
device shall also include the term "jukebox," which shall mean any music
vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by
the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of
songs, music or similar amusement.
 93-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  97-2
93:132
 97-2. Construal of provisions. [Amended 9-2-1969]
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary
to law or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state.
 97-3. License required; application; location licensed.
 97-4. License application. [Amended 5-3-1982; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Every person desiring to procure a license, as provided in this chapter,
shall file with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk a written
application upon a blank form prepared and furnished by the City. Such
application shall contain the names and residences of the applicant, if an
individual, partnership or firm, or the names and residences of the principal
officers, if the applicant is an association or corporation. Such application
shall also describe, in detail, the character of the business in which the
applicant desires to engage. The application shall also state the following:
A. Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
jukebox or mechanical amusement device as defined by this chapter
shall be required to obtain a license from the City upon payment of a
license fee.
B. Application for such license shall be made to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk upon a form to be supplied by the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk for that purpose.
Application for license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being
referred to the Police Department and the other copy to the Fire
Department. [Amended 2-24-2003; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
C. Each license hereunder shall approve the location or premises upon
which the device is sought to be placed, not the device itself, and each
license shall specifically state the number of devices allowed at each
location based upon the inspection required in  97-5 of this chapter.
[Added 4-10-1989]
A. The length of time such applicant, or manager or person in charge if the
applicant is a firm, partnership, corporation or association, has resided
in the City, his places of previous employment, whether he is married or
single, whether he has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and
if so, what offense, when and in what court, and the date of birth of the
applicant.
B. The premises where such business is to be located or carried on, giving
the street and number.
C. Whether the applicant has either alone or with someone else ever
engaged in the business sought to be licensed.
 97-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  97-4
93:133
 97-5. Inspections and approval. [Amended 5-3-1982]
 97-6. License fees and term. [Amended 5-3-1982; 8-11-1986;
4-10-1989]
 97-7. Display of license; written statement describing devices;
transferability. [Amended 4-10-1989]
D. The place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated
and the business conducted at that place.13
A. The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed
to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant has been convicted
of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and either
approve or disapprove the application.
B. The Fire Department shall inspect all wiring and connections to the
machine and determine if the same comply with the Electrical Code of
the City14 and shall either approve or disapprove the application.
[Amended 2-24-2003]
C. Each inspection hereunder shall also determine the number of devices
for which the location can safely be licensed. [Added 4-10-1989]
D. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the Chief
of Police/Director of Public Safety and the Deputy Chief of the Fire
Department. [Amended 2-24-2003]
A. Every applicant before being granted a license shall pay an annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as defined in this chapter. The annual
license fee shall be as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits,
for each number of machines the location is licensed for, plus a fee as
provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, for each additional
inspection during any license period. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992]
B. Unless renewed prior thereto, each license shall expire on July 1 of each
year.
A. The licenses provided for by this chapter shall be posted permanently
and conspicuously in a front window of each premises wherein the
device or devices are to be operated or maintained and, if there is no
such window, in some other prominent or conspicuous place inside the
licensed premises.
B. Each licensee shall provide the Jamestown Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk with a written statement giving the description and
13.Editor's Note: Former  17.4(e), which immediately followed this subsection and required
a description of the machine as part of the application, was deleted 4-10-1989.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Electrical Standards.
 97-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  97-7
93:134
 97-8. Issuance of licenses. [Amended 5-3-1982]
 97-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 5-3-1982; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may at any time suspend
or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this chapter for the
following reasons:
serial number of each mechanical amusement device operated or
maintained on the licensed premises. It shall be the responsibility of
the licensee to keep said written statement current as such mechanical
amusement devices are replaced or removed from the licensed
premises and to so notify the Jamestown Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk on the next business day following such occurrence.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the City, the license herein authorized shall become void. A
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable from one person to another.
A. Upon the filing of the application and information as provided by this
chapter, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may, upon
approval of such application by the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety and the Deputy Fire Chief as hereinbefore provided and payment
to the City of the license fee provided, issue to the applicant a license to
engage in the business as is required by  97-3. No license shall be
refused except for reasons that the applicant has previously been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or by
reason that the location from which the business would be operated
would, if operated, constitute a violation of the provisions of Chapter
300, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Jamestown or by reason of the
fact that an applicant has previously has such license suspended or
revoked. [Amended 2-24-2003; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
B. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the location of the place of business in which the
person receiving such license shall be authorized to establish, engage
in and carry on the business, the kind of business, the dates of issuance
and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and address of
the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall
make further application until a period of at least six months shall have
elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can establish that
the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
C. All licenses shall clearly state the number of machines licensed for each
location. [Added 4-10-1989]
 97-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  97-9
93:135
 97-10. Regulation of licensed premises. [Amended 5-3-1982]
A. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall suspend any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter for a period of up to
30 days upon a finding by the City Court or other court of competent
jurisdiction that the licenses has failed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall suspend any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter for a period of up to
60 days upon a finding by the City Court or other court of competent
jurisdiction that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter and such noncompliance is the second such
offense within a one-year period.
C. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall revoke any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter upon a finding by
the City Court or other court of competent jurisdiction that the licensee
has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter and such
noncompliance constitutes the third such offense within a one-year
period.
D. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall revoke any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter upon a finding that
the licensee has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude during the period when the license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter was in full force and effect.
A. No licensee or his, her or its clerk, agent or employee shall permit any
person under the age of 16 years to operate a mechanical amusement
device or loiter in or about the premises wherein a mechanical
amusement device is located between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:15
p.m. on days when the public schools of the City of Jamestown are in
session, unless such person is accompanied by a parent or lawful
guardian. For purposes of determining the days when the public schools
of the City of Jamestown are in session, the adopted Jamestown public
school calendar for each school year shall be controlling.
B. No licensee or his, her or its clerk, agent or employee shall permit any
mechanical amusement device to be operated by any person under the
age of 16 years of age or permit any such person to loiter in or about the
premises wherein a mechanical amusement device is located between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless such person is
accompanied by a parent or lawful guardian.
C. No licensee or his, her or its clerk, agent or employee shall permit more
persons inside his place of business than is authorized by the
Jamestown Fire Department acting pursuant to applicable provisions of
the National Fire Protection Association Code.
 97-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  97-10
93:136
 97-11. Seizure of gambling devices. [Amended 5-3-1982;
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be
seized by the police and impounded, and if upon trial of the exhibitor for
allowing it to be used as a gambling device, the exhibitor is found guilty,
such machine shall be sold or destroyed by the police.
 97-12. Applicability to jukeboxes. [Amended 5-3-1982]
This chapter shall not apply to jukeboxes while the same are used by bona
fide recreation centers operated under the supervision of churches or the
school authorities of the City or operated for the benefit of a church.
 97-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-1982; 8-10-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992]
Except as otherwise provided in the Penal Law, any persons violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 101
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Special sales  See Ch. 229.
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
D. Each licensee shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the premises wherein a mechanical amusement device is located
a sign with lettering no less than two inches in height and no less than
one inch in width per each character or letter, which sign shall state the
following:
NOTICE
Chapter 97 of the Jamestown City Code prohibits any person under the
age of 16 years to operate a mechanical amusement device or loiter
in and about these premises between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:15
p.m. on days when the public schools of the City of Jamestown are in
session and every day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
unless such person is accompanied by a parent or lawful guardian.
 97-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  101-1
93:137
 101-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER  Any person who at public outcry offers for sale to the
highest bidder any goods, wares, merchandise or property.
 101-2. License required; applicability.
 101-3. Bond. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Before any license authorized by this chapter shall be issued, there shall be
executed to the City and filed with the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk a bond in an amount provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and
Permits, conditioned for the faithful observance of the laws of the state, this
Code and the ordinances of the City Council now or hereafter enacted. Such
bonds shall be approved by the Comptroller as to sufficiency of surety and
by the Corporation Counsel as to form and manner of execution.
 101-4. License application. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Any person desiring a license as an auctioneer shall make written
application at the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk, giving such information as the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk may require therein.
 101-5. Refusal to grant license; revocation. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A license shall not be granted to a person who has been convicted of
violating the laws of the state or sections of this Code relating to auctions
and auctioneers or for fraud or deceit in the conduct of auctions. A license
may be revoked summarily by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk upon such conviction, and such powers of revocation shall also extend
to the license of the employing auctioneer in case one of his employees or
agents is so convicted.
A. No person shall dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or property
at public auction except through the medium of an auctioneer licensed
to conduct such business by the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk, nor shall any person act as auctioneer without having
obtained such license. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
B. Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by
executives or administrators, by trustees under deed of assignment, by
lienors or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law or to the
sale of household effects sold on the premises of the housekeeper
selling them.
 101-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  101-6
93:138
 101-6. License fee; transferability; term of license. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 101-7. General regulations. [Amended 10-5-1970; 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 11-27-2012; 8-28-2017]
 101-8. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 107
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions  See Ch. 101.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Secondhand dealers  See Ch. 235.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Vehicles and traffic  See Ch. 290.
 107-1. Responsibility of parent or guardian; applicability.
[Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
A. The license fee shall be payable to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk in an amount as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses
and Permits.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. All licenses shall expire on December 31 after issuance.
A. No sale at a public auction shall continue for more than 30 successive
days, Sunday and legal holidays excepted, from the day of the
beginning of the sale.
B. Subsection A shall not apply to auction sales of goods, wares or
merchandise in job lots or at wholesale nor to auction sales of used
household furniture and effects purchased from or sold on account of a
householder who has actually used such furniture and effects in his
household in this City, provided that a complete list of such furniture
and effects, with the name and address of the person from whom they
were purchased, shall have been previously filed with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. A license shall not be required for
an auctioneer selling only such goods.
 101-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  107-1
93:139
 107-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE  Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter.
 107-3. Licensing; fee.
A. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle
is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this
chapter.
A. Application generally. Any person may apply for a license for a bicycle
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
4-23-1973]
B. Application form; fee. Application for a bicycle license and sticker shall
be made upon a form provided by the City and shall be made to the
Chief of Police. An annual license fee of $3 shall be paid to the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk before each license or renewal
thereof is granted. [Amended 3-21-1967; 4-23-1973; 3-9-1992 by
L.L. No. 1-1992; 3-23-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. Inspection before issuance. The Chief of Police shall inspect each
bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any
bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition.
D. Issuance; record to be kept by Chief of Police and information required.
(1) The Chief of Police, upon receiving proper application therefor, is
authorized to issue a bicycle license, which shall be effective until
the next succeeding first day of May.
(2) The Chief of Police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he
knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is
not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
(3) The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the number of each
license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to
whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which
issued and a record of all bicycle licenses issued by him.
 107-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  107-3
93:140
 107-4. License sticker. [Amended 3-23-1992]
 107-5. Rental agencies. [Amended 3-23-1992]
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is licensed and a license sticker is attached thereto as provided in this
chapter, and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment
required in this chapter.
 107-6. Dealers. [Amended 3-23-1992]
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the Chief of Police of every
bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of
the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such
bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of the
license sticker, if any, found thereon.
 107-7. Applicability of traffic laws to bicyclists.
E. Renewal. Upon the expiration of any bicycle license, the same may be
renewed upon application and payment of the same fee as upon an
original application.
A. The Chief of Police, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a
license sticker bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle, the
name of the City and the calendar year for which issued.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause such license sticker to be firmly attached
to the frame of the bicycle for which issued, in such position as to be
plainly visible.
C. No persons shall remove a license sticker from a bicycle during the
period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or in the
event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street
in the City.
D. Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall
remove the license sticker.
A. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City applicable to the driver of
a vehicle,15 except as to special regulations in this chapter and except
as to those provisions of the ordinances which by their nature can have
no application.
B. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
15.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 290, Vehicles and Traffic.
 107-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  107-7
93:141
 107-8. Operation regulations.
C. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or
U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall
then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
A. Position and number of riders.
(1) A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(2) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
B. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
C. Riding on right side of roadway; passing a vehicle. Every person
operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand
side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
D. Precautions when emerging from alley or driveway. The operator of a
bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such
sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-ofway
to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
E. Clinging, etc., to vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle shall
attach the same or himself to any streetcar or vehicle upon any
roadway.
F. Operating in a group. Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
G. Carrying articles while in operation. No person operating a bicycle shall
carry any package, bundle or article which prevents such person from
keeping at least one hand upon the handlebar.
H. Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support
the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic and motor vehicle
traffic.
I. Use of roadways when adjacent bicycle path provided. Wherever a
usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
 107-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  107-8
93:142
 107-9. Equipment requirements.
 107-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-23-1992; 8-10-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992]
Except as provided in the Vehicles and Traffic Law, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $25.
Chapter 112
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices  See
Ch. 97.
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
J. Operating on sidewalks prohibited; Chief of Police may prohibit
operation on any roadway by erection of sign. [Amended 3-23-1992]
(1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon any public sidewalk of the City
of Jamestown, except for authorized police bicycles.
(2) The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and when
such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same, with the
exception of authorized police bicycles.
A. Lamps and reflectors required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime
shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear which shall be visible from 50 feet to 300 feet to
the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. Audible signal attachment required; sirens or whistles prohibited. No
person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
C. Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the brake wheel skid on a dry, level and clean
pavement.
 107-8 BINGO  112-1
112:143
 112-1. Authorization. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Pursuant to Subdivision 2 of  9 of Article 1 of the State Constitution, it
shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in  476 of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to
conduct bingo games within the territorial limits of the City, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article
19-B of the Executive Law and the rules and regulations of the State Racing
and Wagering Board.
 112-2. License required.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect.
 112-3. Rental of premises.
No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the
operation of such game.
 112-4. Purchase of supplies and equipment.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 14-H
of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or
equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo
games from other than a supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law16
or from another authorized organization.
 112-5. Limitation of prize money; disposition of proceeds.
 112-6. Management and operation.
A. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000 in any single game of
bingo. [Amended 1-30-1995]
B. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
C. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000. [Amended 1-30-1995]
A. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
16.Editor's Note: See Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
 112-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  112-6
112:144
 112-7. Penalties for offenses.
The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
 112-8. Limited-period bingo. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Limited-period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the State Racing and
Wagering Board.
 112-9. Conduct on Sunday. [Added 6-13-1977]
Pursuant to the authority contained in  485 of Article 14-H of the General
Municipal Law, it shall be lawful to conduct bingo games on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday."
Chapter 120
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Alcoholic beverages  See Ch. 93.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC DANCE  One which is open to the people of the City or community
in general for an admission fee and without individual, prior or formal
invitation, or one which is conducted for profit, directly or indirectly,
whether admission is charged or not, or one which is conducted in a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold or drunk, or both.
 120-2. License required; fees and term.
B. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain or carry on a public dance as defined
in this chapter without first having procured a license for that purpose
as provided by this chapter.
 112-6 BINGO  120-2
112:145
 120-3. Application.
Any person desiring to conduct, maintain or carry on a public dance shall
first file the following application with the Chief of Police:
The undersigned desires to conduct, maintain and carry on a public dance
under the provisions of this chapter, and for that purpose he accepts the
provisions of this chapter and agrees to be bound thereby as a condition
precedent to the issuance and continuance of the license for which he
applies:
(a) Name of dance hall or location.
(b) Name of associates or copartners in the conducting of dances.
(c) Name and address of the owner of the building in which dances are
to be conducted.
(d) State whether the conducting of dances defined by this chapter is to
be the sole business conducted on the premises or whether another
enterprise or business will be conducted on the same premises.
(e) State whether applicant, copartners or associates have been arrested
for or convicted of violating the liquor laws of the state or the United
States and when and where.
(f) Give floor upon which such dances are to be conducted and state
whether any bar for the sale of intoxicating liquors or beer is located
in the same room.
(g) If the conducting of dances is now being carried on, give date that it
was started on the present premises.
(h) Give such other information below as may be required by the Chief of
Police.
The applicant hereby agrees to refrain from violating the liquor laws of the
United States or of the State of New York.
Dated this __________ , 19______
Applicant(s)
Amount deposited with application, $ _________
State of New York, ss.
B. The license fee for an annual license as required by this chapter shall be
as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits.
C. Such license shall continue and be effective for one year from the date
of issuance unless revoked, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter.
D. The license fee to conduct a dance for one day only shall be as provided
in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits.
 120-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  120-3
112:146
Chautauqua County, ss.
___________________ , being duly sworn, deposes and says that he is (one
of) the applicant(s) above named; that he signed this application; that the
statements therein contained are true.
Applicant(s)
Sworn to before me this day
of , 19_____
Notary Public
 120-4. Investigation; notification; issuance of license.
A. The Chief of Police shall investigate into the truth and merits of each
application. He shall take into consideration the character and
reputation of the applicant, whether he has been arrested or convicted
of any offense, especially in relation to the liquor laws of the state and
of the United States, and he shall consider whether the conduct or the
proposed conduct of dances on the particular premises is a menace to
the health, good morals, good order, peace and quiet of the occupants
thereof, the customers or possible customers and the community in
general. The Chief of Police, in the exercise of his discretion, may refuse
to approve the application if he reaches the conclusion that the
proposed conducting of the dances by the particular applicant on the
specific premises menaces the health, good morals, good order, peace,
quiet and welfare of the community. The Chief of Police shall refuse to
approve the application for a license if the applicant within five years
has been convicted of a felony or within one year of a misdemeanor or
has been found guilty within one year of a violation of a law, provision of
this Code or other ordinance of the City for the commission of an
offense which shows his moral unfitness to conduct dances within the
definition of this chapter or if the applicant has made a false statement
in the application required in this chapter. The Chief of Police shall have
10 days in which to reach a decision as to a particular application, and if
he disapproves the same, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his
decision, accompanied by a general statement of his reasons therefor.
After the filing of his application and before granting of the license, the
applicant must publish a notice of making such application at least two
times in a daily newspaper published in the City. Any citizen may appear
before the Chief of Police in opposition or in favor of the granting of
such license. No applicant whose application has thus been
disapproved shall make further application therefor within six months
from the time of such rejection unless he can show that the reason for
such rejection no longer exists.
B. Upon approval by the Chief of Police of an application pursuant to this
chapter, such application shall be filed with the Director of
 120-3 BINGO  120-4
112:147
 120-5. Transferability of license.
No transfer of a license as to location or ownership shall be granted.
 120-6. Posting of license.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted at once, and while it
is in force it shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place or on the premises
where the conducting of dances is authorized.
 120-7. Intoxicated persons and disorderly conduct prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, conducting or in charge of
any dances as defined in this chapter to harbor intoxicated persons on the
premises or to allow intoxicated persons to resort thereto or to permit any
disorderly, indecent, immoral or unlawful conduct on or in such premises.
 120-8. Sanitary condition of premises.
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or maintaining a public
dance as defined in this chapter at all times to keep the premises where
such dances are conducted or maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
 120-9. Inspection.
The Chief of Police, Superintendent of Health and the various police, health,
fire and sanitary officers of the City are hereby authorized to inspect the
licensed premises during business hours to determine whether the same
complies with the laws, ordinances and regulations whose enforcement is a
duty of their particular departments.
 120-10. Revocation or suspension of license.
The officers named in the preceding section and their deputies and
associates shall have a right to recommend, in writing, the revocation of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter, stating the ground upon which such
recommendation is made. Such written recommendation and statement
shall be filed with the Judge of the City Court. If the Judge of the City Court
believes that the statements contained therein are true or if he believes that
Administrative Services/City Clerk, who shall issue such license as
provided in  120-2. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
C. A person, however, who makes application to conduct a public dance as
defined in this chapter for one day only shall be granted such license by
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk upon application to
and approval thereof by the Chief of Police as provided in this chapter,
except that in such case the publication of a notice of making such
application is not necessary. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 120-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  120-10
112:148
sufficient cause exists for the recommendation therein contained, he shall
cause such recommendation and statement to be served upon the licensee
or person conducting or maintaining such dances, accompanied by a notice
to such person that a hearing will be held thereon at the City Court at
the time fixed in the notice. The time of such hearing shall be not less
than three days from the date of the service of such notice, and the person
against whom it is filed shall have an opportunity to be heard to make his
defense against such charges. The officer making the recommendation and
statement shall be entitled to be heard with his witnesses for the purpose
of sustaining such charges. If the City Court Judge finds upon such hearing
that the licensee has violated the provisions of this chapter or has made an
untrue statement in his application for the license or if he shall be satisfied
through such hearing that the licensed business is being conducted in a
manner which is detrimental to the morals, good order, peace, quiet and
welfare of the community, he shall have the power to suspend such license
for a given number of days or to revoke the same. The judgment of the
City Court shall revoke the license of any licensee convicted of violating
the liquor law of the state or of the United States. Whenever any license
has been revoked, no other license shall be issued to the same licensee
within one year from the date of revocation. The conviction of the licensee
of violating this chapter shall effect the immediate revocation of the license.
 120-11. Delivery of notice.
Any notice provided for in this chapter shall be served either by delivering
a copy personally to the licensee or by leaving a copy with some person
of suitable age and discretion at the place of business of the licensee and
actually or apparently in charge thereof. If no such person may be found at
the place of business of the licensee, notice may be served by posting such
notice in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy thereof to
the licensee at his place of business as set forth in his oath and application
for a license.
 120-12. False statements; penalties for offenses. [Amended
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Any person who makes a false statement in his application for the purpose
of obtaining a license or any person who himself or by his clerk, agent
or employee conducts public dances without the license required by this
chapter or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
person whose license has been suspended or revoked who continues to
conduct such dances during the time of the suspension or revocation or
any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
 120-10 BINGO  120-12
112:149
Chapter 125
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 120-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  120-12
112:150
ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs; Licensing
[Adopted 11-29-201017]
 125-1. Statutory authority
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, as amended by
Chapter 59, Part T, of the Laws of 2010, and as may be subsequently
amended or revised.
 125-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve public peace and good
order in the City of Jamestown and to promote the public health, safety
and welfare of its people by enforcing regulations and restrictions on the
activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and privileges of
dog owners and the rights and privileges of other citizens of the City of
Jamestown.
 125-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER  A person appointed by the City of
Jamestown for the purpose of enforcing this article.
AT LARGE  Off the premises of the owner. Any dog that is on property
open to the public or is on private property not owned or leased by the
owner of the dog unless permission for such presence has been obtained.
No dog shall be deemed to be "at large" if it is a guide dog actually leading a
blind person, a police work dog in use for police work, or a dog accompanied
by its owner or other responsible person and is actively engaged in hunting
or training for hunting on unposted land or posted land with the permission
of the owner of the land or leashed.
CATS  Both male and female.
DANGEROUS DOG 
Any dog:
Which, when unprovoked, approaches a person in a vicious or
terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places;
(1)
A.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Chapter 125, Dogs and Other Animals,
consisting of Art. I, Control of Dogs, adopted 7-13-1970, as amended, and Art. II, Dog
License Fees, adopted 10-22-1990, as amended. This ordinance also provided an effective
date of 1-1-2011.
 125-1 BINGO  125-3
112:151
DOGS  Both male and female.
LEASHED  Restrained by a leash, attached to a collar or harness of
sufficient strength to restrain the dog and which shall be held by a person
having the ability to control the dog.
OWNER  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having the care,
custody or control of any dog or cat, and when any such owner shall be a
child under the age of 16 years, the head of the household in which such
child resides shall be deemed to be the owner of such dog or cat for all
purposes of this article. If a dog is not licensed, the term "owner" shall
designate and cover any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
who or which at any time owns or has custody or control of, harbors or is
otherwise responsible for any dog which is kept in, brought into or comes
within the City. Any person owning or harboring a dog for a period of one
week prior to the filing of any complaint charging a violation of this article
shall be held and deemed to be the owner of such dog for the purpose of
this article.
SECURE ENCLOSURE  A fence of at least six feet in height or other
structure, such as a pen, forming or causing an enclosed area suitable
to prevent the entry of young children or any part of their bodies and
suitable to confine dangerous dogs, in conjunction with other measures
which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as the tethering of the
dangerous dog. Such other structures shall be securely enclosed and locked
and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to
prevent the animal from escaping therefrom. If the pen or other structure
has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the
ground no less than one foot.
With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causes injury or otherwise endangers the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;
(2)
Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks or
endangers a human being or domestic animal or household pet
without provocation on public or private property; or
(3)
Which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
(4)
No dog may be declared dangerous if any injury or damage is sustained
by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by
the owner or keeper of the dog or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
If the trespass is determined to be of an innocent nature, the Court may,
depending on the circumstances and in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this article, find the dog to be dangerous.
B.
No dog may be declared dangerous if it is used by law enforcement
officials for law enforcement work.
C.
 125-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  125-4
112:152
 125-4. General regulations concerning dogs and cats.
 125-5. Licensing of dogs; fees.
A. No dog shall be permitted to be at large or allowed to run at large
within the City, except that a dog may be upon the private property or
premises of another only with the knowledge, consent and approval of
the owner of such premises, and further excepting that a dog duly
licensed and wearing a collar and license as required by Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the state may be upon a public way or
public recreation area, provided that such dog is leashed by a leash not
exceeding eight feet in length and is then and there under the custody
and control of the owner or other competent person accompanying the
dog who shall be required to make proper and immediate disposal of
any pet excrement.
B. No person who owns or has control of a dog or cat shall permit or suffer
such dog or cat to damage or destroy property of any kind of another
person, to attack or bite any person peaceably conducting himself in
any place where such person may lawfully be or to attack, chase, injure
or kill any domestic animal or dog or cat or another person when such
animal is in any place where it may lawfully be; for the purposes hereof,
when any dog or cat is at large contrary to the provisions of this article
and commits any such acts, the owner or person in control shall be
deemed to have permitted or suffered the dog or cat to have committed
such acts.
C. No person shall keep, suffer or permit to be kept on the premises of the
owner or person having control of such dog any dog which by its
continual barking, howling or whining or other frequent or longcontinued
noise shall unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of any
other person.
D. No person who owns a dog or cat shall permit the premises, structure
or enclosure in which such dog or cat is kept to be unclean or
unsanitary. Failure to provide adequate food, water or space shall
subject said dogs or cats to seizure and confinement. "Adequate" shall
mean sufficient for age, size and number of dogs on the premises.
A. All dogs harbored in the City of Jamestown shall be licensed with the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk by the age of four months
and shall present a current certificate of rabies and a spaying/neutering
certificate, if applicable at the time of making application for a license
or for the renewal of an existing license. [Amended 8-28-2017]
B. All dog licenses shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire at
the end of the month one year from the date of issuance.
C. The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be $15, which fee
includes the assessment of a surcharge of $1 for the purpose of the
carrying out of a program of animal population control. The license fee
 125-4 BINGO  125-5
112:153
 125-6. Impeding Animal Control Officer.
No person shall hinder, resist or oppose the Animal Control Officer or police
officer authorized to administer or enforce the provisions of this article in
the performance of the officer's duties.
 125-7. Seizure, redemption, and disposition of dogs;
impoundment fee.
 125-8. Confinement after attack for rabies determination.
The owner of any dog or cat which has attacked or injured another person
or animal contrary to the provisions of this article shall confine such dog or
cat for such length of time as may be directed by the Animal Control Officer
for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be $22, which fee includes the
assessment of a surcharge of $3 for the purpose of the carrying out of
a program of animal population control. Replacement tag fees shall be
$3.
D. The City of Jamestown shall not issue purebred or kennel licenses. All
dogs shall be licensed individually in accordance with the fees stated.
E. The City of Jamestown does not allow the licensing of dogs by a shelter.
The shelter must send the adoptive dog owners to the Town or City
Clerk in which the dog will be harbored for licensing.
F. All dog licenses shall be purchased in person at the City Hall or by
regular mail. If licensing or renewing a license by mail, the appropriate
fee shall accompany the forms. There shall be no refund of fees.
A. The Animal Control Officer or any police officer shall seize any dog
found to be in violation of the applicable provisions of this article or in
violation of the applicable provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of this state, and such dog shall be impounded, redeemed,
euthanized or sold as provided in  117 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law of this state or Title 10, Chapter I, Part 2,  2, of the New York State
Sanitary Code, and the owner of such dog shall pay the costs of seizure
and impoundment as therein provided. The Animal Control Officer or
any police officer shall make a record of the matter. The record shall
include date of pick up, breed, general description, sex, identification
numbers, time of pickup, location of release and name and address of
owner, if any.
B. The fees for any seizure and impoundment of each dog in violation of
this article are as follows:
(1) For the first impoundment: $10.
(2) For the second impoundment: $20 plus $3 per day.
(3) For the third impoundment: $30 plus $3 per day.
 125-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  125-8
112:154
or other appropriate authority for the purpose of determining whether such
dog or cat is affected by rabies, and if so affected, such dog or cat shall
be destroyed under the direction of the Animal Control Officer or other
appropriate authority.
 125-9. Dangerous dogs.
The owner of any dangerous dog as defined in  125-3 of this Code shall not
thereafter permit such dog to be at any place other than on the premises of
the owner unless such dog is securely fitted with a properly fitting muzzle
of a type which shall not permit such dog to bite another person or animal,
collar and leash. Such leash shall have a maximum length of four feet, and
both leash and collar shall have a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds.
It shall be unlawful at all times thereafter to allow said dog to leave the
owner's home or a secure enclosure as defined in  125-3 of this Code upon
the owner's property unless said dog is muzzled, collared and tethered and
under the control of a person at least 18 years of age.
 125-10. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law, any violation of this article shall be deemed an offense punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties, except
that any violation of  125-7 of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or confinement in jail not
exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate
offense or misdemeanor, as the case may be, shall constitute a separate
violation. The provisions hereof are in addition to the regulations,
restrictions, requirements and penalties contained in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
 125-11. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety is hereby charged with the duty
of enforcing this article, and the police officers and Animal Control Officer
shall be authorized to issue such process as is necessary to bring violators
before the court upon being satisfied that the person to whom such process
is issued is in fact the person chargeable with the violation.
 125-12. Exemptions. [Amended 8-28-2017]
There shall be no fee for any license issued for any guide dog, hearing dog,
service dog, war dog or police work dog. Each copy of any license for such
dogs shall be conspicuously marked "guide dog," "hearing dog," "service
dog," "war dog" or "police work dog" as may be appropriate by the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk or other authorized licensing officer.
 125-13. Application of fees. [Amended 8-28-2017]
All local dog license fees collected by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk pursuant to the provisions and this article shall be the
 125-8 BINGO  125-13
112:155
property of the City of Jamestown, and said fees shall be used solely for
the purposes of controlling dogs and enforcing the provisions of Article
7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York and any
rule, regulation, local law or ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, including
subsidizing the spaying or neutering of dogs in any facility as authorized
under  116 of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State
of New York and subsidizing public humane education programs in
responsible dog ownership.
 125-14. Disclaimer of liability.
The owner or harborer of any dog so destroyed under the provisions of
this article, whether destroyed by an animal control officer or police officer
or released to an authorized humane society or veterinarian, shall not be
entitled to any compensation, and no action shall be maintainable thereafter
to recover the value of such dog or any other type of damage.
 125-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  125-14
112:156
Chapter 131
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
 131-1. Board of Electrical Examiners.
A. There is hereby created a Board of Electrical Examiners, which shall
consist of five members appointed by the Mayor of the City, subject to
confirmation by the City Council. Such Board shall include the Deputy
Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee, who shall act as
Chairman of the Board, the Building Inspector of the City, who shall act
as Secretary of the Board without additional compensation; one
representative of the Board of Public Utilities, or his designee, one
electrical contractor with 10 years' continuous experience in the
electrical contracting business; and one electrician of 10 years'
continuous experience installing electrical work. The local inspector of
an approved electrical inspection company shall be retained in an
advisory capacity at no remuneration. [Amended 2-24-2003;
10-27-2014; 4-27-2015]
B. Within 30 days from the date of this chapter, the Mayor shall appoint
the members of the Board for terms of two years, but any member may,
for cause, be removed from office at any time by the Mayor. All
members of the Board must be residents of the City. Vacancies
occurring by death, removal, inability to act, resignation or removal
from the City of any member shall be filled by the Mayor by
appointment of a person with the same qualifications and for a term
expiring at the same time as the member whose office has terminated.
All members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
C. The Board of Electrical Examiners may elect its own Vice Chairman. A
majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum to
transact the business of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to
hold a regular meeting at least once during each month at a time and
place to be determined by the Board. Special meetings may be called at
any time by the Chairman on three days' notice to members by mail. He
shall call a special meeting on written request of the Mayor or the
Director of Public Works.
D. It shall be the duty of this Board to receive from the Secretary of the
Board all applications for licenses as master electricians and as
 125-14 BINGO  131-1
112:157
 131-2. License and certificate required; exceptions.
journeymen electricians. The Board shall examine the applicants for
such licenses within 30 days from the date of the filing thereof with
the Secretary of the Board as to their knowledge of the rules and
regulations for the installation of electrical wiring, devices, appliances
and equipment as set forth in the statutes of the state or as issued
under the authority of the statutes of the state in the ordinances of
the City and in the National Electrical Code. The Board shall determine
the general qualifications and fitness of each applicant for executing
electrical work. The nature of the examinations conducted under this
section shall be determined by the Board, and the Board shall adopt
such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for such
examinations. Upon written acknowledgement from the Board of
Electrical Examiners that an applicant is eligible to sit for the Class
2 exam, such applicant may perform any and all electrical work while
under the supervision of a Class 1 licensee for a period not to exceed
30 days. After this thirty-day period, said applicant shall be required
to hold a Class 2 electrician's license to perform electrical work.
[Amended 5-15-2000]
E. Examinations shall be either written or web based, and a complete
record of every in-house examination given or certificates of successful
completion of acceptable independent testing agency shall be kept on
file until three years after the date of the examination. The Board shall
cause licenses to be issued by the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk to qualified applicants, and the Board shall certify to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk those applicants who
shall show proper qualifications. In every case the license shall not be
granted until after the prescribed fee has been paid. It shall also be the
duty of the Board to revoke any license for good and sufficient causes as
prescribed in  131-8. [Amended 4-27-201518; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
F. It shall be the further duty of the Board to conduct public hearings on
any complaints made by the Deputy Chief of the Fire Department or the
Building Inspector of the City against any electrical contractor and to
review electrical matters in dispute between the Building Inspector and
property owners, electrical contractors or others in case of appeal and
to render decisions in all matters brought before it. [Amended
2-24-2003]
A. No person shall engage in or carry on the business of installing,
maintaining, altering or repairing within the City any electrical wiring
devices, appliances or equipment unless such person is the holder of a
master electrician's license and a certificate therefor. No person
18.Editor뭩 Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the period of time applicants who failed
examinations were required to wait before taking the examination again, and which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-27-2015. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of former Subsection G as Subsection F.
 131-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  131-2
112:158
employed by or working under the direction of a holder of a master
electrician's license shall in any manner undertake to execute any
electrical work whatsoever except as provided in this chapter, unless
such person shall have received an electrician's license and a certificate
therefor.
B. No license shall be required in order to execute any of the following
classes of work: [Amended 7-14-1997; 4-30-2007]
(1) The maintenance and/or repair of any devices or equipment and
associated electrical connections in an industrial or institutional
facility when performed on the premises owned or leased by that
facility and using employees of said facility that are experienced
workmen regularly employed for such maintenance purposes.
(2) The installation, alteration or repair of any devices or equipment
and associated electrical wiring by the owner of the property only
when the property is occupied by the owner and is a single-family
or two-family residence.
(3) Minor repair work, the replacement of lamps and the connection of
portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been
permanently installed.
(4) The installation, alteration or repairing of any wiring device or
equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of
intelligence where such wiring, devices, appliances are covered by
NFPA 70 Article 100-I Communications Equipment, 645
Information Technology Equipment, 760 Fire alarm Systems, 800
Communication Systems and equipment deemed similar by the
Board. [Amended 4-27-2015]
(5) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment installed by or for an electrical public
utility for the use of such utility in the generation, transmission,
distribution, utilization or metering of the electrical energy or for
the use of such a public utility in the operation of signals or the
transmission of intelligence.
(6) Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of electrical
materials, devices, appliances or apparatus, not including any
permanent wiring other than that required for testing purposes.
(7) The assembly, erection and connection of electrical apparatus and
equipment by the manufacturer of such apparatus and equipment
not involving any electrical wiring other than that involved in
making electrical connections on the apparatus or equipment itself
or between two or more parts of such apparatus or equipment.
(8) Any work performed by an apprentice who is constantly under the
direct control and direction of a holder of a Class 2 license as
provided by this chapter; provided, however, that no more than one
 131-2 BINGO  131-2
112:159
 131-3. Classes of licenses and certificates. [Amended 12-20-1999;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Two classes of licenses and certificates shall be issued by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk after certification of the applicants by
the Board of Electrical Examiners, which shall be designated respectively as
"Class 1, master electricians, licenses," and "Class 2, electricians' licenses."
A Class 1 license shall entitle the holder thereof to all of the rights and
privileges of the Class 1 license and also those rights and privileges of a
Class 2 license.
apprentice shall be permitted to work under the direct control and
direction of a holder of a Class 2 license at any one time.
(a) The word "apprentice," as used herein, is hereby defined as an
individual enrolled in a qualified electrical apprenticeship
program recognized and registered with the New York State
Department of Labor and/or the United States Department of
Labor Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.
(b) A qualified electrical apprenticeship program, as defined
herein, shall have an established set of criteria to be followed,
including but not limited to required hours of classroom
instruction and a defined period of time for on-the-job training,
not to exceed five years per individual apprentice.
(c) Proof of registration of an apprentice in a qualified electrical
apprenticeship program shall be submitted to the Board of
Electrical Examiners together with the name of the apprentice
qualified under the terms of the exception herein.
(d) The administrator of each qualified electrical apprenticeship
program shall submit an updated list of qualified apprentices
to the Board of Electrical Examiners no later than March 1 of
each year.
(9) City-licensed electricians shall perform all other electrical work per
 131-3 of the Code of the City of Jamestown.
A. A Class 1 license shall be issued to any person engaged in, or to engage
in, the business of the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment who has been
qualified under this chapter or to any person who has a partner,
employee or officer who has been qualified under this chapter. A Class 1
license shall entitle the holder individually to engage in or to perform
the actual work of installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment as described in this
chapter and shall additionally entitle the holder to direct or supervise
such electrical work and conduct business as an electrical contractor.
The holder of a Class 1 license shall employ only licensed electricians
except as otherwise provided in  131-2.
 131-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  131-3
112:160
 131-4. Application for license. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
All applications for licenses shall be made, in writing, to the Secretary
of the Board, stating the class of license applied for, the name and place
of business of the applicant and, in the case of application for a Class
1 license by a partnership, firm or corporation, the name of the partner,
employee or officer who holds a Class 1 license. Whenever the holder of
a Class 1 license dies or is no longer associated with or employed by a
partnership, firm or corporation and the license of such partnership, firm
or corporation was issued on the basis of qualifications of such deceased
or former employee, the license of such partnership, firm or corporation
shall immediately expire. A temporary license allowing the completion of
work in process may be granted by the Board to the partnership, firm or
corporation, provided that application for a new license is made within 30
days of the date on which the previous license expired. An application for
a Class 2 license shall also contain the residence, address and age of the
applicant. No application shall be accepted from persons under 18 years of
age.
 131-5. License fees. [Amended 2-22-1983; 8-28-1989; 12-26-1990;
1-27-1992; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
For the portion of the calendar year for which the license is first issued,
a fee as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, shall be paid for
Class 1 and 2 licenses. A nonrefundable application fee as provided in
Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, shall accompany each application. Both
the nonrefundable application fee and the license fees shall be paid to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, who shall deposit monthly
such fees with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City.
 131-6. Issuance, term and renewal of license. [Amended
2-22-1983; 12-26-1990; 1-27-1992]
B. A Class 2 license shall be issued to any qualified person and shall entitle
the holder thereof to individually engage in and perform the actual
work of installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment as described in this chapter,
but shall not entitle the holder individually to conduct business as an
electrical contractor unless licensed as a master electrician.
A. Licenses will be issued by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk after receiving a certificate stating that the applicant has
qualified, signed by the Secretary of the Board of Electrical Examiners,
when the applicant has met all the requirements of the Board with
respect to the class of license for which application is made, provided
that the license fee specified in this chapter has been fully paid. All
licenses shall be numbered in the order of their issuance, and each
license shall state the class of license and the name, business and
 131-3 BINGO  131-6
112:161
 131-7. Transferability; display of certificate.
residence of the holder, the fee paid and the dates of issuance and
expiration. Each license shall, prior to issuance and validation or
renewal thereof, have affixed to it a photograph of the applicant. Said
photograph shall be similar in size to that of a passport photograph
and shall be provided by the applicant at the applicant's sole expense.
Licenses shall thereafter be valid upon signature by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. Each Class 1 license shall expire on March 1 and shall be renewed
without further examination and with the payment of a renewal fee as
provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, if the application for
renewal is filed with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
on or before the date of such expiration. After March 1 of each year,
each Class 1 license holder shall be entitled to renew such license
without further examination and with payment of a renewal fee as
provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, until May 1. After May
1, a Class 1 license holder who has failed to renew said Class 1 license
as hereinbefore provided shall not have said license renewed, but
instead shall be required to comply with the provisions of ㎣ 131-4 and
131-5 of this chapter. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. Each Class 2 license shall expire on March 1 and shall be renewed
without further examination and with the payment of a renewal fee as
provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, if the application for
renewal is filed with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
on or before the date of such expiration. After March 1 of each year,
each Class 2 license holder shall be entitled to renew such license
without further examination and with the payment of a renewal fee as
provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, until May 1. After May
1, a Class 2 license holder who has failed to renew said Class 2 license
as hereinbefore provided shall not have said license renewed, but
instead shall be required to comply with the provisions of ㎣ 131-4 and
131-5 of this chapter. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
D. Each Class 1 and Class 2 license that is renewed after February 1, 1983,
shall, prior to renewal, have affixed to such license a photograph of the
Class 1 or Class 2 license holder, as the case may be. Said photograph
shall be similar in size to that of a passport photograph and shall be
provided by the applicant at the applicant's sole expense. [Amended
12-20-1997]
A. No license or certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be assigned or transferred, and no such license shall be
used for the interests of any unlicensed master electrician or
electrician.
 131-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  131-7
112:162
 131-8. Revocation or suspension of license or certificate.
 131-9. Liability of City.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for
damages to person or property caused by any defect therein. The City shall
not be held as assuming any such liability by reason of any examination
authorized in this chapter or the license and certificate issued as provided
in this chapter.
 131-10. Electrical inspectors. [Amended 10-22-1984; 4-17-1997;
2-24-2003; 11-26-2007]
B. Every holder of a Class 1 license shall keep his certificate of license
displayed in a conspicuous place in his principal place of business.
C. Every holder of a Class 2 license shall keep his certificate of license on
his person when he is engaged in doing electrical work for which he has
been licensed.19
D. Every apprentice meeting the requirements of  131-2B(7) of this
chapter shall keep on his person, during all times electrical work is
being performed by said apprentice pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, proof of said apprentice's registration in a qualified apprentice
program. [Added 7-14-1997]
A. Any license or certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter may, after hearing, be suspended or revoked by the Board
of Electrical Examiners if the person holding such license willfully or by
reason of incompetence repeatedly violates any statute of the state or
any ordinance, rule or regulation of the City relating to the installation,
maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment.
B. Whenever any license or certificate shall have been revoked or
suspended, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be
made. When any license has been revoked, no new license shall be
granted to the former holder of such license until at least 30 days have
elapsed after the date of such revocation.
A. Approval of electrical inspection companies. Electrical inspection
companies shall provide to the City of Jamestown a certificate of
insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000 naming the City of
Jamestown as an additional insured. Upon request, the companies shall
provide, at no charge to the City, courtesy inspections. [Amended
11-23-2009]
19.Editor's Note: Former Section 10.10, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 2-22-1983.
 131-7 BINGO  131-10
112:163
 131-11. Compliance required; work permits.
 131-12. Inspections; certificate of approval.
B. There shall be two classes of electrical inspector. The license shall
expire on March 1 each year. For the portion of the calendar year for
which the license is first issued a fee as provided in Chapter 175,
Licenses and Permits, shall be paid.
(1) Electrical Inspector Class 1 shall allow the inspection and
reinspection of all portions of electrical services and installations
from the weatherhead throughout the building and terminating at
the end-use device(s). Qualifications for this license shall be the
submission of an application, in writing, on a City of Jamestown
form, a copy of the insurance as stated in Subsection A above, and a
current copy of both a certification as a New York State Code
Enforcement Official and a certification from the International
Association of Electrical Inspectors, or other nationally recognized
testing agency, for the type of inspection to be performed.
(2) Electrical Inspector Class 2 shall allow the inspection and
reinspection of only the portion of an electrical installation from the
weatherhead leading to and including the first panel containing the
main disconnect. Qualifications for the Class 2 license shall be the
submission of an application, in writing, on a City of Jamestown
form, a certificate of insurance as stated in Subsection A above,
and a current copy of certification from the International
Association of Electrical Inspectors, or other nationally recognized
testing agency, for the type of inspection to be performed.
A. All electrical installations, construction and work, except temporary
wiring and other work installed for test purposes at power stations and
manufacturing plants, shall be done and performed under the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person desiring to do any such electrical work shall file a written
application with the electrical inspector on a form provided by the
electrical inspector. The name of the person doing the work, the owner
of the building or structure, the location of the building or structure and
the scope of the work shall be given on this form. The electrical
inspector may require that drawings, diagrams or a more complete
written description of the proposed work be filed as additional
information with the application form. If such proposed work complies
with the requirements of this section and is not in conflict with other
valid ordinances of the City, the electrical inspector shall issue a permit
on a standard form authorizing the work to proceed and stating any
conditions that may apply to the proposed work. No permit shall be
binding upon the City or the officers named in this chapter unless the
same is in writing.
 131-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  131-12
112:164
 131-13. Permit and inspection fees. [Amended 10-22-1984;
2-24-2003]
The charges for inspections and permits shall be in accordance with the
respective schedules filed in the offices of the electrical inspection
companies, and such schedules shall be filed in the offices of the Deputy
Chief of the Fire Department and the respective electrical inspectors. Such
fees and charges shall be payable, as the case may be, to the electrical
inspection companies as compensation for the services of the electrical
inspector of the inspection company performing an electrical inspection
or other related service for which such electrical inspector or inspection
agency shall not be otherwise compensated by the City. The electrical
inspectors shall not charge an individual, person, firm or corporation any
amount in excess of the schedule of the inspection agency thus fixed and
filed.
 131-14. Materials. [Amended 2-24-2003]
All electrical installations, construction and wiring for supplying light, heat
and power hereafter placed within any building or part of any building
used for business purposes or public assembly, now completed or hereafter
erected within the City, shall be run in approved raceways, metallic conduit
or metal molding. The use of armored cable, except with special permission
of the Fire Department, is prohibited after March 1, 1960.
 131-15. Supplemental rules. [Amended 2-24-2003; 4-27-2015]
The Deputy Chief of the Fire Department, through the electrical inspectors,
is hereby authorized to make and prescribe supplemental rules in addition
to this chapter, but not inconsistent therewith, for the purpose of carrying
out and facilitating the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such
supplemental rules and changes shall not take effect until signed by the
electrical inspector and approved, in writing, by the Deputy Chief of the
Fire Department, which supplemental rules and changes as thus signed and
approved shall be kept at all times while in force at the office of the Fire
Department in the City Hall and shall be open for public inspection during
the office hours thereof. The electrical inspector and the Deputy Chief of the
A. It shall be the duty of every person doing any work referred to in this
chapter to notify the electrical inspector, in writing, at such time as may
enable the electrical inspector to properly inspect such work. It shall be
the duty of the electrical inspector to thereupon inspect such work and,
upon the completion thereof, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, to issue to such person which did such work his certificate
approving such work.
B. The inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of
electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment in
and on properties within the City where he deems it necessary for the
protection of life and property.
 131-12 BINGO  131-15
112:165
Fire Department are charged with the duty of administering and enforcing
this chapter in a practical and workmanlike manner, and for those purposes
they shall be guided by the provisions of this chapter. Where this chapter
fails to make provision for a particular type of electrical work, installation
or inspection or any other matter in relation thereto, the Deputy Chief of the
Fire Department and the electrical inspector shall be guided and governed
by the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the National Fire Protection
Association and as adopted by  131-18, which is made a part of this chapter
for all purposes.
 131-16. Service connections.
No person shall make any service connection or furnish current to any
building within the City where electrical work has been installed, altered or
added, unless the electrical work so installed, altered or added to in such
building has been inspected and approved as provided by this chapter or
unless the electrical inspector has issued a temporary permit for making
such service connections or for furnishing such current during building
operations. The electrical inspector may issue a temporary permit for
making such service connection or furnishing such current during
operations, which permit must expire within the period of time limited
therein and which shall extend only so long as may be reasonably necessary
and required in connection with such building operation. In the event that
any person shall make any service connection or furnish current under such
temporary permit, such service must be discontinued, and such current
must cease to be furnished upon the expiration of the time limited in such
temporary permit.
 131-17. Removal of improper installations.
 131-18. Adoption of standards. [Amended 4-17-1978; 4-27-2015]
For the purpose of regulation of the installation, alteration or repair of
electrical installations and facilities in the City of Jamestown and except as
otherwise provided by this chapter, the current State of New York approved
edition of the National Electrical Code, promulgated by the National Fire
Protection Association, as it may be from time to time amended, is hereby
adopted and made to apply within the City of Jamestown.
A. The Fire Department is hereby authorized to cause the removal of
unlawful or improper installations or construction or work undertaken
without a permit and which menace the safety of the occupants of the
buildings or the approach of firemen or tend to cause public
conflagration or disaster. [Amended 2-24-2003]
B. The summary removal of such installations and the infliction of the
money or criminal penalties provided by this chapter shall not be
interpreted to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions,
installations or construction work.
 131-15 JAMESTOWN CODE  131-19
112:166
 131-19. Enforcement. [Amended 2-24-2003]
The Deputy Chief of the Fire Department, through the electrical inspectors,
is authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter by injunction or other
legal process as provided by the Charter of the City.
 131-20. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-8-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, Penalties, and if such person is the holder of a license
of any class provided for in this chapter, such conviction shall have the
effect of suspending such license until it shall have been reinstated by the
Board of Electrical Examiners. The employment of helpers or apprentices
working with or under the direct supervision of licensed electricians shall
not be construed to be a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 135
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 54.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 135-1. Statutory authority; purpose and intent.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to  8-0113 of the Environmental
Conservation Law for the purpose of implementing the provisions of
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law which provides for
state environmental quality review (SEQR).
B. The basic purpose of SEQR is to incorporate environmental factors into
the existing planning and decisionmaking processes of state, regional
and local agencies at the earliest possible time. In adopting SEQR, it
was the Legislature's intention that all agencies conduct their affairs
with an awareness that they are stewards of the air, water, land and
living resources and that they have an obligation to protect the
environment for the use and enjoyment of this and all future
generations.
C. It was the intention of the legislature that the protection and
enhancement of the environment and of human and community
resources should be given appropriate weight with social and economic
 131-19 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-1
135:167
 135-2. General provisions.
considerations in public policy and that those factors be considered
together in reaching decisions on proposed activities. Accordingly, it
is the intention of these regulations that a suitable balance of social,
economic and environmental factors be incorporated in the planning
and decisionmaking processes of state, regional and local agencies; it
is not the intention of SEQR that environmental factors be the sole
consideration in decisionmaking.
D. The SEQR process is designed to be integrated into existing agency
procedures and should not result in delays in agency planning and
decisionmaking. By eliminating existing information gaps, the SEQR
process should expedite agency decisionmaking and assist agencies in
making more informed decisions.
E. SEQR also performs the following functions:
(1) It is an appropriate vehicle for expediting administrative review by
consolidating and coordinating existing multiple approval
procedures of public agencies which are often overlapping and
sometimes fraught with delay, thereby saving time and money. This
approach will encourage the establishment, where possible, of a
one-stop permit review process.
(2) It serves the people's right to have information about and to
participate in government planning and decisionmaking.
F. This chapter provides a broad statewide framework for SEQR
implementation. However, SEQR does not deprive any state agency or
local government of its existing jurisdiction or authority. Nor does
SEQR authorize the Department or any other agency to review and/or
approve actions by other public agencies. Under  135-10 of this
chapter, state agencies and local governments, in recognition of their
differing needs, priorities and responsibilities, shall adopt their own
rules, procedures, criteria and guidelines consistent with this chapter
but tailored to their individual requirements.
A. Each agency shall establish procedures for determining whether or not
an action under consideration will require an environmental impact
statement on the basis of whether that action may have a significant
effect on the environment and shall provide public notice of the
determination in accordance with  135-7 of this chapter. If the action
under consideration involves an applicant, such determination shall be
made within 15 calendar days following the filing of a complete
application.
B. Following a determination that an action under consideration may have
a significant effect on the environment, the agency considering such
action shall immediately notify the applicant, in writing, of its
determination and, except where the action involves more than one
 135-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-2
135:168
agency, shall request the applicant to prepare a draft environmental
impact statement in accordance with  135-6 of this chapter. If the
applicant declines to prepare the statement, the agency shall prepare it
or cause its preparation to be undertaken. The procedures set forth in
㎣ 135-7 and 135-8 of this chapter shall be followed, except that:
(1) If such action may involve major federal actions significantly
affecting the quality of the human environment under the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969, then the procedures set forth in
 135-3 of this chapter shall be followed; or
(2) If such action may involve actions by other agencies, then the
procedures set forth in  135-4 of this chapter shall be followed.
C. Following a determination that an action under the consideration may
have a significant effect on the environment, no agency shall approve,
commence or engage in such action until the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 procedures have been followed (see  135-3 of this
chapter) or the lead agency procedures have been followed (see  135-4
of this chapter) or the SEQR environmental impact statement and
decisionmaking procedures have been followed (see ㎣ 135-7 and 135-8
of this chapter), whichever one of such procedures is applicable.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an agency or an applicant from:
(1) Conducting contemporaneous environmental engineering,
economic, feasibility and other studies and preliminary planning
and budgetary processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal
for action which do not otherwise commit the agency to commence
or engage in such action; or
(2) Granting approval of any part of an application which relates only
to technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such
partial approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence
the action unless and until all requirements of this chapter have
been fulfilled.
D. Agencies should identify programs or categories of actions which would
most appropriately serve as the subject of a single environmental
impact statement. Broad program statements, master or area-wide
statements or statements for comprehensive plans are often
appropriate to assess the environmental effects of a number of separate
actions in a given geographic area, a chain of contemplated actions,
separate actions having generic or common impacts or programs or
plans having wide application or restricting the range of future
alternative policies or projects. Such statements will eliminate multiple
sequential reviews of the same or similar actions. No further
environmental impact statements need be prepared for actions which
are included in such a statement. Agencies preparing such a statement
shall develop procedures for amending or supplementing such
statements to reflect impacts which are not addressed or adequately
analyzed in such a statement as initially prepared. Such procedures
 135-2 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-2
135:169
 135-3. Actions involving federal participation.
 135-4. Actions involving more than one agency.
shall include provisions for informing the public and other agencies of
the preparation of such amendments or supplements and for allowing
comment thereon before incorporation of such amendments or
supplements in said statement. Actions undertaken or approved in
conformity with this chapter prior to the incorporation of such
amendments shall require no further review under this chapter.
A. Where there has duly been prepared under the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 both a draft environmental impact statement and a
final environmental impact statement for an action under
consideration, the agency shall have no obligation to prepare an
environmental impact statement or make findings under this chapter
with respect to the action so long as the environmental impact
statements either contain or are supplemented by the item concerning
growth-inducing aspects and energy use and conservation listed in
 135-6D(7) and (8) of this chapter.
B. Where there has duly been prepared under the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 a negative declaration or other written threshold
determination that the action will not require a federal impact
statement, the agency shall determine whether or not the action may
have a significant effect on the environment pursuant to Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and this chapter.
A. When an action which may have a significant effect on the environment
involves more than one agency, all involved agencies shall, to the fullest
extent possible, coordinate their environmental reviews through a lead
agency to the end that the requirements of this chapter are met by a
single draft environmental impact statement, a single final
environmental impact statement and, if conducted and practicable, a
single hearing process. In order to expedite this coordination, agencies
should require applicants to specify in their applications which other
agencies, to the best of their knowledge, will have jurisdiction by law
over proposed actions.
B. Upon receipt of a complete application for an action which an agency
determines may have a significant effect on the environment, the
agency shall immediately notify all other agencies which may be
involved in the proposed action and request full coordination of the
environmental review of such action. The designation of the lead
agency shall be made within 30 calendar days following the filing of a
complete application.
C. In the case of an action involving an applicant, the lead agency shall
immediately notify the applicant, in writing, that it is the lead agency
and request the applicant to prepare a draft environmental impact
statement.
 135-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-4
135:170
D. If a question arises between or among two or more agencies as to which
agency is the lead agency, the agencies shall resolve the question
themselves and designate a lead agency, in writing, on the basis of the
following:
(1) The agency to first act on the proposed action.
(2) A determination of which agency has the greatest responsibility for
supervising or approving the action as a whole.
(3) A determination of which agency has more general governmental
powers as compared to single or limited powers or purposes.
(4) A determination of which agency has the greatest capability for
providing the most thorough environmental assessment of the
action.
(5) A determination of whether the anticipated impacts of the action
being considered are primarily of statewide, regional or local
concern, e.g., if such impacts are primarily of local concern, the
local agency should be the lead agency.
E. If such agencies are unable to resolve the question within the
prescribed thirty-calendar-day period, they shall submit the question, in
written form, to the Commissioner, who shall, within five business days,
on the basis of the criteria specified above, designate the lead agency.
F. The other agencies involved in the action shall have no further
obligation under this chapter with respect to the action being
considered except:
(1) To provide their views where appropriate and, to the extent
practical, appropriate technical analysis and support.
(2) To make the findings required by  135-8 of this chapter.
(3) Not to approve, commence or engage in such action until the
procedures set forth in ㎣ 135-7 and 135-8 of this chapter have
been completed.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an agency or an applicant from:
(1) Conducting contemporaneous environmental, engineering,
economic, feasibility and other studies and preliminary planning
and budgetary processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal
for action which do not otherwise commit the agency to commence
or engage in such action; or
(2) Granting approval of any part of an application which relates only
to technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such
partial approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence
the action unless and until all requirements of this chapter have
been fulfilled.
 135-4 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-5
135:171
 135-5. Actions previously undertaken.
 135-6. Contents of environmental impact statement.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no environmental
impact statement shall be required for actions undertaken or approved
prior to the effective date(s) of Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
B. If after the effective date(s) of Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law an agency proposes to modify an action undertaken
or approved prior to such date(s), such modification shall be an action
fully subject to this chapter.
A. Environmental impact statements should be clearly written in a brief
and concise manner capable of being read and understood by the
public. Within the framework presented in Subsection D of this section,
such statements should deal only with the specific significant
environmental impacts which can be reasonably anticipated. They
should not contain more detail than is appropriate, considering the
nature and magnitude of the proposed action, the significance of its
potential impacts and the existing resources and capability of the
agency responsible for the statement.
B. All draft and final environmental impact statements shall be preceded
by a cover sheet stating the following:
(1) Whether it is a draft or final.
(2) The name or other descriptive title of the action.
(3) The location (county and town, village or city) of the action.
(4) The name and address of the agency which required its
preparation, and the name and telephone number of a person at the
agency to be contacted for further information.
(5) Identification of individuals or organizations which prepared any
portion of the statement.
(6) The date of its completion.
C. If a draft or final environmental impact statement exceeds 10 pages in
length, it shall have a table of contents following the cover sheet.
D. The body of all draft and final environmental impact statements shall at
least contain the following:
(1) A description of the proposed action and its environmental setting.
(2) A statement of the environmental impact of the proposed action,
including its short- and long-term effects and typical associated
environmental effects.
 135-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-6
135:172
 135-7. Environmental impact statement procedures.
(3) An identification of any adverse environmental effect which cannot
be avoided if the proposed action is implemented.
(4) A discussion of alternatives to the proposed action and the
comparable impacts and effects of such alternatives.
(5) An identification of any irreversible and irretrievable commitments
of resources which would be involved in the proposed action should
it be implemented.
(6) A description of mitigation measures proposed to minimize the
adverse environmental impacts.
(7) A description of any growth-inducing aspects of the proposed
action.
(8) A discussion of the effects of the proposed action on the use and
conservation of energy.
(9) A list of any underlying studies, reports and other information
obtained and considered by the agency in preparing the statement.
(10) For final only, copies or a summary of the substantive comments
received in response to the draft environmental impact statement
and the agency's response to such comments.
E. An environmental impact statement may incorporate by reference all or
portions of other documents which contain information relevant to the
statement. The referenced document shall be made available to the
public in the same places where the agency makes available copies of
the statement. When a statement uses incorporation by reference, the
referenced document shall be briefly described and its date of
preparation provided.
A. An environmental impact statement represents a mechanism which
aids agencies in giving meaningful consideration to environmental
factors and facilitates the weighing of social, economic and
environmental issues in planning and decisionmaking. Therefore, the
preparation of such statements should be integrated into existing
agency decisionmaking processes and occur at the same time as other
agency reviews are being undertaken. Since the environmental impact
review process is not a separate procedure to be added at the end of
existing procedures, it should not extend the time required for agency
decisionmaking.
B. When an action under consideration by an agency is not an exempt
action, a ministerial action, an action listed as a Type II action in
 135-12 or on the agency's own list of actions found not to have a
significant effect on the environment, such agency, upon determining
whether the action may or will not have a significant effect on the
 135-6 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-7
135:173
environment, shall immediately file such determination as follows: with
the appropriate regional office of the Department; and with the
Commissioner; and in the case of a local agency, board, district,
commission or governing body, city, county or other political subdivision
of the state, in the office of the Municipal Clerk whose jurisdiction
most closely corresponds with the agency; or, in the case of a state
department, agency, board, public-benefit corporation, public authority
or commission, in the main office of such agency. In addition, individual
agency procedures shall provide for further public notice of
determinations as shall afford the opportunity for public response by
such means as up-to-date files in agency offices, signboards or other
appropriate means.
C. Where the action under consideration involves an applicant, the agency
may require the applicant to submit an environmental impact report to
assist the agency in carrying out its responsibility under this chapter or
may request the applicant to prepare the environmental impact
statements required by this chapter. An agency may request additional
data and information from an applicant or other sources at any time it
determines they are needed to comply adequately with SEQR.
Notwithstanding any use of outside sources and work, agencies shall
make their own independent judgment of an environmental impact
statement and shall take responsibility for its scope, contents and
adequacy.
D. Each agency which requests an applicant to prepare or prepares a draft
environmental impact statement shall, upon its completion, issue a
notice of completion containing the following:
(1) A brief description of the action covered by the statement and the
location of its potential impacts and effects.
(2) A statement indicating where and how copies of the statement can
be obtained from the agency.
(3) A statement that comments on the statement are requested and
will be received and considered by the agency at a given address
for a period not less than 30 calendar days from the first filing and
circulation of the notice of completion pursuant to Subsections D
and E of this section or not less than 10 calendar days following a
public hearing at which the environmental impacts of the proposed
action are considered.
E. The notice of completion shall be sent to all other agencies involved in
the action, persons who have requested it, the editor of the State
Bulletin, the state clearinghouse and the relevant regional
clearinghouse designated under Federal Office of Management and
Budget Circular A-95. Each agency shall maintain a file open to public
inspection of notices of completion and draft environmental impact
statements it has requested an applicant to prepare or has prepared.
 135-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-7
135:174
F. For public information purposes, copies of the draft environmental
impact statement and notice of completion shall immediately be filed as
follows:
(1) One copy with the Municipal Clerk whose jurisdiction most closely
coincides with that of the lead agency.
(2) One copy with the appropriate regional office of the Department.
(3) One copy with the Commissioner.
G. Each agency which requests an applicant to prepare or prepares a draft
environmental impact statement shall, upon its completion, determine
whether or not to conduct a public hearing concerning the action. In
determining whether or not to hold a hearing, each agency should
consider the degree of interest shown by other persons in the action
and the extent to which a public hearing can aid in agency
decisionmaking processes by providing a forum for or an efficient
mechanism for the collection of public comment.
(1) If a hearing is to be held, notice thereof may be contained in the
notice of completion or, if not so contained, shall be given in the
same manner in which the notice of completion is sent, filed and
circulated pursuant to Subsections D and E of this section. In either
case, the notice of hearing shall also be published at least 10
calendar days in advance of the public hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the area of the potential impacts and effects
of the action.
(2) The hearing shall commence not less than 15 calendar days nor
more than 60 calendar days after the filing of the draft
environmental impact statement pursuant to Subsection F of this
section, except as the agency may otherwise provide where it
determines that additional time is necessary for public or other
agency review of the draft environmental impact statement or
where a different hearing date is required as appropriate under
applicable law. When a SEQR hearing is to be held, it shall be
incorporated into existing hearing procedures.
H. Except as provided in Subsection H(1) and (2) below, the lead agency
shall prepare or cause to be prepared a final environmental impact
statement within 45 calendar days after the close of any hearing or
within 60 calendar days after the filing of the draft environmental
impact statement, whichever last occurs.
(1) If the proposed action has been withdrawn or if, on the basis of the
draft environmental impact statement or hearing, the agency has
determined that the action will not have a significant effect on the
environment, no final environmental impact statement need be
prepared.
 135-7 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-7
135:175
 135-8. Decisionmaking; determinations.
(2) The agency may extend the last date for preparation of the final
environmental impact statement:
(a) Where it determines that additional time is necessary to
complete the statement adequately;
(b) Where problems with the proposed action requiring material
reconsideration or modification have been identified; or
(c) For other good cause.
(3) The final environmental impact statement shall reflect a revision
and updating of the matters contained in the draft environmental
impact statement in the light of further agency review, comments
received and the record of any hearing.
I. Copies of the final environmental impact statement shall be filed and
made available for review in the same manner as the draft
environmental impact statement. A notice of completion of the final
environmental impact statement shall be sent to all persons to whom
the notice of completion of the draft environmental impact statement
was sent. Each agency shall maintain a file open to public inspection of
notices of completion and draft and final environmental impact
statements it has requested or prepared.
A. No decision to carry out or approve an action which may have a
significant effect on the environment shall be made until after the filing
and consideration of a final environmental impact statement. The lead
agency's decision whether or not to approve an action which has been
the subject of an environmental impact statement shall be made within
30 calendar days of the filing of a final environmental impact statement.
B. When an agency decides to carry out or approve an action which may
have a significant effect on the environment, it shall make the following
findings in a written determination:
(1) Consistent with social, economic and other essential consideration
of state policy, from among the reasonable alternatives thereto, the
action to be carried out or approved is one which minimizes or
avoids adverse environmental effects to the maximum extent
possible, including the effects disclosed in the relevant
environmental impact statement.
(2) Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations
of state policy, all practicable means will be taken in carrying out or
approving the action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental
effects.
C. For public information purposes, a copy of the determination shall be
filed immediately in the same manner as the draft environmental
 135-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-8
135:176
 135-9. Significant-impact criteria.
impact statement. Each agency shall maintain a file open to public
inspection of notices of determinations prepared by it.
A. An action may have significant effect on the environment if it can
reasonably be expected to lead to one of the following consequences:
(1) A substantial adverse change to ambient air or water quality or
noise levels or in solid waste production, drainage, erosion or
flooding (example: reactivation of a heavy manufacturing plant).
(2) The removal or destruction of large quantities of vegetation or
fauna, the substantial interference with the movement of any
resident or migratory fish or wildlife species, impacts on critical
habitat areas or the substantial affecting of a rare or endangered
species of animal or plant or the habitat of such a species (example:
clear-cutting of a forested mountainside).
(3) The encouraging or attracting of a large number of people to a
place or places for more than a few days relative to the number of
people who would come to such place absent the action (example:
acquisition of a large private lake for use as a public park).
(4) The creation of a material conflict with a community's existing
plans or goals as officially approved or adopted (example:
construction of a jail in an area zoned by the local municipality for
single-family residential use).
(5) The impairment of the character or quality of important historical,
archaeological, architectural or aesthetic resources or of existing
community or neighborhood character (example: demolition of a
historical landmark listed in the Statewide Inventory of Historical
and Cultural Resources).
(6) A major change in the use of either the quantity or type of energy
(example: an agency decision to centrally air-condition all its
existing public buildings).
(7) The creation of a hazard to human health or safety (example: the
manufacture or disposal by an agency of toxic substances).
(8) A substantial change in the use or intensity of use of land or other
natural resources or in their capacity to support existing uses,
except where such a change has been included, referred to or
implicit in a broad statement prepared pursuant to  135-2D of this
chapter (example: construction of an airport).
(9) The creation of a material demand for other actions which would
result in one of the above consequences.
 135-8 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-9
135:177
 135-10. Agency rule-making; records.
(10) Changes in two or more elements of the environment, no one of
which is substantial, but when taken together result in a material
change in the environment.
B. For the purpose of determining whether an action will cause one of the
foregoing consequences, the action shall be deemed to include other
contemporaneous or subsequent actions which are included in any
long-range comprehensive integrated plan of which the action under
consideration is a part, which are likely to be undertaken as a result
thereof or which are dependent thereon. The significance of a likely
consequence (i.e., whether it is material, substantial, large, important,
etc.) should be assessed in connection with its setting (i.e., urban or
rural), its probability of occurring, its duration, its irreversibility, its
controllability, its geographic scope and its magnitude (i.e., the degree
of change or its absolute size). Section 135-12 of this chapter contains
lists of actions which are likely to have a significant effect on the
environment and lists of actions which the Commissioner has found not
to have a significant effect on the environment.
A. All agencies shall, consistent with the provisions of Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law, after public hearing, adopt and
publish such additional procedures as may be necessary for the
implementation by them of this chapter. This may be accomplished by
the use of uniform procedures or adoption by reference of procedures
applicable to other agencies.
B. Individual agencies are encouraged to develop their own criteria
consistent with  135-9 of this chapter and their own classification
system, whether or not in the form of  135-12 of this chapter, to cover
the particular actions engaged in or reviewed by them. Such criteria
and classification systems shall be no less protective of environmental
values than this chapter. Individual agencies are also encouraged to
develop a classification of actions which are ministerial actions and
criteria for determining when actions are or are not ministerial.
C. The procedures prescribed under this chapter shall, to the greatest
extent practicable, be incorporated in and integrated with existing
agency procedures, and variance in form alone shall constitute no
objection thereto. Such individual agency procedures, however, shall be
no less protective of environmental values, public participation and
agency and judicial review than the procedures set forth in this chapter.
D. Upon the written request of any person, the Commissioner shall review
and determine whether any action contained in an agency's own list or
classification system similar to  135-12 is consistent with the criteria of
 135-9 and the actions listed in  135-12 of this chapter. The
Commissioner shall give written notification of the determination to
such persons and the agency within 30 days of receipt of a request.
 135-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-10
135:178
 135-11. Fees and costs.
 135-12. Classification and lists of actions.
E. Such agency procedures shall provide for interagency working
relationships in cases where actions typically involve more than one
agency, liaison with the public, public notice requirements, provision
for public comment and such other procedures as may be required to
effect the efficient and expeditious administration of this chapter.
Procedures for administrative review of agency decision may also be
incorporated in agency rules.
F. All agencies shall review their present statutory authority,
administrative regulations and current policies and procedures for the
purpose of determining whether there are any deficiencies or
inconsistencies therein which prohibit or impede full compliance with
this chapter. Agencies should examine time limits or schedules for
actions, hearing procedures, public notice provisions, standards for
agency action which limit or exclude environmental factors, provisions
for environmental data gathering, provisions for public participation in
the decisionmaking process and procedures for and methods of
reviewing environmental impact. By January 1, 1977, agencies shall
recommend or effect such measures as may be necessary to bring their
authority and policies into conformity with this chapter, including
statutory changes, amendments to administrative regulations, new
standard forms, revised instructions and procedural guidelines and
improved personnel training.
G. Each agency shall maintain a file open to public inspection containing a
list of all environmental impact statements prepared or under
preparation by or at the request of such agency.
A. Where an action subject to this chapter involves an applicant, the
agency responsible for environmental impact statements may charge a
fee, not to exceed 1/2 of 1% of the action's total cost, to the applicant in
order to recover the costs of preparing and reviewing environmental
impact statements.
B. The technical services of each agency may be made available on a fee
basis reflecting the costs thereof to other agencies, and the fee charged
to any applicant pursuant to Subsection A of this section may reflect
such costs.
C. Any such fees shall be computed and charged in accordance with the
regulations adopted, after public hearing, by the charging agency
pursuant to  135-10 of this chapter.
A. The purpose of this section is to simplify the task of determining
whether or not a proposed action may have a significant effect on the
environment by identifying for agencies actions or classes of actions
that are likely to have a significant effect and those that will not have a
 135-10 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-12
135:179
significant effect. Because of the complex and varied nature of agency
actions, the lists in this section are not all-inclusive. The omission
from the lists of an action does not mean that it is exempt from this
chapter, nor does it mean that it is automatically an action requiring
environmental impact statement preparation. The criteria set forth in
 135-9 of this chapter and criteria included in agency procedures
under  135-10 of this chapter shall be used to determine significance
with respect to actions not listed in this section.
(1) The following classification system is used in this section:
(a) Type I: Actions or classes of actions that are likely to require
preparation of environmental impact statements because they
will in almost every instance have a significant effect on the
environment.
(b) Type II: Actions or classes of actions which have been
determined not to have a significant effect on the environment
and which do not require environmental impact statements
under this chapter.
(2) This chapter does not apply to actions by private persons where no
nonministerial agency action is involved. The following lists are
intended to cover only actions of agencies or actions which must be
approved, funded or otherwise acted upon by an agency.
B. Type I.
(1) Type I actions or classes of actions are likely to, but will not
necessarily, require preparation of environmental impact
statements because they will in almost every instance have a
significant effect on the environment.
(2) The following are Type I actions or classes of actions:
(a) The construction of new (or expansion by more than 50% of
existing size, square footage or usage of existing):
[1] Airports.
[2] Public institutions, such as hospitals, schools and
institutions of higher learning and correction facilities and
major office centers.
[3] Road or highway sections, including bridges, which
require an indirect source permit under 6 NYCRR 203.
[4] Parking facilities or other facilities with an associated
parking area for 250 or more cars, only if such facility
would require an indirect source permit under 6 NYCRR
203.
 135-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-12
135:180
[5] Dams with a downstream hazard of C classification under
Environmental Conservation Law (ECL)  15-0503.
[6] Stationary combustion installations operating at a total
heating input exceeding one thousand million
(1,000,000,000) Btu's per hour.
[7] Chemical pulp mills.
[8] Portland cement plants.
[9] Iron and steel plants.
[10] Primary aluminum one reduction plants.
[11] Incinerators operating at a refuse-charging rate exceeding
250 tons of refuse per twenty-four-hour day.
[12] Sulfuric acid plants.
[13] Petroleum refineries.
[14] Lime plants.
[15] By-product coke manufacturing plants.
[16] Storage facilities designed for or capable of storing
1,000,000 or more gallons of liquid natural gas, liquid
petroleum gas or other liquid fuels.
[17] Sulfur recovery plants.
[18] Fuel conversion plants.
[19] Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems emitting air
contaminants assigned an environmental rating of A under
6 NYCRR 212 and whose total emission rate of such A
contaminants exceeds one pound per hour.
[20] Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems from which
the total emission rate of all air contaminants exceeds 50
tons per day.
[21] Sanitary landfills for an excess of 100,000 cubic yards per
year of waste fill.
[22] Any facilities, developments or projects which are to be
directly located in one of the following critical areas:
[a] Tidal wetlands, as defined in Article 25 of the ECL.
[b] Freshwater wetlands, as defined in Article 24 of the
ECL.
[c] Floodplains, as defined in Article 36 of the ECL.
 135-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-12
135:181
[d] Wild, scenic and recreational rivers areas designated
in Title 27 of Article 15 of the ECL.
[23] Any facilities, developments or projects having an adverse
impact on any historic or prehistoric building, structure or
site listed on the National Register of Historic Places or in
the Statewide Inventory of Historical and Cultural
Resources.
[24] Any developments, projects or permanent facilities of a
nonagricultural use in an agricultural district which
requires a permit, except those listed as Type II actions.
[25] Any facilities, developments or projects which would
generate more than 5,000 vehicle trips per any hour or
more than 25,000 vehicle trips per any eight-hour period.
[26] Any facilities, developments or projects which would use
ground- or surface water in excess of 2,000,000 gallons in
any day.
[27] Any industrial facilities which have a yearly average
discharge flow, based on days of discharge, of greater than
0.5 million gallons per day.
[28] Any publicly or privately owned sewage treatment works
which have an average daily design flow of more than 0.5
million gallons per day.
[29] Residential developments outside any standard
metropolitan statistical area as defined by the United
States Census Bureau that include 50 or more units in an
unsewered area of 250 or more units in a sewered area or
within a standard metropolitan statistical area that include
50 or more units in an unsewered area or 2,500 or more
units in a sewered area.
[30] Lakes or other bodies of water with a water surface in
excess of 200 acres.
(b) Any funding, licensing or planning activities in respect of any
of the types of construction listed in Subsection B(2)(a) above.
(c) Application of pesticides or herbicides over more than 1,500
contiguous acres.
(d) The clear-cutting of 640 or more contiguous acres of forest
cover or vegetation other than crops.
(e) The proposed adoption of comprehensive land use plans,
zoning ordinances, building codes, comprehensive solid waste
plans, state and regional transportation plans, water resource
basin plans, comprehensive water quality studies, area-wide
 135-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-12
135:182
wastewater treatment plans, state environmental plans, local
floodplain control plans and the like.
(f) The commercial burial of radioactive materials requiring a
permit under 6 NYCRR 380.
(g) Any action which will result in excessive or unusual noise or
vibration, taking into consideration the volume, intensity,
pitch, time duration and the appropriate land uses for both the
source and the recipient of such noise or vibration.
(h) The acquisition or sale by a public agency of more than 250
contiguous acres of land.
C. Type II.
(1) Type II actions or classes of actions have been determined not to
have a significant effect on the environment and do not require
environmental impact statements under this chapter.
(2) The following are Type II actions or classes of actions:
(a) The construction or alteration of single- or two-family
residences and accessory appurtenant uses or structures not in
conjunction with the construction or alteration of two or more
such residences and not in one of the critical areas described
in this section for Type I actions.
(b) The extension of utility facilities to serve new or altered singleor
two-family residential structures or to render service in
approved subdivisions.
(c) The construction or alteration of stores, offices or restaurants
designed for an occupant load of 20 persons or fewer, if not in
conjunction with the construction or alteration of two or more
stores, offices or restaurants and if not in one of the critical
areas described in this chapter for Type I actions and the
construction of utility facilities to serve such establishments.
(d) Actions involving individual setback and lot line variances and
the like.
(e) Agricultural farm management practices, including the
construction, maintenance and repair of farm buildings and
structures and land use changes consistent with generally
accepted principles of farming.
(f) The operation, repair, maintenance or minor alteration of
existing structures, land uses and equipment.
(g) The restoration or reconstruction of structures, in whole or in
part, being increased or expanded by less than 50% of their
existing size, square footage or usage.
 135-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-12
135:183
 135-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACTION  Any activity of an agency, except an exempt action as defined in
this chapter, including, without limitation:
(h) The repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of
new travel lanes.
(i) Street openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance of
existing utility facilities.
(j) The installation of traffic control devices on existing streets,
roads and highways, other than multiple fixtures on long
stretches.
(k) The mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, uses,
ownership patterns and the like.
(l) Regulatory activities not involving construction or changed
land use relating to one individual, business, institution or
facilities such as inspectors, testing, operating certification or
licensing and the like.
(m) Sales of surplus government property, other than land,
radioactive material, pesticides, herbicides or other hazardous
materials.
(n) Collective bargaining activities.
(o) Operating, expense or executive budget planning, preparation
and adoption not involving new programs or major reordering
of priorities.
(p) Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or
retirement systems.
(q) Actions which are immediately necessary for the protection or
preservation of life, health, property or natural resources.
(r) The routine administration and management of agency
functions, not including new programs or major reordering of
priorities.
(s) Routine license and permit renewals where there is no
significant change in preexisting conditions.
(t) Routine activities of educational institutions which do not
include capital construction.
Physical activities, such as construction or other activities which
change the use or appearance of any natural resource or a structure.
A.
 135-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-13
135:184
AGENCY  Any state department, agency, board, public benefit
corporation, public authority or commission or any local agency, including
any village, town, city, county, board, district, commission, governing body
and other political subdivision of the state.
APPLICANT  Any person making an application or other request for
agency action.
COMMISSIONER  The Commissioner of Environmental Conservation.
DEPARTMENT  The Department of Environmental Conservation.
ENVIRONMENT  The physical conditions which will be affected by a
proposed action, including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, noise,
objects of historic or aesthetic significance, existing patterns of population
concentration, distribution or growth and existing community or
neighborhood character.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  A written document prepared
in accordance with  135-6 of this chapter. An environmental impact
statement may either be a draft or be final.
EXEMPT ACTION  Any one of the following:
Funding activities, such as the proposing, approval or disapproval of
contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, tax abatements or exemptions or
other forms of direct or indirect financial assistance.
B.
Licensing activities, such as the proposing, approval or disapproval
of a lease, permit, license, certificate or other entitlement for use or
permission to act.
C.
Planning activities, such as site selection for other activities and the
proposing, approval or disapproval of master or long-range plans,
zoning or other land use maps, ordinances or regulations, development
plans or other plans designed to provide a program for future activities.
D.
Policy-making activities, such as the making, modification or
establishment of rules, regulations, procedures, policies and guidelines.
E.
Enforcement or criminal proceedings, or the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion in determining whether or not to institute such proceedings.
A.
B. Ministerial actions.
Maintenance or repair involving no substantial changes in an existing
structure or facility.
C.
With respect to the requirements of Subdivision 2 of  8-0109 of Article
8 of the Environmental Conservation Law, actions requiring a
certificate of environmental compatibility and public need under
Articles VII and VIII of the Public Service Law and the consideration of,
grant or denial of any such certificate.
D.
With respect to the requirements of Subdivision 2 of  8-0109 of Article
8 of the Environmental Conservation Law, actions subject to the
E.
 135-13 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-13
135:185
MINISTERIAL ACTION  An action performed upon a given state of facts in
a prescribed manner imposed by law without the exercise of any judgment
or discretion as to the propriety of the action, such as the grant of a driver's
license, although such law may require, in some degree, a construction of
its language or intent.
PERSON  Any agency, individual, corporation, governmental entity,
partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity.
TYPICAL ASSOCIATED ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS  Changes in one
or more natural resources which usually occur because of impacts on
other such resources as a result of natural interrelationships or cycles. For
example, the diminution of a predator population is typically associated with
the increase in a pray population.
 135-14. Phased schedule.
 135-15. Grandfathering.
jurisdiction of the Adirondack Park Agency pursuant to  809 of the
Executive Law, including actions of the Adirondack Park Agency
thereunder, and actions subject to the jurisdiction of local governments
pursuant to  808 of the Executive Law, including actions of such local
governments thereunder.
Except as set forth in  135-5 of this chapter, actions undertaken or
approved prior to June 1, 1976. An action shall be deemed to be
undertaken or approved prior to June 1, 1976, if, in the case of
construction activities, a contract for substantial construction activities
has been entered into or if a continuous program of on-site construction
or modification has been engaged in or if, in the case of an action
involving federal participation, either a draft environmental impact
statement or a negative declaration has been duly prepared under the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
F.
Actions which are immediately necessary on a limited emergency basis
for the protection or preservation of life, health, property or natural
resources.
G.
H. Actions of the Legislature of the State of New York or of any court.
A. June 1, 1977: Type I actions (designated in  135-12 as likely to require
an environmental impact statement) which are directly undertaken by
local governments and Type I actions which are funded by state
agencies are subject to the law's requirements.
B. September 1, 1977: Type I actions requiring a license or permit from
state or local government and Type I actions which are funded by local
government will be subject to the law's requirements.
C. September 1, 1978: All other actions.
 135-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-15
135:186
 135-16. Integration with existing procedures.
The amendment provides that agencies may vary the times established in
SEQR in order to completely integrate the environmental impact statement
process with established review times, so long as reasonable time is
provided for preparation and public review and hearing, when appropriate,
of the draft impact statement.
A. Direct actions of local government. Not later than September 1, 1977,
lists of Type I actions directly undertaken by local government are to be
compiled locally and submitted to the chief fiscal officer of the local
government, who will certify (within 30 days) that substantial time,
work or money has been expended on the project prior to June 1, 1977.
Lists of these actions, which will not be subject to the requirements of
an environmental impact statement, are to be available for public
inspection. Not later than September 1, 1978, the same procedure is to
be followed for non-Type I actions directly undertaken by local
governments.
B. Actions funded by local government. The same procedure shall be used
for locally funded projects, with the lists to be submitted by November
1, 1977.
C. Actions requiring a license or permit. Actions which have received final
approval (as defined in the amendment) will not be subject to the law's
requirements:
(1) In the case of the subdivision of land, an action in the nature of a
conditional approval of a preliminary or final plat as that term is
defined in  276 of the Town Law, and an action in the nature of an
approval of a preliminary plat with or without modification as
defined in  7-728 of the Village Law and  32 of the General City
Law.
(2) In the case of a site plan, special use, conditional use, exception,
variance or similar special authorization, an action in the nature of
an approval with or without conditions or modifications by the
appropriate local body, such as a legislative body, the Board of
Appeals or the Planning Board.
(3) In the case of all such actions requiring a permit or authorization
from a state or local agency, the granting of each such permit or
authorization.
 135-15 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW  135-16
135:187
Chapter 140
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Open fires  See Ch. 142.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 135-16 JAMESTOWN CODE  135-16
140:188
ARTICLE I
Fire Protection
[Adopted as Ch. 11 of the 1962 Code]
 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPALITY  The City of Jamestown, New York.
 140-2. Regulations adopted. [Amended 8-12-1974; 11-1-1976;
3-21-1977; 9-16-1985]
For purposes of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and the Life Safety Code provisions of
the National Fire Prevention Association Code (NFPA Code 101), as such
may be from time to time amended, shall be applicable within the City of
Jamestown and are hereby adopted as ordinances of the City of Jamestown
as though more fully put forth herein.
 140-3. Enforcement; Fire Prevention Bureau. [Amended
2-24-2003]
The provisions of the preceding section shall be enforced by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the municipality, which Bureau
is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of
the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
 140-4. Inspectors. [Amended 1-31-2000; 2-24-2003]
The Deputy Fire Chief and/or his designee may detail any member or
members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall be necessary.
 140-5. Modification of provisions.
The Office of Public Safety of the municipality shall have the power to
modify any of the provisions of the National Fire Prevention Code, 1960
Edition, adopted as part of this chapter, upon application, in writing, by
the owner or lessee or his duly licensed agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such provisions,
provided that the spirit of such provisions shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification,
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Office of Public Safety
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Fire Department, and a
signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
 140-1 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING  140-6
140:189
 140-6. Appeals.
Whenever the Fire Department shall disapprove any application or refuse
to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of
this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
the decision of the Fire Department to the City Council within 30 days from
the date of the decision.
 140-7. Limits on storage of flammable and explosive materials.
 140-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to
comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any lawful order
made hereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to this article or
any certificate or permit issued hereunder and from which no appeal has
been taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within
the time fixed herein shall be severally, for each and every such violation
and noncompliance respectively, be punished, upon conviction, by a fine as
provided in  1-1 of the Code. The application of the above penalty shall not
be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
A. The limits referred to in Section 16.22 of the National Fire Prevention
Code, 1960 Edition, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows:
"Fire District" as established by Chapter 300, Zoning.
B. The limits referred to in Section 16.51 of the National Fire Prevention
Code, 1960 Edition, in which bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited, are hereby established as follows: areas designated as R-7,
R-6, R-5, R-4, and R-3 by Chapter 300, Zoning.
C. The limits referred to in Section 21.6a of the National Fire Prevention
Code, 1960 Edition, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted, are hereby established as follows: areas designated other
than F-1 by Chapter 300, Zoning.
D. The limits referred to in Section 12.6b of the National Fire Prevention
Code, 1960 Edition, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents
is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all areas except as may
be specifically permitted by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
on a temporary basis.
E. Except in M Manufacturing Districts, as defined by Chapter 300 of this
Code, the installation and/or storage of liquified petroleum gas
cylinders in excess of 100 pound tank size is hereby prohibited. [Added
3-8-1999]
 140-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  140-8
140:190
Chapter 142
FIRES, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention  See Ch. 140. Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
OPEN FIRE  Any outdoor fire or outdoor smoke-producing process from
which air contaminants are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere.
REFUSE  All waste material, including but not limited to garbage,
rubbish, incinerator residue, street sweepings and dead animals.
RUBBISH  Solid or liquid waste material, including but not limited to
paper and paper products; rags; trees or leaves, needles and branches
therefrom; vines; lawn and garden debris; furniture; cans; crockery; plastic;
cartons; chemicals; paint; grease; sludge; oils and other petroleum
products; wood; sawdust; demolition materials; tires; and automobiles and
other vehicles and parts for junk, salvage or disposal.
 142-2. Prohibited burning.
Except as permitted by  142-3, no person shall burn in an open fire or
cause, suffer, allow or permit the burning in an open fire of garbage; refuse;
rubbish; rubbish generated by residential activities; rubbish generated by
industrial or commercial activities; rubbish generated by land clearing or
demolition for the erection of any structure; rubbish generated by the
construction or modification of any highway, railroad, power or
communication line or pipeline; or rubbish generated by the development
or modification of a recreational area or park.
 142-3. Permitted burning. [Amended 2-24-2003]
Burning in an open fire, provided that it is not contrary to any other federal,
state or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation, will be permitted as follows:
A. At a publicly sponsored celebration or event or at a public or private
school sponsored event with the prior written permission of the Deputy
Fire Chief or his/her designee and subject to any conditions or
restrictions which he/she shall impose for the safety of life and property.
 140-8 FIRES, OPEN  142-3
142:191
 142-4. Outdoor cooking excepted.
The provisions of  142-2 shall not be deemed to prohibit any person from
the open burning of charcoal or wood for cooking purposes, provided that
such charcoal or wood is confined in a cooking utensil commonly referred
to as a "grill," "hibachi" or "barbecue pit" or other similar cooking utensil
designed for the open burning of charcoal or wood.
 142-5. Storage of flammable materials. [Amended 2-24-2003]
No person shall leave or store within any building within the City of
Jamestown any material increasing the tendency or liability of fire therein
after being ordered by the Deputy Fire Chief and/or his designee
 142-6. Enforcement. [Amended 2-24-2003]
The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety and such fire-fighting personnel
under his command as he shall designate, is hereby vested with authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Fire Department is hereby
authorized to extinguish any open burning being conducted in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter.
 142-7. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
B. The burning of land clearings and/or demolition materials consisting of
wood, trees, tree trimmings, leaves or brush generated by land clearing
or demolition for the erection of any structure, for the construction or
modification of any highway, railroad, pipeline or power or
communication line or for the development or modification of a
recreational area or park, provided that such burning is done on-site or
at an appropriate designated burning area in accordance with a permit
issued by the Commissioner of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation in accordance with Part 215, Section
215.3, of the New York Code, Rules and Regulations if the State of New
York, and further provided that additional permission is granted by the
Deputy Fire Chief or his/her designee, which has the authority to
condition permission on such restrictions as might be imposed for the
protection of life and property.
 142-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  142-7
142:192
Chapter 145
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135.
Building construction  See Ch. 140.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 142-7 FIRES, OPEN  142-7
142:193

ARTICLE I
Findings, Purpose and Objectives
 145-1. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Jamestown finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the City of Jamestown and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
 145-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
 145-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
 145-1 FIRES, OPEN  145-3
142:195
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges,
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
 145-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-3
142:196
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
 145-4. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
 145-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL  A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING  A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity
flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD  The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1 - 99, V,
VO, VE or V1 - 30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain"
or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD  The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT  That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL  A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING  Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR  The same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA  The area subject to high-velocity waters,
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on
a FIRM as Zone V1 - 30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
 145-4 FIRES, OPEN  145-5
142:197
ELEVATED BUILDING  A nonbasement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM)  An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD or FLOODING  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)  An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but
no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)  An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY  The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevations
of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities and structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY  The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR  The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including
basement, i.e., the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of
wood flooring in wood-frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE  A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR  The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of the
lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
 145-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-5
142:198
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME  The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)  As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD  The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND  That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in  145-13B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES  Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION  The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or the physical alteration of the property,
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes
the placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages and sheds), storage trailers and building materials. For
manufactured homes, the "actual start" means the affixing of the
manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT  Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
 145-5 FIRES, OPEN  145-5
142:199
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to commence when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
B.
 145-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-5
142:200
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
 145-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Jamestown.
 145-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report
entitled the "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Jamestown of
Chautauqua County," dated December 1977, with Flood Insurance Rate
Maps enumerated on Map Index No. 360141 0001-0006, dated June 1,
1978, and with accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps
enumerated on Map Index No. 360141 0001-0006, dated June 1, 1978. The
Flood Insurance Study and maps are declared to be a part of this chapter
and are on file at the Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk's office.
 145-8. Interpretation; conflicts with other provisions.
 145-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted
or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a
violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, Penalties. Each day of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
City of Jamestown from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
A. This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood
Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all
previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
eligibility for flood insurance.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standards shall govern.
 145-6 FIRES, OPEN  145-9
142:201
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
 145-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
of Jamestown, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
 145-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-10
142:202
ARTICLE IV
Administration
 145-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
 145-12. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or
any other development within the area of special flood hazard as established
in  145-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the local administrator and may include but not be limited
to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question and existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing.
A. Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
(1) The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor, including basement or cellar, of all structures.
(2) The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
(3) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
 145-14C(1).
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in  145-15.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing
by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the local administrator a certificate of the elevation of the lowest floor
or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the
same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the
floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and
certified by the same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission
and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
 145-11 FIRES, OPEN  145-12
142:203
 145-13. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
(1) Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the area of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
(a) If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
(4) Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of  145-14E, Encroachments.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with  145-7, Basis for
establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the local administrator
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to  145-14D(4), in order to administer
 145-15, Specific standards, and  145-16, Floodways.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement or cellar.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed.
 145-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-13
142:204
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in ㎣ 145-14
and 145-15.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter, including variances, when granted, and
certificates of compliance.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
(1) The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict between the
limits of the federally identified areas of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
(2) Base flood elevation data established pursuant to  145-7 and/or
Subsection B above, when available, shall be used to accurately
delineate the areas of special flood hazard.
(3) The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the areas of special flood hazard when base flood
elevations are not available.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject
to the penalties described in  145-9 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local
administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in  145-9 of this chapter.
G. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
 145-13 FIRES, OPEN  145-13
142:205
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have, upon completion, a certificate of compliance issued
by the local administrator.
(3) All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to Subsection G and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic
information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
(4) No certificate of compliance under this section shall be issued until
receipt by the City of Jamestown of an administrative fee of $10 for
each certificate requested. [Added 2-14-1994]
 145-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-13
142:206
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
 145-14. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
 145-14 FIRES, OPEN  145-14
142:207
 145-15. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in  145-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, and  145-13B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
E. Encroachments.
(1) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the areas
of special flood hazard set forth in  145-13A(3). This may require
the submission of additional technical data to assist in the
determination.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available pursuant to  145-13B or Subsection D(4) and no
floodway has been determined, the cumulative effects of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard where floodway data is provided
or available pursuant to  145-13B, the requirements of  145-16,
Floodways, shall apply.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any resident structure shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.
(2) Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
 145-14 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-15
142:208
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the structure
is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located
below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(1) If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically (without
human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) If the structure is to be floodproofed:
(a) A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/
or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice to make the structure watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
 145-15 FIRES, OPEN  145-15
142:209
 145-16. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
"floodways." (See definition in  145-5.) The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing
additional threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is
available for a particular site as provided by ㎣ 145-7 and 145-13B, all
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development, are prohibited within the limits of the floodway
unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy; and
(b) A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
shall certify the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level,
to which the structure is floodproofed.
C. The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such
certificates noted in this section.
D. Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without base
flood elevations. New construction or substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation as
may be determined in  145-13B or two feet above the highest adjacent
grade where no elevation data is available.
(1) New construction or substantial improvements of structures,
including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
 145-15 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-16
142:210
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
 145-16 FIRES, OPEN  145-16
142:211

ARTICLE VI
Variances
 145-17. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Code of the City of
Jamestown shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments of and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
 145-17 FIRES, OPEN  145-17
142:213
 145-18. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and the
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
 145-17D have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
 145-17 JAMESTOWN CODE  145-18
142:214
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
 145-18 FIRES, OPEN  145-18
142:215
Chapter 149
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 149-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Freshwater Wetlands Protection
Ordinance of the City of Jamestown."
 149-2. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of the City of Jamestown to preserve,
protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and the benefits derived
therefrom, to prevent the despoliation and destruction of freshwater
wetlands and to regulate the development of such wetlands in order to
secure the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands consistent with the
general welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the City of Jamestown. It is further declared to be the policy
of the City of Jamestown to exercise its authority pursuant to Article 24 of
the State Environmental Conservation Law, as such Article may from time
to time be amended.
 149-3. Findings.
A. The freshwater wetlands located in the City of Jamestown are
invaluable resources for flood protection, wildlife habitat, open space
and water resources.
B. Considerable acreage of freshwater wetlands in the City of Jamestown
has been lost, despoiled or impaired by unregulated draining, dredging,
filling, excavating, building, pollution or other acts inconsistent with
the natural uses of such areas. Other freshwater wetlands are in
jeopardy of being lost, despoiled or impaired by such unregulated acts.
C. Recurrent flooding aggravated or caused by the loss of freshwater
wetlands has serious effects upon natural ecosystems.
D. Freshwater wetlands conservation is a matter of City concern.
E. Any loss of freshwater wetlands deprives the people of the City of
Jamestown of some or all of the many and multiple benefits to be
derived from wetlands, as follows:
 145-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-3
142:216
 149-4. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meaning given herein:
ADJACENT AREA  Any land in the City of Jamestown immediately adjacent
to a freshwater wetland lying within 100 feet or any such greater or lesser
distance as determined by the City of Jamestown, measured horizontally, of
the boundary of a freshwater wetland.
AGENCY  The Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
APPLICANT  Any person who files an application for any permit issued by
the agency pursuant to this chapter, and includes the agent of the owner or
a contract vendee.
BOARD  The Freshwater Wetlands Appeals Board established by Article
24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
(1) Flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage
capacity of freshwater wetlands.
(2) Wildlife habitats, by providing breeding, nesting and feeding
grounds and cover for many forms of wildlife, wildfowl and
shorebirds, including migratory wildfowl and rare species.
(3) Protection of subsurface water resources, and provision for
valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
(4) Recreation, by providing areas for hunting, fishing, boating, hiking,
bird-watching, photography, camping and other uses.
(5) Pollution treatment, by serving as biological and chemical oxidation
basins.
(6) Erosion control, by serving as sedimentation areas and filtering
basins, absorbing silt and organic matter and protecting channels
and harbors.
(7) Education and scientific research, by providing readily accessible
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training
and education resources.
(8) Open space and aesthetic appreciation.
(9) Sources of nutrients in freshwater food cycles and nursery
grounds, and sanctuaries for freshwater fish.
F. Regulation of freshwater wetlands, in accordance with the agricultural
exemption established in  149-5 hereof, is consistent with the
legitimate interests of farmers and other landowners to graze and
water livestock, make reasonable use of water resources, harvest
natural products of the wetlands, selectively cut timber and otherwise
engage in the use of land for agricultural production.
 149-3 FIRES, OPEN  149-4
142:217
BOUNDARIES OF A FRESHWATER WETLAND  The outer limit of the
vegetation specified in Subsections A and B of the definition of "freshwater
wetlands" of this section and of the waters specified in Subsection C of such
definition.
CITY  The City of Jamestown.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS  Lands and waters lying within the boundaries
of the City of Jamestown, as shown on a freshwater wetlands map, which
contain any or all of the following:
Lands and submerged lands commonly called "marshes," "swamps,"
"sloughs," "bogs" and "flats" supporting aquatic or semiaquatic
vegetation of the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees, which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(Acer rubrum), willows (Salix species), black spruce (Picea
mariana), swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), red ash (Fraxinus
pennsylvanica), American elm (Ulmus americana) and larch (Larix
laricina).
(1)
Wetland shrubs, which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
species), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bog rosemary
(Andromeda glaucophylla) and leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne
calyculata).
(2)
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
species), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria
species), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus
species), reed (Phragmites communis), wild rice (Zizania aquatica),
burreeds (Sparganium species), purple loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water
plantain (Alisma plantago-aquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating-leaved vegetation, including, among others, water
lily (Nymphaea odorata), water shield (Brasenia schreberi) and
spatterdock (Nuphar species).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemna species), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and
watermeal (Wolffia species).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation, which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a
competitive advantage over other open land vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex species), rushes (Juncus species),
cattails (Typha species), rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), reed
canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea), swamp loosestrife (Decodon
verticillatus) and spike rush (Eleocharis species).
(6)
A.
 149-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-4
142:218
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP  A map on which are indicated the
boundaries of any freshwater wetland and which has been filed with the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of Jamestown by the State
Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to  24-0301 of the
State Environmental Conservation Law, as such map may from time to time
be amended.[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT  A city.
PARTY IN INTEREST  The applicant, the agency, the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, each local government in which the regulated
activity or any part thereof is located, and any person who appears and
wishes to be a party in interest at the public hearing held pursuant to
 149-7 of this chapter.
PERSON  Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate
or one or more individuals, and any unit of government or agency or
subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION  The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may
be injurious to humans, plants, animals or property.
Bog mat vegetation, including, among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum species), bog rosemary (Andromeda glaucophylla),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), pitcher plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) and cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium
oxycoccos).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamogeton species), naiads (Naias species), bladderworts
(Utricularia species), wild cherry (Vallisneria americana), coontail
(Ceratophyllum demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum species),
muckgrass (Chara species), stonewort (Nitella species),
waterweeds (Elodea species) and water smartweed (Polygonum
amphibium).
(8)
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do
not exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six feet, and provided
further that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention.
B.
Lands and waters enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as
set forth herein in Subsection A and dead vegetation as set forth
in Subsection B, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation.
C.
The waters overlying the areas as set forth in Subsections A and B and
the lands underlying Subsection C.
D.
 149-4 FIRES, OPEN  149-4
142:219
PROJECT  Any action which may result in direct or indirect physical
impact on a freshwater wetland, including but not limited to any regulated
activity.
REGULATED ACTIVITY  Any form of draining, dredging, excavation,
removal of soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate from any
freshwater wetland, either directly or indirectly; any form of dumping,
filling or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill
of any kind, either directly or indirectly; erecting any structures or roads
or the driving of pilings or the placing of any other obstructions, whether
or not changing the ebb and flow of the water; any form of pollution,
including but not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall,
discharging sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes directly into
or so as to drain into a freshwater wetland; that portion of any subdivision of
land that involves any land in any freshwater wetland or adjacent area; and
any other activity which substantially impairs any of the several functions
served by freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which are
set forth in  149-3 of this chapter.
SELECTIVE CUTTING  The annual or periodic removal of trees,
individually or in small groups, in order to realize the yield and establish
a new crop and to improve the forest, which removal does not involve the
total elimination of one or more particular species of trees.
STATE  The State of New York.
STATE AGENCY  Any state department, bureau, commission, board or
other agency, public authority or public benefit corporation.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND  Any division of land into two or more lots,
parcels or sites, whether adjoining or not, for the purpose of sale, lease,
license or any form of separate ownership or occupancy (including any
grading, road construction, installation of utilities or other improvements
or any other land use and development preparatory or incidental to any
such division) by any person or by any other person controlled by, under
common control with or controlling such person or by any group of persons
acting in concert as part of a common scheme or plan. Subdivision of land
shall include any map, plat or other plan of division of land, whether or
not previously filed. Subdivision of land shall not include the lease of land
for hunting and fishing and other open space recreation uses and shall not
include the division of land by bona fide gift, devise or inheritance.
 149-5. Permit required; exceptions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall
conduct a regulated activity in any freshwater wetland or adjacent area
unless such person has first obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. No permit under this chapter shall be required for:
(1) The deposition or removal of the natural products of freshwater
wetlands and adjacent areas by recreational or commercial fishing,
 149-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-5
142:220
shellfishing, aquaculture, hunting or trapping where otherwise
legally permitted and regulated.
(2) The activities of farmers and other landowners in grazing and
watering livestock, making reasonable use of water resources,
harvesting natural products of wetlands or adjacent areas,
selective cutting of timber, draining land or wetlands for growing
agricultural products and otherwise engaging in the use of
wetlands or other land for growing agricultural products, except
that structures not required for enhancement or maintenance of
the agricultural productivity of the land and any filling activities
shall not be excluded hereunder. Each farmer or other landowner
who intends to conduct an otherwise regulated activity shall notify
the agency, in writing, prior to conducting the activity of his or her
intention to engage in such activity, stating the approximate
acreage of freshwater wetland or adjacent area affected, the
location thereof, the methods to be employed and the uses to be
made of such land. A soil and water conservation plan prepared by
a Soil and Water Conservation District and filed with the agency
shall be deemed sufficient notification for the purposes of this
subsection.
(3) Public health activities, orders and regulations of the State
Department of Health and the County Department of Health
undertaken in compliance with  24-0701, Subdivision 5, of the
State Environmental Conservation Law.
(4) Activities subject to the review jurisdiction of the State Public
Service Commission or the New York State Board on Electric
Generation Siting and the Environment under Article VII or Article
VIII of the State Public Service Law, respectively. The standards
and restrictions of this law will be applied by said bodies in
determining whether to issue a certificate of environmental
compatibility and public need under such Articles.
(5) Any actual and ongoing emergency activity which is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life or property or
the protection or preservation of natural resource values. Such
emergency activities include, for example: search and rescue
operations; preventive or remedial activities related to large-scale
contamination of streams or other bodies of water; floods,
hurricanes and other storms; and public health concerns. Within
five days of the end of such an emergency involving the
undertaking of any activity which otherwise would be treated as a
regulated activity under this chapter, the person chiefly responsible
for undertaking such emergency activity shall send a written
statement to the agency setting forth the pertinent facts regarding
such emergency, including an explanation of the life, property or
resource values such activity was designed to protect or preserve.
 149-5 FIRES, OPEN  149-5
142:221
 149-6. Application for permit; processing.
(6) Any activity located in a freshwater wetland where such wetland is
located in more than one city.
(7) Ordinary maintenance and repair of existing structures or
improved areas which does not involve expansion or substantial
restoration, reconstruction, rehabilitation or modification,
including but not limited to bridges, roads, highways, railroad
beds, bulkheads, docks, piers, pilings or paved streets.
(8) Any land use, improvement or development for which final approval
shall have been obtained prior to September 1, 1975, from the City
of Jamestown. As used in this subsection, the term "final approval"
shall mean:
(a) In the case of the subdivision of land, approval as used in  32
of the General City Law.
(b) In the case of a site plan not involving the subdivision of land,
approval by the appropriate body or office of the City of
Jamestown of the site plan.
(c) In those cases not covered by Subsection B(8)(a) and (b) above,
the issuance of a building permit or other authorization for the
commencement of the use, improvement or development for
which such permit or authorization was issued.
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity requiring a permit under this chapter upon any freshwater
wetland or adjacent area shall file an application for a permit with the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown.
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall immediately
forward such application to the agency. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. An application for a permit shall be filed by the applicant on a form
prescribed by the agency.
(1) Such application shall set forth the purpose, character and extent
of the proposed regulated activity. The application shall include a
detailed description of the regulated activity, a map showing the
area of freshwater wetland or adjacent area directly affected, with
the location of the proposed regulated activity thereon, a deed or
other legal description describing the subject property and such
additional information as the agency deems sufficient to enable it
to make the findings and determinations required under this
chapter.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names of the
owners of record of lands adjacent to the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area upon which the project is to be undertaken and the
 149-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-6
142:222
names of known claimants of water rights of whom the applicant
has notice which relate to any land within or within 100 feet of the
boundary of the property on which the proposed regulated activity
will be located.
(3) An application shall not be deemed to be completed or received
until the agency determines that all such information, including
any additional information requested, has been supplied in a
complete and satisfactory form.
C. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of
Jamestown shall cause a copy of such completed application to be
mailed to all local governments where the proposed activity or any part
thereof is located. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
D. Notice of application.
(1) Within five days of its receipt of a completed application for a
permit regarding a proposed regulated activity, the agency shall
provide the applicant with a notice of application which the
applicant shall publish at his or her own expense at least once in
each of at least two newspapers having a general circulation in the
City of Jamestown.
(2) Said notice of application shall be in a form prescribed by the
agency and shall:
(a) Specify that persons wishing to object to the application should
file a notice of objection by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of objection to the
application, with the agency.
(b) Specify that if no notices of objection are timely filed or if the
agency determines that the proposed activity is of such a minor
nature as to not affect or endanger the balance of systems
within any freshwater wetland, then the agency, in its
discretion, may determine that a hearing is not necessary and
dispense with the public hearing.
(c) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of
Jamestown. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the agency
may, in its discretion, dispense with the requirement for a notice of
application and require a notice of hearing pursuant to Subsection
F of this section.
E. Public hearing.
 149-6 FIRES, OPEN  149-6
142:223
(1) No sooner than 30 days and not later than 60 days after its receipt
of a completed application for a permit regarding a proposed
regulated activity and after the publication of a notice of
application pursuant to Subsection D of this section, the agency
shall hold a public hearing on such application at a suitable location
in the City of Jamestown, which hearing shall be held pursuant to
the provisions of  149-7 of this chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section,
where no notice of objection to the notice of application published
pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall have been filed within
the time specified by that notice or where the agency determines
that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature as not to affect
or endanger the balance of systems within any freshwater wetland,
the agency may, in its discretion, dispense with such hearing.
Where the agency finds that a public hearing is not necessary, it
shall publish a decision setting forth its reasons therefor, which
decision shall be a matter of public record and shall be mailed to
each local government where the proposed regulated activity or
any part thereof will be located. Public notice of such decision that
a public hearing is not necessary shall be provided in the same
manner as notice of application set forth in Subsection D of this
section.
F. Notice of hearing.
(1) The agency shall within 21 days of receipt of a completed
application provide the applicant with a notice of hearing which the
applicant shall publish at his or her own expense at least 15 days
prior to the date set for the hearing at least once in each of at least
two newspapers of general circulation in the City of Jamestown.
(2) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the agency
shall, by certified mail, provide a notice of hearing to each local
government within whose boundaries the proposed regulated
activity or any portion thereof will be located.
(3) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the agency
shall, by certified mail, provide notice of hearing to all owners of
record of land adjacent to the affected freshwater wetland or
adjacent area and to all known claimants of water rights of whom
the applicant has notice which relate to any land within or within
100 feet of the boundary of the property on which the proposed
regulated activity will be located.
(4) The notice of hearing shall:
(a) State the name of the applicant.
(b) Specify the location and outline the scope of the proposed
regulated activity.
 149-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-6
142:224
 149-7. Public hearing.
(c) Specify the date, time and place of the public hearing on the
application.
(d) Specify that persons wishing to be parties in interest and
eligible to be heard at such public hearing, if any, should file a
notice of appearance by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of support of, opposition to or
interest in the application, with the agency.
(e) Specify that any person who wishes to be a party in interest
without filing a notice of appearance may do so by appearing at
the public hearing and indicating his or her desire to be a party
in interest, if a public hearing is held.
(f) Specify that if no notice of appearance is timely filed by any
party in interest and if the applicant waives any public hearing,
then the public hearing may be canceled by the agency.
(g) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of
Jamestown. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
G. The agency shall make the application, including all documents and
maps associated with it, available for public inspection at the office of
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of
Jamestown. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
H. If no timely notice of appearance has been filed as provided in the
notice of hearing published pursuant to Subsection F of this section and
the applicant waives, in writing, any public hearing on his or her
application, the agency may dispense with a public hearing and in such
instance shall provide public notice of the cancellation of the hearing.
I. For any notice canceling a hearing which has been scheduled, notice
shall be given on the same basis as the notice of public hearing
provided in Subsection F of this section.
J. The agency may establish permit fees to assist in its implementation of
this chapter.
A. Any public hearing held on a permit application received under this
chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the
agency. The hearing officer shall have full authority to control the
conduct and procedure of the hearing and shall be responsible that a
complete record of the hearing be kept. The public hearing shall be held
within the City of Jamestown.
B. Parties in interest.
 149-6 FIRES, OPEN  149-7
142:225
 149-8. Decision on permit application.
(1) Any person may appear as a party in interest, notwithstanding the
failure of such person to file a timely notice of appearance, by
appearing at the hearing and making known his or her desire to be
a party in interest. Persons who are not parties in interest may be
allowed to participate in the hearing where the hearing officer finds
that such participation would be in the public interest.
(2) All parties in interest shall be afforded an opportunity to present
oral and written arguments on issues of law and policy and an
opportunity to call witnesses in their behalf and to present oral and
written evidence on issues of fact. The hearing officer shall permit
the parties in interest to cross-examine witnesses but may limit
such cross-examination to avoid the introduction of irrelevant or
repetitious material in the record of the hearing.
A. Where a public hearing has been held regarding a permit application,
the agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or without
conditions, or deny the application. The decision by the agency to issue
or deny a permit after public hearing shall be based on the record of the
hearing and shall be made, in writing, within 30 days of the agency's
receipt of the hearing record.
B. Where no public hearing regarding a permit application has been held,
either because a hearing was determined not to be necessary pursuant
to  149-6E(2) of this chapter or because no notice of appearance was
filed with regard to the public hearing and a hearing was canceled
pursuant to  149-6H of this chapter, the agency shall compile an
official file consisting of documents submitted by the applicant and any
additional documents relied on by the agency with respect to the
application. The agency may also take notice of general, technical or
scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of the agency. Any
document made part of such official file shall be available for inspection
by the applicant and any interested member of the public. On the basis
of such file, the agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or
without conditions, deny the application or order a public hearing to be
held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The decision by the
agency to issue or deny a permit or to order that a hearing be held shall
be based on the official file and shall be made, in writing, within 30 days
of its completion of the official file and, in any event, within 60 days of
its receipt of a completed application, provided that in the case where
there have been no objections filed regarding a proposed project, the
issuance of a permit shall be deemed to be a written decision by the
agency.
C. A copy of the decision of the agency on each application for a permit
under this chapter shall be mailed by the agency as soon as practicable
following such decision to the applicant and to each local government
within whose boundaries the proposed regulated activity or any portion
 149-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-8
142:226
 149-9. Standards for permit decisions.
 149-10. Permit conditions.
thereof is located and, if a public hearing has been held regarding the
application, to each party in interest.
A. In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the agency shall
consider the effect of the proposed activity with reference to the public
health and welfare, fishing, flood, hurricane and storm dangers and
protection or enhancement of the several functions of the freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth in
 149-3 of this chapter.
B. No permit shall be issued by the agency pursuant to this chapter unless
the agency shall find that:
(1) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the policy of this
chapter to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and
the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the despoilation and
destruction of freshwater wetlands and to regulate the
development of such wetlands in order to secure the natural
benefits of freshwater wetlands, consistent with the general
welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the City.
(2) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the land use
regulations applicable in the City of Jamestown pursuant to
 24-0903 of Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation
Law.
(3) The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public
health and welfare.
(4) The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary.
(5) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent
area.
C. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed
regulated activity will be in accord with the standards set forth in this
section.
D. Duly filed written notice by the state or any agency or subdivision
thereof to the agency that the state or any such agency or subdivision is
in the process of acquiring the affected freshwater wetland on which a
proposed regulated activity would be located by negotiation or
condemnation shall be sufficient basis for denial of a permit for such
regulated activity. Such notice may be provided at any time prior to the
agency's decision to issue or deny a permit for the regulated activity.
 149-8 FIRES, OPEN  149-10
142:227
 149-11. General powers of agency.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the agency
shall have the following powers:
 149-12. Other laws and regulations.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are necessary to assure
the preservation and protection of affected freshwater wetlands and to
assure compliance with the policy and provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the agency's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
B. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following
conditions:
(1) The agency shall have the right to inspect the project from time to
time.
(2) The permit shall expire on a date certain.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the agency of the date on which
project construction is to begin at least five days in advance of such
date.
(4) The agency's permit shall be prominently displayed at the project
site during the undertaking of the activities authorized by the
permit.
C. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application its findings and reasons for all conditions attached to
any permit.
A. To appoint officers, agents and employees, and to prescribe their duties
and qualifications and fix their compensation.
B. To adopt, amend and repeal, after public hearing (except in the case of
rules and regulations that relate to the organization or internal
management of the agency), such rules and regulations consistent with
this chapter, as it deems necessary to administer this chapter, and to do
any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose and
policies of this chapter.
C. To contract for professional and technical assistance and advice.
D. To hold hearings and subpoena witnesses in the exercise of its powers,
functions and duties provided for by this chapter.
A. To the greatest extent practicable, any public hearing held pursuant to
 149-7 of this chapter shall be incorporated with any public hearing
required by or pursuant to the New York State Town Law, Village Law,
General City Law, General Municipal Law or Environmental
 149-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-12
142:228
 149-13. Bonding requirements.
 149-14. Suspension or revocation of permits.
 149-15. Penalties for offenses.
Conservation Law relating to approvals or permits otherwise required
for the undertaking of regulated activities on the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area in question.
B. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove any person's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited
to the acquisition of any other required permit or approval.
A. The agency may require that, prior to commencement of work under
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall post a
bond with the agency, in an amount determined by the agency,
conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the terms of such permit
and for the indemnification of the City of Jamestown for restoration
costs resulting from failure to so comply. Such bond shall be issued by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and shall be in
favor of the City of Jamestown. It shall remain in effect until the agency
certifies that the work has been completed in compliance with the
terms of the permit or the bond is released by the agency or a substitute
bond is provided.
B. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application its findings and reasons for imposing a bond
pursuant to this section.
A. The agency may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter where it finds that the permittee has not complied with any or
all terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the
permit or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in
the application.
B. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application its findings and reasons for revoking or suspending a
permit pursuant to this section.
A. Administrative sanctions. Any person who violates, disobeys or
disregards any provision of this chapter, including any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
by the agency pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the people of
the state for a civil penalty of not to exceed $3,000 for every such
violation, to be assessed, after a hearing or opportunity to be heard
upon due notice and with the rights to specifications of the charges and
representation by counsel at such hearing, by the agency. Such penalty
may be recovered in an action brought by the Attorney General at the
request and in the name of the agency in any court of competent
 149-12 FIRES, OPEN  149-15
142:229
 149-16. Enforcement.
 149-17. Review and appeal.
jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or comprised by the
agency before the matter has been referred to the Attorney General,
and such penalty may be released or compromised and any action
commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued by
the Attorney General with the consent of the agency. In addition, the
agency shall have power, following a hearing held in conformance
with the procedures set forth in  71-1709 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law, to direct the violator to cease his or her violation
of this chapter and to restore the affected freshwater wetland to its
condition prior to the violation, insofar as that is possible, within a
reasonable time and under the supervision of the agency. Any such
order of the agency shall be enforceable in an action brought by the
Attorney General at the request and in the name of the agency in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Any civil penalty or order issued by the
agency pursuant to this subdivision shall be reviewable in a proceeding
pursuant to Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person who violates an order, permit or rule or
regulation of the agency regulating freshwater wetlands and adjacent
areas pursuant to this chapter shall, in addition, for the first offense be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000; for a second and each subsequent offense, he or she shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000
nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of not less than 15
days nor more than six months, or both. Instead of these punishments,
any offender may be punishable by being ordered by the court to
restore the affected freshwater wetland to its condition prior to the
offense, insofar as that is possible. The court shall specify a reasonable
time for the completion of such restoration, which shall be effected
under the supervision of the agency. Each offense shall be a separate
and distinct offense and, in the case of a continuing offense, each day's
continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
A. The Attorney General, upon his or her own initiative or upon complaint
of the agency, shall prosecute persons alleged to have violated any such
order of the agency pursuant to this chapter.
B. The agency shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provisions of this chapter.
A. Any decision or order of the agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person affected thereby, including but not limited
to any owner of the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident
or citizen of the City of Jamestown, by the Board in accordance with
Title 11 of Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law,
 149-15 JAMESTOWN CODE  149-17
142:230
 149-18. When effective. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
This chapter shall take effect upon the filing with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown of the final
Freshwater Wetlands Map by the State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to  24-0301 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law applicable to any or all lands within the City of
Jamestown.
Chapter 155
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices  See
Ch. 97.
Bingo  See Ch. 112.
provided that such review is commenced by the filing with the Board of
a notice of review within 30 days after service of such order or notice
of such decision given, as the case may be.
B. Any party to any proceeding before the agency may make an appeal to
the Board in accordance with Title 11 of Article 24 of the State
Environmental Conservation Law from any order or decision of the
agency or any officer or employee thereof issued or made pursuant to or
within the scope of this chapter, provided that such appeal is
commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice of appeal within 30
days after service of such order or after notice of such decision given,
as the case may be.
C. Any decision or order of the agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person, including but not limited to any owner of
the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident or citizen of the
City of Jamestown, in accordance with Article 78 of the State Civil
Practice Law and Rules, provided that such review is commenced
within 30 days of the filing of such decision or order. The limitation
upon the availability of such remedy as prescribed in  7801 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules shall not be applicable to the applications for
review of determinations and orders made pursuant to this chapter.
D. The institution of a judicial proceeding to review a determination or
order of the agency shall preclude the institution of a proceeding before
the Board to review such a determination or order. The availability of
such review by the Board shall not affect the right of any person to seek
review of a determination of the Agency as provided in Article 78 of the
State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
 149-17 GAMES OF CHANCE  149-18
155:231
 155-1. Authorization; conduct subject to regulations. [Amended
9-12-1988]
Pursuant to Subdivision 2 of  9 of Article 1 of the State Constitution, it
shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in  186 of Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to
conduct games of chance as such are defined by Subdivision 3 of  186
of the General Municipal Law, as amended by Chapter 46 of the Laws of
1988, within the territorial limits of the City, subject to the provisions of
this chapter, Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law,  186 of the General
Municipal Law, as amended by Chapter 46 of the Laws of 1988, and the
rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
 155-2. License required. [Amended 9-12-1988]
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 9-A of General Municipal Law shall
conduct such games of chance or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting such games of chance or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
 155-3. Rental of premises.
No games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profit derived from the
operation of such game.
 155-4. Purchase of supplies and equipment. [Amended 9-12-1988]
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or
equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games
of chance from other than a supplier licensed under the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board.
 155-5. Limitation of prize money; disposition of proceeds.
A. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $100, except that for
merchandise wheels, no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of
$250 and for bell jars, no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of
$500. No single wager shall exceed $2. [Amended 1-30-1995]
B. The accounting for games of chance proceeds, the filing of required
financial statements and the disposition of games of chance proceeds to
the licensee and City of Jamestown shall be governed by the rules and
regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board, and said
rules and regulations as from time to time amended are hereby
incorporated by reference herein.
 149-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  155-5
155:232
 155-6. Management and operation.
 155-7. Additional rules incorporated.
The rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering
Board, as from time to time amended, are hereby incorporated by reference
and made a part of this Chapter 155 as though more fully put forth herein.
 155-8. Penalties for offenses.
The unauthorized conduct of any game of chance and any willful violation
of any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
Chapter 160
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works  See Ch. 68.
Open fires  See Ch. 142.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Recycling  See Ch. 224.
C. No series of prizes on any one game of chance shall aggregate more
than $1,000 for any one occasion as the term "one occasion" is defined
by Subdivision 14 of Section 186 of the General Municipal Law, as
amended by Chapter 46 of the Laws of 1988, except that for bell jars, no
series of prizes for any one game of chance shall aggregate more than
$3,000 and for merchandise wheels, no series of prizes on any one
game of chance shall aggregate more than $10,000. [Amended
1-30-1995]
A. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game of chance.
B. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of chance, except that the
compensation of bookkeepers and accounts for preparing the quarterly
summary statement required for games of chance operations shall be
$20 per statement.
 155-5 GAMES OF CHANCE  155-8
155:233

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-26-1962 as Ch. 12 of the 1962 Code]
 160-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE  Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
OFFENSIVE AND WASTE MATERIALS  Any sewage, fecal matter,
manure, offal, garbage, dead animals, meat wastes, blood, tankage, brine,
urine or any putrescible organic matter or the contents of privies, cesspools,
septic tanks or chemical toilets, either in liquid or solid state, or any other
substance or liquid dangerous or prejudicial to health.
PRIVATE SOLID WASTE HAULER  Any person or firm who transports
solid waste, as that term is defined in this section, for a fee or any other
form of remuneration.[Added 11-12-1996]
RUBBISH  Household or business wastes, including paper, rags, glass,
cans, metals, ashes, etc., but not including garbage.
SOLID WASTE  Putrescible materials or substances discarded or rejected
as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess by the owners at the time
of such discard or rejection, organic waste material, both animal and
vegetable, wastepaper, cardboard, cardboard boxes and containers and all
other waste material not specifically defined, but excluding recyclables,
white goods, tires, hazardous waste, building materials, trees, tree parts,
shrubs, grass clippings and related yard waste, commercial waste,
construction and demolition debris, furniture and all other materials and
substances which are not accepted by the Chautauqua County Landfill for
disposal.[Added 11-12-1996]
 160-2. Disposal not to constitute nuisance.
No person shall permit, deposit, store or hold any offensive material on any
premises or place unless such material is so treated, screened, covered or
placed in such manner as not to create a nuisance detrimental to health,
nor shall such offensive material be discharged into any waters of the City
or on to the surface of the ground in such a manner as to create a nuisance
detrimental to health.
 160-3. Burial.
No person shall dispose of any offensive material by burial or by any other
means so as to endanger or pollute any source of water supply.
 160-1 GAMES OF CHANCE  160-4
155:235
 160-4. Accumulations unlawful.
Every dwelling and every part thereof, including the lot on which such
dwelling is located, shall be kept reasonably free from any accumulation of
garbage, rubbish and filth.
 160-5. Disposal on highways or alleys.
No person shall place, deposit or leave in any highway or alley within
the City any rubbish or waste material, except that such rubbish or waste
material may be placed in a metallic container with close-fitting cover
thereon. No rubbish or other waste material shall be allowed by the owner
thereof to remain eight hours after such deposit or placing, and when such
waste materials and similar rubbish shall be left and deposited for a period
of more than 48 hours in any alley or highway of the City, the Director of
Public Works is authorized to remove and dispose of the same and charge
the expense of such removal and disposal to the owner or other person
responsible for the placing and leaving of such rubbish or waste material.
 160-6. Waste containers; placement of wastes.
 160-7. Dumping on lands abutting lake.
Dumping, filling or construction on any lands abutting the outlet of
Chautauqua Lake within the City is prohibited unless a permit for such is
first obtained from the City Building Inspector.
 160-8. Transportation of offensive materials and rubbish.
A. All containers for storage of offensive material shall completely confine
the material in such a way that it is inaccessible to insects, rodents,
dogs and other animals and shall be kept in an inoffensive and sanitary
condition at all times.
B. Each householder within the City shall provide himself with tight metal
or plastic garbage receptacles fitted with covers so constructed that
neither water nor snow may enter the same. Such covers, when the
receptacle is in use, shall be kept on the receptacle. Such receptacles
shall be kept upon the ground level, easily accessible to the garbage
collectors. No garbage shall be placed in such receptacle unless having
first been thoroughly drained and securely wrapped. Such receptacles
shall not be larger than a ninety-five-gallon capacity. It shall be the duty
of the collector, his agents and servants to report to the County Board of
Health the names of any persons who fail to comply strictly with the
provisions of this subsection. Upon the failure on the part of any person
to observe the regulations prescribed by this subsection within 48
hours after notice from the County Board of Health to comply with the
same, such person shall be guilty of violating this subsection.
[Amended 8-10-1970; 2-27-2017]
 160-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  160-8
155:236
 160-9. Littering prohibited.
A. No person shall remove or transport or permit the removal or
transportation of any offensive materials or rubbish except in such a
manner as will prevent the creation of a nuisance or the loss or
discharge of such material in any such place. All such material shall be
so handled, covered or treated that it cannot escape or be accessible to
rodents, flies or other insects or create a nuisance.
B. All vehicles or implements used in connection with such vehicles shall
be kept in an inoffensive and sanitary condition and when not in use
shall be stored or kept so as not to create a nuisance.
C. Any vehicle used for transporting rubbish, trash or waste materials of
any nature for hire shall be registered by the owner or operator thereof
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk on September 1
of each year, and a permit for the operation of such vehicle shall be
secured from the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. Such
permit shall be carried at all times in the vehicle. The name and address
of the owner or operator of such vehicle shall be printed on the driver's
side of such vehicle in letters at least three inches high. Unregistered
vehicles used for transporting waste, trash or rubbish for hire shall not
be permitted in the City dump. The operation of such vehicles for hire
registered under this subsection shall be subject to such further
regulations as the Director of Public Works may reasonably require.
[Amended 9-2-196920; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. No person shall throw or cast or direct, suffer or permit any agent,
employee or person in his charge to throw, cast or place any refuse or
rubbish of any kind whatsoever in any street, walk, lawn, path, road,
park or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned
by such person or not, within the City; nor shall any person at any time
sweep any of the aforementioned rubbish or refuse from the sidewalk
into the gutter except as it is permitted for purposes of collection and
except that merchants in the downtown area may sweep refuse into the
gutter between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight only; nor
shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any streams or other
body of water.
B. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the City
any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other
public place or into any occupied premises within the City.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter, drop or spill or permit to
be scattered, dropped or spilled from any vehicle or part thereof or
20.Editor's Note: Former Section 12.11, Permit for collection of human waste, and Section
12.12, Penalty for violation of preceding provisions of chapter, as amended 6-29-1970,
which immediately followed this section, were deleted 12-26-1990.
 160-8 GAMES OF CHANCE  160-9
155:237
 160-10. Penalties for offenses. [Added 10-8-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
receptacle or otherwise any refuse or rubbish of any sort therefrom in
or upon any street or public place.
 160-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  160-10
155:238
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Fees
[Adopted 10-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
 160-11. Placement on public streets or lands.21
No person shall place, throw or deposit or cause to be placed, thrown or
deposited any solid waste, recyclable material, hazardous waste or white
goods upon any public sidewalk, street, alley, parkway, lane, gutter, park
or any other public place in the City of Jamestown or upon the banks
of any waterway running through or adjacent to the City of Jamestown;
provided, however, that a person desiring to receive the solid waste and
recyclable material collection and disposal services of the City of Jamestown
may place, at curbside in front of the parcel of real property wherein such
person resides, solid waste as defined herein in sanitation bags as defined
herein and recyclable materials as defined herein for pickup by the City of
Jamestown not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the appointed day
for the pickup of said solid waste and recyclable materials by the City of
Jamestown.
 160-12. Placement on private property.
No person shall place, throw, deposit or cause to be placed, thrown or
deposited any solid waste, recyclable material, hazardous waste or white
goods upon the private property of another with or without the consent of
the owner or occupant of such private property; provided, however, that a
person residing in a dwelling unit situate upon a parcel of real property
owned by another who desires to receive the solid waste and recyclable
material collection and disposal services of the City of Jamestown may
place, at curbside in front of the parcel of such real property wherein such
person resides, solid waste as defined herein in sanitation bags as defined
herein and recyclable materials as defined herein for pickup by the City of
Jamestown not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the appointed day
for the pickup of said solid waste and recyclable materials by the City of
Jamestown.
 160-13. Placement in bags required.
No person shall place, at curbside for collection by the City of Jamestown,
any solid waste as defined herein which is not contained in a sanitation bag
as defined herein.
 160-14. Placement for collection limited to property served.
No person shall place, throw, deposit or cause to be placed, thrown or
deposited any solid waste, recyclable material, hazardous waste, white
21.Editor's Note: Former ㎣ 160-11 through 160-14, containing provisions relating to solid
waste collection, fees, and disposition of revenues, were repealed 12-20-1993. This
enactment also provided for the renumbering of former ㎣ 160-15 through 160-23 as
㎣ 160-11 through 160-19, respectively.
 160-11 GAMES OF CHANCE  160-14
155:239
goods, shrubs, grass clippings, tree branches or tires into any receptacle,
dumpster or other like or similar container designed for and utilized for
the receipt of solid waste, unless such solid waste, recyclable material,
hazardous waste, white goods, shrubs, grass clippings, tree branches or
tires were originated or were generated upon the real property wherein
such solid waste receptacle, dumpster or other like or similar container is
located.
 160-15. Commingling of recyclables; weight limit of bags.
No person shall commingle with any solid waste placed at curbside for
collection by the City of Jamestown any recyclable materials, nor shall any
person place at curbside for collection by the City of Jamestown any solid
waste the weight of which when placed in a sanitation bag exceeds 40
pounds.
 160-16. License required. [Added 9-28-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992;
amended 11-27-1995; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 11-23-2009; 11-27-2012; 8-28-2017]
No private solid waste hauler shall be permitted or entitled to collect and
transport solid waste in the City of Jamestown without having first obtained
a license to do so from the office of the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk of the City of Jamestown in accordance with Chapter 175 of the
Jamestown City Code. Each licensee shall pay a fee of $200 per annum or
any part thereof, together with $50 for each and every vehicle utilized to
collect and/or transport solid waste. If the solid waste hauler collecting solid
waste from either commercial or residential sources which is stored upon
City property, it shall file with the office of the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk a certificate of insurance, naming the City of Jamestown
as loss payee and as an additional insured, in form acceptable to the office
of the Corporation Counsel and in a minimum amount of $100,000 per
single occurrence and $300,000 per multiple occurrence. For purposes
of this section, a license shall run from September 1 of each year and
shall expire August 31 of the succeeding year. Such private solid waste
hauler license shall be accompanied by a decal for each vehicle utilized to
collect and/or transport solid waste and shall be, at all times, displayed in a
conspicuous place on the left lower corner of the left front window of each
vehicle.
 160-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992; 12-20-1993]
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of ㎣ 160-11, 160-12,
160-13 and 160-14 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not less than 15 days nor more than one year, or both. Any
person convicted of violating the provisions of  160-15 of this article shall
be punished in accord with the provisions of Chapter 224, Recycling, of the
Code of the City of Jamestown.
 160-14 JAMESTOWN CODE  160-18
155:240
 160-18. Construal of provisions.
The disposal and collection of recyclable materials shall be governed by the
provisions of Chapter 224, Recycling, of the Code of the City of Jamestown,
and this article shall not be construed so as to alter, amend, replace or
repeal any of the provisions therein contained.
 160-19. Repealer.
A. All other local laws, ordinances or parts of local laws or ordinances in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
B. Local Law No. 1-1990 is hereby repealed effective January 1, 1992;
provided, however, that the repeal of Local Law No. 1-1990 shall in no
way be deemed to waive or in any way affect the validity of any lien
imposed pursuant to the authority of Local Law No. 1-1990 or of the
claims of the City of Jamestown against any person for unpaid
sanitation fees imposed for the years 1990 and/or 1991 pursuant to the
authority of Local Law No. 1-1990.
 160-18 GAMES OF CHANCE  160-19
155:241
Chapter 165
GASOLINE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135. Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
 165-1. Sign requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or advertise
for sale at retail for use in internal-combustion engines, motor vehicles
or otherwise any gasoline or other petroleum products unless such
seller shall post and keep continuously and conspicuously posted at the
premises where such sale or offer for sale or advertisement for sale of
such products is made signs or placards not less than seven inches in
height and eight inches in width nor more than 12 inches in height and
12 inches in width, stating clearly and legibly in letters and numbers of
uniform size and color with respect to each such gasoline or other
petroleum product the retail selling price or prices per unit thereof, the
combined state and federal tax applicable thereto and the total retail
price including tax to a purchaser or prospective purchaser in three
separate sets of figures, together with the name, trade name, brand,
mark or symbol and grade or quality classification, if any, of such
gasoline or other petroleum products. All letters, figures or numerals of
each sign or placard affixed thereto, marked thereon, imprinted
thereon, placed thereon or embossed thereon shall be at least 1/4 inch
in height, and all of the lines or marks used in the making or forming of
any such letters, figures or numerals which are a part of such signs
shall be at least 1/8 inch in width. The stating of a fractional part of a
figure shall be indicated so that the numerator and denominator are of
equal size and the combined overall size shall be the same as that of a
whole number. If such gasoline or other petroleum products are sold by
the use of or through or from any pump or other device, such sign or
placard shall be inserted in a bracket no more than 12 inches in height
and 12 inches in width attached to such pump or dispensing device
from which such gasoline or other petroleum products are dispensed,
except that the selling price of the products as usually contained in the
face of computing pumps through which such products are dispensed
sufficiently complies with the provisions of this subsection, thus
eliminating the necessity of any additional price, sign or placard. In any
case, such sign or placard shall be so located and placed that it may
easily be seen or read by a purchaser or prospective purchaser of such
products.
B. No other sign or placard stating, referring to or implying the price of
such gasoline or other petroleum products, except a facsimile of the
sign or placard as specified in the preceding Subsection A, shall be
 160-19 JAMESTOWN CODE  165-1
165:242
 165-2. Deceptive selling methods prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or advertise for
sale gasoline or other petroleum products at retail in any manner so as
to deceive or tend to deceive a purchaser or prospective purchaser as to
the price, nature, quality or identity thereof or to sell or offer for sale or
advertise for sale from any pump or other dispensing device any gasoline
or other petroleum product other than that manufactured or distributed by
the manufacturer or distributor marketing such gasoline or other petroleum
products under the name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol affixed to or
contained on such pump or the dispensing device or to mix or adulterate
gasoline or other petroleum products sold or offered for sale or advertised
for sale under a name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol or to substitute
other gasoline or petroleum products therefor.
 165-3. Lead content of gasoline. [Added 6-28-1971; amended
11-15-1971; 3-25-1974; 10-6-1975]
Every gasoline filling station within the City shall offer for sale at retail
gasoline with a lead content no higher than has been prescribed by Federal
Environmental Protection Agency regulations, as amended.22
 165-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 10-8-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, violations of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided by Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 170
LASER POINTING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minors  See Ch. 185.
 170-1. Purpose.
Laser pointing devices emit light amplified by the stimulated emission of
radiation and do have important and valuable uses, particularly in the
medical field. Important and valuable uses notwithstanding, laser pointing
posted or maintained on or within the vicinity of the premises at which
such gasoline or other petroleum products are sold or offered for sale
or advertised for sale by such person, directly or indirectly.
22.Editor's Note: Former Sections 13.5 and 13.6, which immediately followed this section and
dealt with lead content and additives, were deleted 10-6-1975.
 165-1 LASER POINTING DEVICES  170-1
170:243
devices can be misused and, if misused, can cause serious injury or physical
damage. Additionally, minors have been known to use such laser pointing
devices to annoy, harass or menace others and, in particular, law
enforcement officers. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public
safety by ensuring that such devices may be purchased and possessed only
by adults.
 170-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LASER POINTING DEVICE  Any hand-held device which emits light
amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation, which amplified light is
visible to the human eye.
 170-3. Sales to certain persons prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation within the City of Jamestown shall sell, make
available, give or provide a laser pointing device to any person under the
age of 18 years.
 170-4. Prohibited display for sale.
No person, firm or corporation within the City of Jamestown engaged in
the sale of laser pointing devices shall store or display such laser pointing
devices unless such items are contained within a sealed and locked case,
or are located behind the service counter, or in any other manner which
restricts easy access to laser pointing devices by their customers and/or the
general public.
 170-5. Unlawful possession of a laser pointing device.
No person under the age of 18 years shall possess or have in or upon such
person's possession a laser pointing device.
 170-6. Disposal of illegally possessed laser pointing device.
Any laser pointing device seized pursuant to this chapter shall be declared
a public nuisance and shall be disposed of in accordance with the New
York State Penal Law. Any person claiming ownership of such laser pointing
device seized pursuant to the terms of this chapter may apply to the court
for an order preventing the disposal of the laser pointing device seized
and ordering the return of such laser pointing device. The court may order
the laser pointing device resumed at the close of the applicable case if it
is determined that return of such laser pointing device would be in the
interests of justice.
 170-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  170-7
170:244
 170-7. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a
Class A misdemeanor.
 170-8. Severability.
In the event that any provision or portion of this chapter shall for any reason
be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining portions of this chapter.
 170-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect April 1, 1999.
Chapter 175
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems  See Ch. 89.
Amusements and amusement devices  See
Ch. 97.
Auctions and auctioneers  See Ch. 101.
Bicycles  See Ch. 107.
Bingo  See Ch. 112.
Dances and dance halls  See Ch. 120.
Dogs and other animals  See Ch. 125.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Peddling and soliciting  See Ch. 204.
Plumbing  See Ch. 210.
Special sales  See Ch. 229.
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
Sewers  See Ch. 240.
Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Swimming pools  See Ch. 265.
Taxicabs; liveries  See Ch. 274.
Towing  See Ch. 275.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
 175-1. Licenses, fees and bonds required.
No person shall, within the City, engage in any business or do anything
specified in this chapter, without first having obtained a license therefor and
having obtained the permit, filed the bond or paid the license fee or both, as
required by this chapter.
 170-7 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-2
170:245
 175-2. Applicability to public auctions.
This chapter shall not be deemed to affect such sales as are required by law
to be held at public auction.23
 175-3. Schedule of fees. [Amended 9-2-1969; 6-14-1976;
7-28-1986; 12-26-1990]
A. Classification of licenses and permits. [Amended 2-11-1991;
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
(1) The classification of licenses and permits required by this chapter
and the fee term and expiration date therefor shall be as provided
in the following table: [Amended 9-28-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992;
10-24-1994; 11-27-1995 ; 1-25-1999; 12-20-1999;
12-18-2000; 2-24-2003; 11-15-2004; 12-21-2005; 1-30-2006;
11-23-2009; 11-29-2010; 11-27-2012; 11-26-2013;
7-31-2017]
Classification
Permit or
License Fee Term Expiration Date
Amusement device fee License $100 per
machine
Annual June 30
Additional inspection $75 Per
inspection
--
Auction and auctioneers
fee, plus surety bond of
$5,000
1 to 2 occasions License $100 Annual December 31
3 to 10 occasions License $250 Annual December 31
Greater than 10
occasions
License $500 Annual December 31
Billposter License $50 Annual 1 year from date of
issuance
Bowling alley (per lane) License $25 Annual 1 year from date of
issuance
Circus and menagerie License $600 Annual 1 year from date of
issuance
Dance, public License $50 Annual 1 year from date of
issuance
$10 Daily Date of issuance
Electrical Inspector License $325 Annual March 1
23.Editor's Note: Former Section 16.3, Refund for owners or operators of theaters, concert
halls, etc., which immediately followed this section, was deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992.
 175-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-3
170:246
Classification
Permit or
License Fee Term Expiration Date
Electrician Class 1 License $325 Annual March 1
With late penalty
(March 1 to May 1)
License $340 Annual March 1
Electrician Class 2 License $125 Annual March 1
With late penalty
(March 1 to May 1)
License $140 Annual March 1
Electrician license
application fee
-- $30 Per
application
--
Limousines -- -- -- --
Pawnbroker License $300 Annual 1 year from date of
issuance
Peddling and soliciting,
plus surety bond of
$5,000
License $500 Annual December 31
Duplicate license -- $10 -- December 31
Plumber, master
Examination fee $150
License fee License $100 Annual
License reinstatement
fee
$10
Reinstatement fee
(after April 30)
$50
Reexamination fee
(after July 31)
$150
Out-of-town contractor
fee
Exam fee
of $450
plus
annual
license fee
of $100
Plumber digital photo
identification
$5
Plumber, retired (over age
60)
$30
Reinstatement fee $100
Plumber, journeyman
Examination fee $20
License fee License $20 Annual
 175-3 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-3
170:247
Classification
Permit or
License Fee Term Expiration Date
Reinstatement fee
(after April 30)
$5
Reexamination fee
(after July 31)
$20
Out-of-town contractor
fee
Exam fee
of $100
plus
annual
license fee
of $20
Plumber, apprenticeship
fee
$5 Annual
Sales, special (closing) License $500
(refund of
$425; see
 229-7)
30 days 30 days from date of
issuance or 60 days if
30-day renewal
applied for
Secondhand dealer and
junkyard, plus surety
bond of $10,000
License $150 Annual April 30
Sign installation Permit $30 Annual December 31
Site plan review
Staff -- $100 -- --
Commission -- $150 -- --
Solid waste hauler,
private
License $200 Annual August 31
Additional vehicle -- $50 -- --
Street obstruction Permit $25 Per
occurrence
--
Storage of impounded
motor vehicles on City
property
-- $60 per
day
-- --
Taxicab/livery business,
per taxicab/livery
License $125 Annual December 31
Transfer/replacement License $25 Per
occurrence
--
Additional inspection $20
Taxicab/livery driver License $40 Annual December 31
Tower -- $250 -- --
Additional vehicle -- $50 -- --
 175-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-3
170:248
Classification
Permit or
License Fee Term Expiration Date
Transient retail merchant,
plus surety bond of
$5,000
License $400 Week 11:59 p.m. Saturday
Zoning Board of Appeals
application
-- $150 Per --
(2) Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, in
those instances where an individual is an applicant for a license or
permit reflected on the aforesaid fee schedule and said individual is
75 years of age or older on the date of the commencement of the
term of the license or permit for which application is made, the fee
for such license or permit shall be 50% of that specified above.
Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals and the dog license
local fee shall be as provided on the aforesaid schedule of fees
regardless of the age of the applicant. [Added 6-13-1994]
B. Fees for the issuance of building permits shall be as follows: [Amended
1-13-1992; 4-29-1996; 12-18-2000; 12-18-2002; 4-19-2004;
12-20-2004; 2-28-2005; 12-21-2005; 3-19-2007; 11-17-2008;
3-23-2009; 10-26-2009; 11-23-2009; 4-26-2010; 5-23-2011;
11-27-2012; 7-25-2016; 12-19-2016]
Type of Permit Fee
New residential structures (1- or 2-family
dwellings)
Up to 1,200 square feet of floor space $125
1,200 square feet to 1,800 square feet of floor
space
$175
Over 1,800 square feet of floor area $225
New multiple dwelling units $200
Additional unit $50
Residential additions and alterations $100
Minor residential additions and alterations $75
New commercial/industrial buildings or
structures
Up to 3,500 square feet of floor space $250 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
3,500 square feet to 10,000 square feet of
floor space
$350 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
10,000 square feet to 35,000 square feet of
floor space
$550 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
Greater 35,000 square feet of floor space $1,050 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
 175-3 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-3
170:249
Type of Permit Fee
Additions to existing commercial/industrial
buildings or structures
Up to 3,500 square feet of floor space $250 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
3,500 square feet to 10,000 square feet of
floor space
$350 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
10,000 square feet to 35,000 square feet of
floor space
$550 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
Greater than 35,000 square feet of floor space $1,050 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
Renovation/alteration to existing commercial
structures
$100 plus $0.25/
sq. ft.
Reroofing $25
Garages, detached
Under 600 square feet $40
Over 600 square feet $70
Fences $25
Storage buildings
Up to 250 square feet of floor space $45
Over 250 square feet of floor space $70
Decks, porches, patios
Up to 200 square feet of floor space $35
Over 200 square feet of floor space $60
Sign permits
Per square foot $1.25
Minimum fee per side $100
Installation $30
Swimming pools $100
Demolitions
Residential structures $100
Commercial/industrial buildings or structures $200
Parking lots
1 to 12 spaces $100
13 or more spaces $150
Street opening permits $75
Street opening permits, sidewalk replacement
only
$25
 175-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-3
170:250
Type of Permit Fee
Encroachments
New $75
Renewal $50
Recorded encroachments (annual fee) $25/year
Work in the right-of-way permits $75
Individual right-of-way permits, per address $75
The contractor/entity will make application to the City of
Jamestown Department of Public Works for each individual permit
required. An individual permit is required for each City address
upon which work is to be performed, or upon which access is
required for any business purpose, in the City뭩 right-of-way. Upon
review and approval of the application, a permit or, in the case of
multiple addresses, permits will be issued, for a period not to
exceed two weeks. If the work in the right-of-way exceeds two
weeks, the contractor/entity must pay an additional $75 for each
individual permit and for each additional two-week period.
Failure to apply for and pay for the individual right-of-way
permit(s) will result in a doubling of the permit fee for a first
occurrence and a mandatory penalty of $250 for each subsequent
occurrence. Additionally, any entity or individual contractor who
violates this section may forfeit any future ability to work in the
City of Jamestown right-of-way at the discretion of the Director of
Public Works.
Annual right-of-way permits: utility companies
Board of Public Utilities $50,000
National Fuel Gas Distribution Corporation $15,000
Windstream $13,000
Time Warner Cable $8,000
DFT Communications $8,000
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the above-named utility companies
can annually elect to either 1) pay the annual right-of-way fee set
forth above or 2) pay on a per-instance/address basis by obtaining
individual right-of-way permits for all work or business conducted in
the City뭩 rights-of-way as necessary.
 175-3 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-3
170:251
Type of Permit Fee
The entity electing to pay the annual right-of-way permit fee will pay
the full amount of the annual fee on or before December 31 of the
year preceding the year for which the annual permit is to be issued.
Failure to pay by December 31 will be interpreted as an election to
pay on a per-instance/address basis, and the entity will be subject to
the requirements applicable to the issuance of individual right-ofway
permits with respect to all work or business conducted in the
City뭩 rights-of-way. An entity can elect to pay its annual fee after
December 31; however, the entity will be responsible for the full
amount of the annual fee, regardless of the date paid, and will not
be entitled to any credit for any individual permit fees paid.
Storm sewer connection permit
6 inches or less in diameter $60
Greater than 6 inches in diameter $350
Billboard
Per square foot $1.25
Minimum per side $100
Operating permit $50
Special hauling permit for overdimensional and
overweight vehicles
Overdimensional
One trip, one route $25
One year, all City roads (multiple trips) $200
Overweight
One trip, one route (plus an engineering load
analysis for structure of $50)
$10
One year, one route (multiple trips) (plus an
engineering load analysis for structure of $50)
$250
One year designated route (multiple trips)
(See attached listing of designated routes per
 290-53 of the Jamestown City Code.)
$250
NOTE: Floor area shall not include cellar, noninhabitable basement,
noninhabitable attic or carport, but shall include accessory garage.
Floor area shall be based upon outside dimensions of the building.
C. In all instances where a building permit, plumbing permit or street
opening permit is not requested or issued until after the project is
commenced, the above fees shall be automatically doubled in amount,
to reflect the additional time and expense incurred by the City in
inspecting and approving said projects. [Added 7-28-1992]
 175-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-3
170:252
D. Fees for Fire Department services shall be as follows: [Added
9-18-2000; amended 1-22-2001; 12-21-2005; 11-23-2009;
11-27-2012]
Type of Service Fee
Commercial ambulance service assistance $150 per transport
Fire Department master box alarm $225
Commercial and industrial $200 annually
Fire suppression
Vehicle fires $250 minimum
Hazardous materials
Hazardous material mitigation $275 plus field
expenses
Technical rescue
Light-duty rescue $300
Heavy-duty rescue $550
Industrial/commerical rescue $800
E. Billing of fire inspection; code enforcement noncompliance fees. The
noncompliance fee shall be the hourly inspector's salary rate multiplied
by the number of hours expended in reinspections after the fire/life
safety order has been issued (two-hour minimum) and shall be paid by
the owner. The first reinspection after the fire/life safety order has been
issued will not be charged to the owner if the property is in compliance
at the time of that reinspection. If the property is not in compliance at
the time of the first reinspection, then time involved in all subsequent
reinspections shall be chargeable as a noncompliance fee. [Added
9-18-2000]
F. Plumbers. [Added 9-25-2006; amended 11-27-2012; 11-26-2013]
Type of Service/Permit Fee
Plumbing permit, repairs/replacement $30
Filing fees
One- or two-family dwellings $20
All other plans $30
Varied fixture fees
Per-fixture fee $5
 175-3 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-3
170:253
Type of Service/Permit Fee
For the purpose of computing plumbing permit fees, a fixture shall
be defined as automatic clothes washer, bathtubs, bidet,
dishwashing machine, drinking fountain, emergency shower and
eyewash station, food waste grinders, garbage can washer, laundry
tray, lavatories, showers, sinks, urinals, water closets, whirlpool
baths, healthcare fixtures and equipment, specialty plumbing
fixtures, faucets and other fixture fittings, manual food- and
beverage-dispensing equipment, floor sinks and service sinks.
Sanitary sewer installation/
replacement
From main to house/building $50
Water line installation/replacement
From curb stop to house/building $50
Backflow prevention device $50
Sanitary sewer taps
One-, two-, and three-family
dwellings
$200
Four or more units Add additional $50/each unit
All other taps $400
Buildings having both residential and nonresidential use serviced
by one water line shall be assessed fees as established for 밶ll other
taps.
Sanitary sewer dye test $75
Water tap
Note: Plumbing contractor must excavate minimum of 4 square feet
at least 6 inches below water tap. Fee includes BPU installation,
corporation cock, curb stop and street box. Call BPU at 661-1660
for fee information.
Water meter
The property owner is responsible for damage to the water meter
and will be responsible for the meter cost and installation charge.
Call the Water Department at 661-1660 for fee information.
Testing water meter (disputed water
bill)
Meter 3/4 inch or smaller $25
Meter larger than 3/4 inch $50
Inside inspections (minimum of 1 to 2
inspections per job)
$25 each
Outside inspections (minimum of 1
inspection per job)
$25 each
 175-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-3
170:254
 175-4. Bonds. [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 3-23-2009; 8-28-2017]
As a prerequisite to the issuance of a business license as required by
this chapter, the following applicants shall file with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk a bond in the amount hereinafter shown,
which bond shall be approved by the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk:
Classification Amount of Bond
Auctioneers $1,000
Building mover $100
Circus and shows usually called "Wild West Shows" $200
Circus and menagerie $200
Excavation $50,000
Lifting machine, lung testers, $50
ring boards, striking machines, rope walking,
revolving swings and trained animal shows in
street or halls
$100
Performances or exhibitions under cover, other
than a circus or menagerie
$100
 175-5. Demolition of buildings.
Type of Service/Permit Fee
Other inspections (includes demolition
of water and sewer line)
$40
PLEASE NOTE: All fees will automatically be doubled if an approved
permit is not secured before work commences.
A. Permit required. No building or structure of any size or character
within the City shall be torn down, demolished, wrecked, dismantled or
otherwise razed, in whole or in part, or moved upon or removed from
any premises by any person without a permit therefor from the Building
Inspector.
B. Application for permit. The application for such permit shall be in the
form required by the Building Inspector. Before any such permit is
issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall: [Amended
12-26-1990; 10-24-1994]
(1) If required by law to secure worker's compensation insurance, file
in the office of the Building Inspector a certificate of insurance of
an insurance carrier approved by the State Industrial
Commissioner as proof of worker's compensation insurance
coverage.
 175-3 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-5
170:255
(2) If demolition is for a building or structure located within an R-1 or
R-2 Zone, such as defined by Chapter 300 of this Code, file a
certificate showing that the owner or contractor is insured against
public liability and property damage in connection with such
demolition in the sum of at least $500,000 for injury and/or death to
one person and at least $1,000,000 for injury and/or death to more
than one person and in the sum of at least $1,000,000 for property
damage; if the building or structure sought to be demolished is
located in a zone other than an R-1 or R-2 Zone, file a certificate
showing that the owner or contractor is insured against public
liability and property damage in connection with such demolition in
the sum of at least $1,000,000 for injury to one person and at least
$3,000,000 for injury to more than one person and in the sum of at
least $1,000,000 for property damage. All insurance certificates
required herein shall provide a clause thereon which states as
follows: "The owner or contractor shall save and hold harmless the
City of Jamestown and its agents, servants, officers and employees
from any and all damages and liability by reason of bodily injury
and/or death and/or property damage arising either directly or
indirectly from the work to be performed under the terms of the
demolition permit, irrespective of the cause of such injury or
damage." The City of Jamestown shall be named as an additional
insured on all policies of insurance and insurance certificates
required herein for purposes of coverage but not by payment of
premium. Anything herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding, no certificate of insurance or insurance coverage
shall be required for demolition actions undertaken by the owner or
contractor on a structure totaling not more than 300 square feet in
gross floor area. For purposes of this provision, the terms
"building" or "structure" are deemed to be as such are defined by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(3) Pay the fee for a permit for the demolition of a residential structure
or the fee for a permit for the demolition of a commercial or
industrial structure, as indicated in  175-3B of this Code.
[Amended 12-21-2005]
(4) Give written proof that the Police Department has been put on
notice of the proposed demolition.
(5) Give written proof that the Fire Department has been put on notice
of the proposed demolition. [Amended 2-24-2003]
(6) Provide written certification that all utility companies have been
notified of the proposed demolition.
(7) Agree in a written instrument signed by the owner or contractor to
conditions of closure of the site after demolition is completed. Such
conditions, as determined by the Building Inspector, shall include
but are not limited to the following:
 175-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-5
170:256
(a) The owner or contractor will be required to supply backfill
material to bring work areas within two inches of finished
grade. The backfill material shall be normal run-of-bank gravel
free of refuse and/or other materials dangerous to plant
growth. The maximum size of the material shall be two inches.
Rate of application shall be as needed, compacted.
(b) The owner or contractor shall grade the subbase, by knocking
down high spots and/or by backfilling with approved select fill
material. Any backfill shall be compacted and placed to a grade
able to receive topsoil as specified. Compaction shall be equal
to a 95% standard proctor density of material.
(c) After completion of rough grading, approved topsoil shall be
spread and raked over the demolition site to a uniform
compacted depth of at least two inches to bring to finish grade.
All stones and debris in excess of one inch shall be removed
from the area.
(d) Topsoil, to be furnished by the owner or contractor, conforming
to the New York State Department of Transportation
Specification 713-01, Topsoil, shall cover the site to a minimum
compacted depth of two inches. It shall be free of stumps,
roots, brush, stones, clay lumps or similar objects larger than
two inches in greatest diameter. The topsoil shall be approved
by the Building Inspector.
(e) Commercial 5-10-10 fertilizer shall be applied to the wellpulverized
soil by a mechanical spreader at the rate of 25
pounds per 1,000 square feet and worked into the soil.
(f) The standard and quality of the seed shall be as specified in the
New York State Department of Transportation Specification
713-04, Seeds. The approved seed is to be applied at the rate of
15 pounds per 1,000 square feet. Seeded areas are to be lightly
raked so as to bury seed approximately 1/4 inch and lightly
compacted.
(g) Mulch material shall be hay mowings of acceptable herbaceous
growth or straw, free from noxious weeds. Approved mulch
shall be spread at a uniform rate by hand or by machine
sufficient to completely hide the soil from view. Care must be
taken to not smother seedlings.
(h) As required by the Building Inspector, approved measures shall
be undertaken to control soil, seed, mulch, silt and other
sediments from flowing off the site.
(i) Should the demolition site in question be designated as a site
for new construction, such construction shall commence within
60 days of demolition. Sites designated as those for new
construction are only required to comply with Subsection
 175-5 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-5
170:257
B(7)(a) of this section. Those sites that are designated for
new construction shall be required to comply with this section
within a reasonable time frame not to exceed 30 days.
(j) At the discretion of the Jamestown Planning Commission,
portions of the demolition ordinance time frame referenced in
the above Subsection B(7)(i) may be waived. Requests for such
waivers shall be submitted to the Jamestown Planning
Commission, in writing. Criteria to be examined for the
potential granting of such waivers shall include, but are not
limited to, inclement or seasonal weather or other hardships
that are not self-created. All such waivers shall be recorded by
the Jamestown Planning Commission.
C. Removal of demolition and associated debris. All demolition and
associated debris shall be promptly removed from the area, and the
final time for removal of debris shall be determined by the Building
Inspector and noted on the demolition permit. Materials which are to be
salvaged may be allowed to remain on the premises for a longer period
of time as may be determined by the Building Inspector and noted on
the demolition permit. [Amended 10-24-1994]
D. Plan of demolition. The plans and method of demolition, including
starting and closing dates, shall be fully set forth by the applicant. In
the event that explosives are to be used, the applicant shall designate
the name of the licensed operator who will handle the explosives.
E. Obstructing streets. No materials or equipment shall be allowed to
remain in the public right-of-way unless special permission is granted.
In such later event, the application shall comply with the requirements
of this Code relating to obstructions in streets.
F. Use of equipment. The use of a swinging weight, clamshell bucket,
power shovel, bulldozer or other mechanical contrivance for the
purpose of demolishing walls shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) Where a swinging weight is used, a zone of demolition at least 1/2
times the height of the structure or portion thereof being so
demolished shall be maintained around points of impact.
(2) Where a clamshell bucket is being used, a zone of demolition shall
be maintained within 25 feet of the line of travel of the bucket.
(3) Where other mechanical contrivances are being used to effectuate
total or partial collapse, there shall be maintained in the area into
which the affected portion may fall a zone of demolition at least 1 1/
2 times the height of the structure or remaining portion thereof.
G. Protective barrier required. All structures under demolition shall be
completely encircled with a fence or other suitable barrier, sufficient in
height and strength to prevent casual public entry onto the premises
 175-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-5
170:258
 175-6. Impoundment of motor vehicles. [Added 10-24-1994;
amended 11-23-2009; 11-27-2012]
Whenever a motor vehicle is impounded by the Jamestown Police
Department or other police agency for any reason authorized by law and
such motor vehicle is stored on real property owned by the City of
Jamestown during the period of impoundment, the owner of such motor
vehicle shall pay to the City of Jamestown a storage fee of $60 per day
for each day or any portion thereof that said motor vehicle is stored on
City property, together with towing charges, if any, incurred by the City
of Jamestown in the impound of such motor vehicle and an administrative
fee of $300. No motor vehicle lawfully impounded by the Jamestown Police
Department or other police agency which is stored on real property owned
by the City of Jamestown shall be released to the owner thereof until such
time as such impound is authorized by the Chief of Police or authorized
officers under his command or by the impounding police agency other than
the Jamestown Police Department, nor shall any such motor vehicle be
under demolition and to further prevent the entry of children and
animals onto the premises under demolition.
H. No person or corporation shall, after the demolition of any building,
deposit or cause to be discharged the waste materials therefrom at any
dump, incinerator or other refuse site operated by or for the City of
Jamestown or upon any other property owned by said City, unless he
shall file with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk a bond
equal to 1/3 of the last assessed valuation of such building or 1/2 of that
amount in cash conditioned to insure the proper handling and
discharge of such waste materials in a manner satisfactory to and
within a time period specified by the Director of Public Works.
[Amended 3-21-1966; 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995
by L.L. No. 6-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
I. Revocation of permit. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to
revoke any permit when, in his opinion, based upon an inspection of the
site or any other investigation, the applicant has violated any of the
terms of his permit or failed to comply with any of the requirements of
this section. All work shall cease upon the revocation of the permit.
J. Waiver of provisions. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to
waive any or all of the provisions of this section when, in his discretion,
public safety and property rights are not endangered by the proposed
demolition. The size of the building and its location in relation to other
buildings and abutting property shall be determinative. In all cases of
proposed demolition, however, a permit must be obtained.
K. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a determination made by the
Building Inspector pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to
appeal such determination to the Housing Board of Appeals. An appeal
as herein provided shall be commenced no later than 10 days after final
determination is made by the Building Inspector. [Added 8-23-1976]
 175-5 LASER POINTING DEVICES  175-6
170:259
released from impound until such time as all storage fees, administrative
fees and towing charges are paid to the City of Jamestown as authorized
herein.
 175-7. Sewer connections; fee. [Added 9-15-2003]
Chapter 185
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices  See
Ch. 97.
Bicycles  See Ch. 107.
Dances and dance halls  See Ch. 120.
Laser pointing devices  See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
A. Upon the completion of any sewer in any street or alley in said City, the
General Manager of the Jamestown Board of Public Utilities may
proceed to make all connections with said sewers. The City Council is
empowered to compel by ordinance any person or persons to complete
connections with such sewers. The General Manager of the Jamestown
Board of Public Utilities shall certify, under oath, to the Director of
Assessments the cost and expenses of making such connections with
the sewer and extending the same as aforesaid to the owner of the lot or
plot of land to which it has been extended. All costs and expenses
incidental to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall be
borne by the owner.
B. Thereafter, the Director of Assessments shall proceed to hold a public
hearing for the review and correction of such assessments in the same
manner upon the same notices, with the same procedure and legal
effects, as are provided for the review and correction of paving
assessments by such Director, by the Charter and except as otherwise
provided in this section. The City Council shall have the power and it
shall be its duty annually thereafter at the time of levying the annual
taxes in and for said City to levy the amount of such cost and expense as
charged against such land and the owner and owners thereof that shall
be required to pay any portion of such costs and expense, and the same
shall be collected and enforced as other taxes are collected and
enforced in said City.
 175-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  175-7
185:260
ARTICLE I
General Restrictions
[Adopted 3-26-1962 as Ch. 18 of the 1962 Code]
 185-1. Poolrooms.
No proprietor or employee of a billiard table or room or pool table or room
within the City shall cater to, invite or permit the presence of any person
either on his premises or for the purpose of using such billiard or pool table
who is or apparently is under the age of 16 years, nor shall any person
apparently or actually under the prohibited age of 16 years go into, remain
about or linger on the premises described in this section when ordered
to leave and remain away by such proprietor or employee. The failure of
any proprietor or employee of such a room or resort to keep any person
apparently or actually under the age of 16 years out of his resort after
directing such person to leave and remain away shall not be interpreted to
palliate or excuse the offense of such proprietor nor the penalty provided by
this Code.
 185-2. Curfew. [Amended 4-5-1982]
 185-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. No person under the age of 16 years shall be or remain in or upon any of
the streets, alleys or public places in the City during any part of the
night between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such person
is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody or control of such a minor person or whose employment or
education makes it necessary to be upon such streets, alleys or public
places during the nighttime between such specified hours or unless
such person is returning directly from or going directly to a school- or
church-sponsored activity. The foregoing exceptions shall not apply
when a person under such age shall be playing or unnecessarily
loitering in or upon such street, alley or public place.
B. No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or
control of any child under 16 years of age shall knowingly allow or
permit any such child to go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or
public places in the City between the hours specified in this article
unless there exists reasonable necessity therefor.
A. Any person under the age of 16 years violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be dealt with in accordance with applicable provisions
of the Family Court Act of the State of New York.24
B. Except as otherwise provided in the Penal Law, a violation of any of the
provisions of this article by any person 16 years of age or over shall be
24.Editor's Note: Former Section 18.4, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with drinking age requirements, was deleted 12-29-1986.
 185-1 MINORS  185-3
185:261
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Penalties. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
 185-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  185-3
185:262
ARTICLE II
Recreation and Amusement Facilities
[Adopted 5-21-1973]
 185-4. Findings.
It is hereby determined by the local legislative body that a serious
deficiency exists in the City of recreational and amusement facilities for
youth while it is possible and likely under present state and federal law to
create recreation and amusement facilities for adults which would exclude
such youths. Accordingly, it is hereby declared the legislative policy of
this Council to ensure that recreation and amusement facilities existing
within the City shall not be discriminatory to young people and that such
facilities as would be required to so discriminate shall be prohibited; and,
further, that all amusement and recreational facilities within the City shall
be required to demonstrate that no such discriminatory practices would be
required.
 185-5. Age discrimination prohibited.
In accordance with the legislative declaration of intent herein, no business
or facility shall be established or maintained within the City which by any
local, state or federal law or any rule or regulation of any regulatory body
would be required to deny admission or participation in any way in or to any
part of such facility or business to any person on account of his or her age.
 185-6. Applicability.
This article shall not be construed to affect restaurants or business
establishments which are subject to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law nor
to motion pictures to which such person may be admitted conditioned upon
accompaniment by an adult person.
 185-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article 1, Penalties.
 185-4 MINORS  185-7
185:263
Chapter 193
PARKS AND PUBLIC LANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Advertising materials  See Ch. 83.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
Peddling and soliciting  See Ch. 204.
Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 193-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK RESERVATION  All grounds now or hereafter lawfully under the
control of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation as parks,
parkways, street parkings, street lawns and playgrounds.
 193-2. Destruction, removal or alteration of public property.
[Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
No person shall dig up, cut, break, remove, deface, defile or ill-use any
building, stone, fence, pole or other construction or any root, branch or
other part of any tree or shrub or any plant, turf or rock or any other
property of the City over which the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation has control except upon a permit issued by the Park Division
or other duly authorized officer or agent acting under the control of the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
 193-3. Disturbing and trapping of animals.
No person shall disturb or injure any bird, bird's nest or bird's eggs or
any squirrel or other animal or set any trap or snare within the park
reservations of the City.
 193-4. Gambling, obscenities and solicitation.
No person shall have possession of instruments of gambling in any park
of the City or play any game of chance therein or utter profane, loud,
threatening, abusive or indecent language in any such park or do any
obscene or indecent thing therein or solicit the acquaintance of or follow or
in any way annoy any visitor in any of the parks of the City.
 185-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  193-5
185:264
 193-5. Use of shrubberies, benches and walls.
No person shall go within the shrubberies in any park of the City or stand
upon or lie down upon a bench or sit or stand upon or climb over any
balustrade, wall or fence on any of the parks of the City.
 193-6. Firearms, fireworks, fires, signs, public assembly and
organized sports. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992;
9-25-2017]
No person shall throw any stone or other missile or discharge any firearm,
firecracker, torpedo or firework or operate remote-controlled air devices
such as, but not limited to, airplanes, helicopters, drones and the like or
make a fire or post, paint, affix or display any sign, notice, placard or
advertising device or have any intoxicating beverages or preach or pray
aloud or make any oration or harangue or move in a military or civic
parade, drill or procession or play any musical instrument in any of the
public parks of the City, except by written authority of the Director of
Parks, Recreation and Conservation. No person shall play any game of
tennis, baseball, football or other sport upon any of the public parks of the
City except by written authority of the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation or his duly authorized officer or agent.
 193-7. Sale of goods.
No person shall sell or offer or expose for sale or for rent any goods or
wares or pleasure craft whatsoever on park reservations. This shall not be
construed to prevent lawful sales on private grounds which are adjacent to
park reservations.25
 193-8. Painting of poles between sidewalks and curblines.
[Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Whenever directed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation,
any person having or maintaining poles between the sidewalk and curbline
of any street, square or highway shall paint the same with such color as
shall be designated by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
 193-9. Removal of unlawfully displayed advertisements. [Amended
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
It shall be the duty of the employees acting under the control of the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation and of all policemen to
remove as soon as discovered all advertisements or other matter affixed to
or connected with any tree, fence, pole or other structure in violation of
these rules, together with the tacks or other appliance used in affixing the
same, and to report the removal as soon as practicable to the Director of
25.Editor's Note: Former Section 22.8, Attachment of contrivances to trees prohibited;
Section 22.9, Requests for removal or trimming of trees; and Section 22.10, Planting of
trees, which immediately followed this section, were deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992.
See now Ch. 280, Trees and Shrubs.
 193-5 MINORS  193-9
185:265
Parks, Recreation and Conservation. These employees and policemen shall
in all such cases ascertain if possible the person guilty of affixing, placing or
displaying such advertisement or other matter and report the same to the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
 193-10. Construal of provisions. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of the City
Council in opening, widening or narrowing streets, establishing or changing
grades or in constructing, raising or lowering sidewalks, curbs or gutters
or in exercising any other power conferred upon the City Council by the
Charter.
 193-11. Installation or modification of structures between curb
and property line. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, change, alter or modify in
location, position, substance or quality any structure, apparatus or thing
between the curb and property line upon any street, avenue or alley above
the level of the sidewalk thereon, including among other things not
specified the following: poles, wires, pipes, signs, advertising means,
entrances, covered or otherwise, racks, containers, posts and lights and
other illuminating means without first obtaining the written permit of the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation authorizing the same.
 193-12. Electrical signs.
Applications for the placing and maintenance of electrical signs shall
conform to the provisions of Chapter 245, Signs and Encroachments, and
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for his approval.
 193-13. Right of City to use privately maintained poles. [Amended
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Each permit to maintain poles in and along the streets, alleys, parks and
public places of the City is granted, and any pole now erected in any street,
alley, park or public place in the City shall be allowed to remain only under
the condition that the City shall have the right to run all wires owned by
the City either for fire alarms, police calls, streetlighting or power lines
on all poles erected or allowed under  193-11 to remain on any street or
alley of this City in such positions on the poles as shall be decided to be
proper by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation and without
the payment of any pecuniary consideration therefor.
 193-14. Electrical equipment.
A. Electric equipment having a capacity in excess of 25 kilowatts and used
for the purpose of transforming electric current must not be located on
any portion of the public highway or on any public lands without written
permission from the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation
 193-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  193-14
185:266
 193-15. Observation of rules and regulations. [Added 4-16-200126]
All rules and regulations posted in any public park shall be observed at all
times.
 193-16. Smoking in City parks and recreation areas. [Added
3-28-201627]
and then only on such conditions as may be prescribed by the Director
of Parks, Recreation and Conservation. Complete details showing
methods of supporting shall be submitted upon application for
permission to locate any such transformer equipment. [Amended
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
B. Transformer equipment having a capacity of 25 kilowatts or less may be
placed on poles located between the sidewalk and curbline, provided
that such equipment is adequately supported in accordance with the
best practices known to the trade and will not interfere with the general
rights and privileges of the public.
A. No person shall smoke and/or utilize any tobacco products within the
City of Jamestown Park System. This prohibition against the use of
tobacco products includes but is not limited to sporting fields, the
Riverwalk System, swimming pools and/or playgrounds, picnic
facilities, parking lots and lawn areas.
B. No person shall smoke and/or utilize any tobacco products within the
City of Jamestown buildings, public parking facilities and/or grounds.
C. No person shall smoke and/or utilize any tobacco products while
traveling in or operating any equipment and/or vehicles owned or
leased by the City of Jamestown and any of its operating entities and
used in the delivery of public services.
D. For purposes of this section, "to smoke and/or utilize any tobacco
products" shall mean to burn a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe, and/or to
use any other substance which contains tobacco and also includes
electronic cigarettes, vapor devices and chewing tobacco.
E. Appropriate signage shall be posted designating tobacco-free zones;
however, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a
violation of this section.
F. Violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of  193-17.
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former  193-15 as  193-16.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former  193-16 as  193-17.
 193-14 MINORS  193-17
185:267
 193-17. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
2-1992; amended 4-16-2001; 3-28-2016]
Violations of the provisions in this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties, except for violations of
㎣ 193-15 and 193-16 of this chapter wherein, upon conviction of a violation
of any said section, the fine shall not be less than $50 for a first-time offense,
$100 for a second offense and $250 for a third or subsequent offense, which
shall not be suspended, waived or otherwise reduced below those amounts.
In addition, any equipment used in any violation of the provisions of this
section may be seized or disposed of pursuant to order of the City Court
Judge.
Chapter 198
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials  See Ch 83.
Alarm systems  See Ch. 89.
Alcoholic beverages  See Ch. 93.
Amusements and amusement devices  See
Ch. 97.
Bicycles  See Ch. 107.
Bingo  See Ch. 112.
Dances and dance halls  See Ch. 120.
Dogs and other animals  See Ch. 125.
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Peddling and soliciting  See Ch. 204.
 198-1. Firearms and explosives.28
A. No person shall discharge or explode within the City any air rifle, gas
guns, compressed air gun or any other type of gun propelling metal
bullets, such as a revolver or pistol, gunpowder, dynamite or other
explosive or shoot a bow and arrow other than for a lawful purpose
exercised with the consent of the Chief of Police or by the public
authorities of the City.
B. No person shall carry a firearm, including a rifle or shotgun, whether or
not capable of being concealed upon the person, containing bullets or
ammunition, whether in the chamber or magazine, within the limits of
the City of Jamestown, nor shall any such firearm equipped with a
removable magazine or ammunition clip be carried with such magazine
or clip attached thereto. This subsection shall not apply to the carrying
28.Editor's Note: Former Sections 20.1 through 20.4, which immediately preceded this
section and dealt with alcoholic beverages in restaurants, were deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992.
 193-17 JAMESTOWN CODE  198-1
198:268
 198-2. Noise. [Amended 11-19-1973; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992; 9-16-1996; 3-16-1998; 11-17-2003]
of a weapon as authorized by a legal permit presently in force. [Added
9-7-1971; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-199229]
A. Declaration of policy. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the
City to reduce the ambient noise level in the City, so as to preserve,
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare and the peace
and quiet of the inhabitants of the City, prevent injury to human, plant
and animal life and property, foster the convenience and comfort of its
inhabitants and facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions of the
City. It is the public policy of the City that every person is entitled to
ambient noise levels that are not detrimental to life, health and
enjoyment of his or her property. It is hereby declared that the making,
creation or maintenance of excessive or unreasonable noises within the
City affects and is a menace to the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, welfare and the prosperity of the people of the City. The
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are for
the above-mentioned purpose.
B. Interpretation. This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to
effectuate the purposes described in this chapter. Nothing herein shall
abridge the powers and responsibilities of any police department, law
enforcement agency or code enforcement department to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to abridge
the powers of any health department, code enforcement department or
the right of such department to engage in any necessary or proper
activities.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or
cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or
unusual noise, or to permit any other to do so, which disturbs the peace
or quiet within the geographical boundaries of the City of Jamestown,
or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of
normal sensitiveness. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be
presumed that the owner, tenant, person or persons in possession or
control, and the occupants of the particular premises, are, jointly or
severally, permitting such noise.
D. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but such
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or omnibus, as they are defined in the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, to use a horn or other device
for signaling except in a reasonable manner as a danger warning,
29.Editor's Note: In addition, former Section 20.7, Gambling, etc., generally, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992.
 198-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  198-2
198:269
and it shall be unlawful for any person having the management and
control of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or omnibus to produce
or cause, suffer or allow to be produced by means of such horn
or other signaling device a sound which shall be unreasonable or
unnecessarily loud or harsh or shall continue for an unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time.
(2) No person shall use or operate or cause to be used or operated, in
front of or outside any building, place or premises, or in or through
any window, doorway or opening of such building, place or
premises, or upon any public street or place or on any vehicle
thereon, any device or apparatus for the amplification of sounds
from any radio or other sound-making or sound-reproducing device
without permission from the Public Safety Committee.
(3) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operation of any of the above in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the
building, structure, property or room in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. [Amended
8-21-2006]
(4) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the uttering of
obscenities upon the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(5) No animal or bird owner shall permit any animal to cause
annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance for more than 15 minutes at
any time of the day or night by repeated barking, whining,
screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be
heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property.
(6) No person shall cause or permit the operation of any device,
vehicle, construction equipment or lawn maintenance equipment,
including but not limited to any diesel engine, internal combustion
engine or turbine engine without a properly functioning muffler in
good working order and in constant operation regardless of sound
level produced.
(7) The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle or the opening, closing or other handling
of boxes, crates, containers, building materials or other similar
objects.
 198-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  198-2
198:270
(8) Any activity necessary or incidental to the erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekdays and
Saturdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to
exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which
permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the
emergency continues. If the Building Inspector should determine
that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the
excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., and if he/she shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he/she may
grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the
permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
(9) Subject to the limitations enumerated below, no person, while on
public or private grounds on or adjacent to a school, hospital, court
or place of worship, shall willfully make or assist in the making of
any noise or diversion which disrupts or tends to disturb the peace
or good order of the activities within:
(a) Schools: while any class thereof or other instruction is in
session.
(b) Hospitals or similar institutions: at all times.
(c) Courts: during the hours of the court or while otherwise in
session.
(d) Places of worship: during the hours of worship or while
otherwise conducting religious services.
(10) The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
(11) The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose
of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale.
(12) The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any
pile driver, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or
other such appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or
unusual noise.
(13) Motor vehicles:
(a) The playing of any radio, music player or audio system in a
motor vehicle at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of other persons or at a volume which is plainly
 198-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  198-2
198:271
 198-3. Public assemblies and parades.
The gathering and assembling of persons in a public place in such a manner
as to disturb the peace is hereby declared to be unlawful, and the police
force is hereby directed to disperse all such gatherings, loitering,
assemblages, groups, mobs and similar congregations of people. In the
event of such persons refusing to disperse, the police are hereby authorized
to make the summary arrests of such persons. No public meetings within or
parade through the highways of the City shall be permitted except upon the
written authorization of the Chief of Police.
 198-4. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 3-23-1992]
audible to persons other than the occupants of such vehicle.
The operation of any of the above in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 10 feet from the vehicle at
which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this subsection. [Amended 8-21-2006]
(b) No person shall operate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause
unreasonable noise by spinning or squealing the tires of such
vehicle, or by causing the engine to rev producing excessive
motor roar.
(c) No person shall allow noise from an automobile alarm in excess
of five minutes after it has activated.
(d) The repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle,
excepting emergency repairs, where the standards for
determination so dictate or in such a manner that a reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness in the area is caused discomfort
or annoyance.
(14) The operation of lawn mowers, lawn tractors, trimmers, leaf
blowers and other lawn care power machines between the hour of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to noise generated by
municipality-sponsored concerts or permitted special events, as well as
noise generated by events held at or within the confines of stadiums,
arenas or fields designed specifically and primarily for sporting events
and which are open to the public.
A. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct when, with intent to cause
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk
thereof:
(1) Such person engages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or
threatening behavior; or
 198-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  198-4
198:272
 198-5. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992; amended 3-16-1998; 8-20-2001; 12-17-2001; 11-17-2003]
Violations of the provisions in this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties, except for violations
of  198-2D(2), (3) and (13)(a) of this chapter wherein, upon conviction
of a violation of any said subsections, the fine shall not be less than $75
for a first offense, $150 for a second offense and $250 for a third or
subsequent offense, which fine shall not be suspended, waived or otherwise
reduced below those amounts. In addition, any equipment used in violation
of  198-2D(3) or (13)(a) is hereby declared to be contraband and may be
seized or disposed of pursuant to order of the City Court Judge.
Chapter 204
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials  See Ch. 83.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
(2) Such person makes unreasonable noise; or
(3) In a public place, such person uses abusive or obscene language, or
makes an obscene gesture; or
(4) Without lawful authority, such person disturbs any lawful assembly
or meeting of persons; or
(5) Such person obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
(6) Such person congregates with other persons in a public place and
refuses to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse; or
(7) Such person creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition
by any act which serves no legitimate purpose.
(8) Such person is found to be in violation of any lawfully posted rules
and/or regulations on public property. [Added 8-20-2001;
amended 12-17-2001]
B. Disorderly conduct is a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in Article I, Penalties, of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
 198-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  204-1
198:273
 204-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS  Includes a building or store in
which or where a person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares
and merchandise he hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular business
hours.
HAWKER and PEDDLER  Any person, firm or corporation who or which
either, as principal or agent, from any boat or car on a railroad track or
any street or place or by going from house to house or place of business
to place of business, on foot or on or from any animal or vehicle, including
but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, pushcarts or wagons, sells
or barters, offers for sale or barters or carries or exposes for sale or barter
any goods, wares or merchandise, except milk, newspapers and periodicals.
PERSON  Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
SOLICITOR  Includes any person who goes from place to place or house
to house or who stands in any street or place taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares and merchandise, except milk, newspapers and
periodicals, or for services to be performed in the future or by making,
manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future
delivery.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS  Includes one conducted in a store, hotel,
motel, house, building or structure for the sale, retail or wholesale, of
goods, wares and merchandise, except meats, fish, fruit and farm products
by farmers and persons who produce such commodities, which is intended
to be conducted for a temporary period of time and not permanently. If the
place in which the business is conducted is rented or leased for a period
of six months or less, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the
business carried on therein is a transient business.
 204-2. Applicability; exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any sales conducted
pursuant to statute or by order of any court; to any person selling
personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles; to merchants
having an established place of business within the City or their
employees for soliciting orders from customers and delivering the
same; to farmers and truck gardeners who themselves or through their
employees vend, sell or dispose of products of their own farms and
gardens; to any honorably discharged veteran of the Armed Forces of
the United States who is a resident of this state and a veteran of any
war or who shall have served in the Armed Forces of the United States
overseas or the spouse of such veteran if a resident of this state, as
provided by  32 of the General Business Law of the State of New York;
to berry pickers who sell berries of their own picking; to persons
 204-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  204-2
198:274
 204-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City of
Jamestown to act as a hawker, peddler, solicitor or transient retail business
as herein defined without first having obtained and paid for and having in
force and effect a valid, current license therefor.
 204-4. Application; bond.
engaged in fishing in the waters adjacent to the City of Jamestown,
when such fish is sold by the person catching the same; to the owner
or lessee of any property within the City of Jamestown who conducts
on his or her property flea markets, porch sales, garage sales or similar
sales for not more than four days, two of which may be consecutive, in
any calendar year. [Amended 9-12-1994]
B. This chapter shall not apply to sales of tangible commodities by local
not-for-profit corporations or associations which have as their primary
purpose the promotion of charitable, educational and recreational
activities or volunteers working for such corporations or associations
within the City of Jamestown, New York.
C. The City Council may additionally grant exemptions from the provisions
of this chapter for special events or occasions, subject to such
conditions or requirements as the City Council may deem proper.
Requests for exemption as herein provided shall be submitted, in
writing, to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk not less
than 45 days prior to the commencement date of the special event or
occasion, which requests shall state the date or dates of the special
event or occasion, the nature of the special event or occasion, the
provisions of this chapter for which exemptions are requested, the
reasons therefor and the estimated number of hawkers, peddlers or
solicitors it is anticipated will participate in the special event or
occasion. [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk a written
application prepared by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk and furnished by the City and shall file at the same time
satisfactory proof of good character and satisfactory proof of
compliance with  1101 et seq. of the Tax Law of the State of New York
(sales tax). The application shall give the number and kind of vehicles to
be used by the applicant carrying on the business for which the license
is required, the registration or other identification of any vehicles to be
used, the kind of goods, wares and merchandise the applicant desires to
sell or the kind of services the applicant desires to perform, the method
of distribution, the name, address and age of the applicant and the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation he represents.
Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Sealer
 204-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  204-4
198:275
 204-5. Issuance of license; conditions.
of Weights and Measures of Chautauqua County certifying that all
weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been
examined and approved, or such application shall be accompanied by
a statement that no weighing and measuring devices will be utilized.
[Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. An application for the license as a solicitor or transient retail business
who demands, accepts or receives payment or deposit of any money in
advance of final delivery shall also be accompanied by a bond to the
City of Jamestown, approved as to form of surety by the Corporation
Counsel, in a penal sum as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and
Permits, with a sufficient surety or sureties or sufficient collateral
security conditioned for making a final delivery of the goods, wares and
merchandise delivered or services to be performed in accordance with
the terms of such order or, failing therein, that the advance payment of
such order is refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of any
licensed solicitor or transient retail business shall have the right by
action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Such
bond shall remain in full force and effect, and in the case of a cash
deposit, such deposit shall be retained by the City of Jamestown, for a
period of 90 days after the expiration of any such license, unless sooner
ordered released by the Mayor. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
C. When an application is filed pursuant to this chapter, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be
made by the Police Department to ascertain the validity of the
information provided on such application. The Chief of Police shall
furnish to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, in writing,
the information derived from such investigation. [Added 7-23-2007;
amended 8-28-2017]
A. Upon the filing of the application, bond and certificate as provided by
 204-4, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall issue to
the applicant a license as provided in  204-3, signed by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no license shall be refused except for a
specific reason and for the protection of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
C. A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who
permits it to be used by any other person and any person who uses such
license granted to any other person shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
 204-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  204-5
198:276
D. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder
or his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the
original application and bond may be issued by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk upon the filing with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk by the licensee of an affidavit setting
forth the circumstances for the loss and what, if any, search has been
made for its recovery. The fee for issuing a duplicate license as herein
provided shall be as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits.
[Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
E. All licenses shall be issued on forms provided by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, numbered in the order in which
they are issued, and shall state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used,
the kind of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or services to be
rendered, the number of the license, the dates of issuance and
expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and address of the
licensee. Such license shall automatically expire on December 31
following the date of issuance of such license. [Amended 3-9-1992 by
L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
F. Such license shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying
on the business for which the person is licensed.
G. No license shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age.
H. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a
license which has been revoked shall make further application until a
period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous
rejection or revocation, unless such applicant can show that the reason
for the rejection no longer exists.
I. Every licensee, while exercising his or her license, shall carry the
license with him or her and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
J. The license shall be issued in triplicate. A duplicate copy thereof shall
be furnished to the Chief of Police, and the third copy shall be retained
by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended
3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
K. Any licensee using a horse and wagon or motor vehicle may employ two
persons and no more to assist in selling and delivering the wares, but
such persons shall so act only while accompanying a licensed peddler,
hawker or solicitor.
L. This chapter shall not apply so as unlawfully to interfere with interstate
commerce, and to that end all persons claiming to be engaged in
interstate commerce shall apply to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk for a certificate of compliance, using the form of
application described in  204-4; the applicant shall also submit to the
 204-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  204-5
198:277
 204-6. License fees. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
 204-7. Vehicle identification.
All vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers,
pushcarts or wagons, used by a licensee in the exercise of his or her
license shall be marked on both sides with the number corresponding to the
number of his or her current license and the words "Licensed Vendor" in
plain letters and figures at least two inches in length and of such color as to
be plainly read at a distance of at least 10 feet.
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk satisfactory evidence
that he or she is engaged in interstate commerce. [Added 4-10-1995;
amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
M. When the applicant shall have established to the satisfaction of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk that he or she is engaged
in interstate commerce, the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall issue to him or her, without charge, a certificate of
compliance, stating, among other things, that such person has complied
with the requirements of this section and has satisfactorily established
that he or she is engaged in interstate commerce. Such certificate shall
be carried with the person exercising it and shall be exhibited upon
demand. Each such certificate shall be invalid after one year from its
date of issue. The securing of any such certificate by fraud or
misrepresentation by any person not in fact engaged in interstate
commerce shall constitute a violation of this chapter. [Added
4-10-1995; amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
N. Not-for-profit, charitable or religious corporations shall be exempt from
the licensing requirements of this chapter including the payment of
fees. Before commencing any fund drive the organization shall file with
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and the Police Chief
the dates of solicitation. Individuals soliciting for not-for-profit,
charitable and religious purposes must refrain from soliciting if the
premises is posted with a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitor" or similar words. [Added 4-10-1995; amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. The license fee for the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits.
B. The license fee for all persons conducting a transient retail business
within the City shall be as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and
Permits. For purposes of this provision, a week shall commence on
Sunday at 12:01 a.m. and terminate on the following Saturday at 11:59
p.m.
 204-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  204-8
198:278
 204-8. Licensee to carry license.
Each licensee shall carry his or her valid, current license and exhibit the
same to any police officer or customer or prospective customer or agent or
officer of the City of Jamestown on demand. Agents of a licensee shall carry
a photographic duplicate of the licensee's current license and produce the
same on demand to the same individuals herein specified.
 204-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Mayor may at any time for a violation of this chapter or any other
ordinance or any law revoke any license. When a license shall be revoked,
no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made. Notice of such
revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by
the Mayor upon the person named in the application or by mailing the same
to the address given in the application and upon filing a copy of such notice
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 204-10. Restrictions.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall:
A. Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale nor offer for sale any
unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him or her in a clean and
sanitary condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale well
covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects and, in so doing, shall
abide by any sanitary regulations or other applicable regulations of the
Chautauqua County Health Department relative to the sale and display
of foodstuffs.
C. Within the central business district of the City of Jamestown, refrain
from the blowing of any horn, ringing of any bell or the use of any other
noisy device to attract public attention to his or her wares or from
shouting or crying out his or her wares.
D. Within the central business district of the City of Jamestown, not stand
nor permit the vehicle used by him or her to stand in any place other
than those places or areas designated by the Public Safety Committee
of the City Council of the City of Jamestown for the hawking, peddling
or soliciting of food, goods, wares or merchandise, and shall move the
vehicle used by him or her on the half-hour a distance of not less than
50 feet from said vehicle's last prior location.
E. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, not stand nor
permit the vehicle used by him or her to stand in front of any premises
for any time if the owner or lessee of the ground floor thereof objects.
 204-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  204-10
198:279
 204-11. Orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and
one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is
paid to the solicitor.
 204-12. City records. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
to keep a record of all applications and of all licenses granted under the
provisions of this chapter, giving the number and date of each license, the
F. Within the central business district of the City of Jamestown, not hawk,
sell, peddle or solicit any food, goods, wares or merchandise from any
vehicle having a size greater than five feet in length, height or width.
G. Not use any heating source which does not meet the requirements of
the fire codes of the City of Jamestown.30
H. Not use any electricity from any lightpole or any other utility of the City
of Jamestown.
I. Not sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
J. Not permit any vehicles used by him or her to stop or remain on any
crosswalk.
K. Not create or maintain any booth, stall or stand or place any boxes,
barrels, crates or other obstructions upon any street or public place for
the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any food, goods, wares or
merchandise.
L. Not sell, barter or offer for sale or barter or carry or expose for sale or
barter any goods, wares or merchandise in or along or within the
distance of 300 feet of the streets, avenues and ways constituting the
designated line of march of any parade conducted in the observance of
Memorial Day, whether held on the 30th day of May in any year or
otherwise, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on the day such
parade is held.
M. Not conduct any business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on any public street or public place or by going from house to house or
place of business on foot or on or from any animal or vehicle nor sell or
barter, offer for sale or barter nor carry or expose for sale or barter any
goods, wares or merchandise, except milk, newspapers and periodicals.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
 204-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  204-12
198:280
name and residence of the person licensed, the amount of the license fee
paid and also the date of revocation of all licenses revoked.
 204-13. Indemnification.
By acceptance of a license herein authorized, the holder thereof agrees
to indemnify and hold the City of Jamestown and its officers, employees,
agents and servants harmless from any and all liability for property damage,
personal injury and/or death which may result to the licensee or any third
party in the licensee's performance of the rights granted to the licensee by
virtue of the license or licenses authorized herein. No liability shall inure to
the City of Jamestown or its officers, employees, agents or servants for any
wrongful act done or committed by any licensee or holder of the licenses
herein authorized.
 204-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Any person who, himself or by his or her clerk, agent or employee, shall
act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor or shall operate a transient retail
business as herein defined without a license or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who, having had his or her license revoked,
shall continue to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor or shall operate a
transient retail business shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties. Each day on
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 210
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Sewers  See Ch. 240.
 210-1. Plumbing Inspector. [Added 9-15-200331]
The office of Plumbing Inspector, under the powers and duties defined by
Chapter 327 of the Laws of 1900, and the amendments thereto, is hereby
continued, but subject to the supervision of the General Manager of the
Board of Public Utilities.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former ㎣ 210-1
through 210-3 as ㎣ 210-2 through 210-4, respectively.
 204-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  210-2
198:281
 210-2. Registration of plumbers; fee. [Amended 2-25-1985;
12-26-1990; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Each plumber licensed in the City and holding a certificate of competency
issued in accordance with Article 4,  46, of the General City Law shall
renew his or her plumbing license annually by registering his or her name
in the office of the Plumbing Inspector. Such registration shall entitle such
person to do business as a licensed plumber during the calendar year
in which he or she has so registered. Each person so registering his or
her name between January 1 and February 28 of each year shall pay a
registration fee as provided in Ch. 175, Licenses and Permits. Each person
so registering his or her name after February 28 of each year but before
April 30 of each year shall pay a registration fee as provided in Chapter
175, Licenses and Permits, plus a late registration penalty. Each person who
fails to so register his or her name by April 30 of each year shall forfeit
his or her plumbing license and shall be thereafter required to retake the
examination for master plumber and pay all application or examination fees
for such examination as may from time to time be required.
 210-3. Plumbing permits.
No new or original installation of plumbing shall be commenced in the
city unless a plumbing permit shall have been granted by the Plumbing
Inspector.
 210-4. Enforcement. [Amended 7-24-1978]
The Plumbing Inspector is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing this
chapter and the rules and regulations formulated by the Examining Board
of Plumbers pursuant to Article 4,  44, of the General City Law, and
the Plumbing Inspector shall be authorized to issue such process as is
necessary to bring violators before the court upon being satisfied that the
person to whom such process is issued is, in fact, the person chargeable
with the violation.
 210-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  210-4
198:282
Chapter 215
PROPERTY REHABILITATION AND CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15.
Alarm systems  See Ch. 89.
Dogs and other animals  See Ch. 125.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Plumbing  See Ch. 210.
Public records  See Ch. 220.
Sewers  See Ch. 240.
Subdivision of land See Ch. 260.
Swimming pools  See Ch. 265.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 210-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  210-4
198:283

Part 1
Premises Requirements
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 215-1. Title; applicability.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Rehabilitation and
Conservation Code" and shall be applicable to residential, nonresidential,
commercial and industrial buildings, structures or vacant areas and
combinations thereof.
 215-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to provide basic and uniform standards, in
terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential,
nonresidential, commercial and industrial buildings, structures or vacant
areas and combinations thereof and to establish reasonable safeguards for
the safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
 215-3. Applicability.
A. Scope. This Part 1 shall apply to premises as follows:
(1) Lots, plots or parcels of land which are vacant or upon which
buildings used for dwellings, mixed occupancy, commercial,
industrial or storage uses, whether occupied or vacant, are located.
(2) Residential buildings, including private dwellings and multiple
dwellings, unless specifically excluded.
(3) Buildings of mixed occupancy, occupied in whole or in part.
(4) Commercial, industrial and storage buildings.
(5) Vacant residential, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial and
storage buildings.
(6) Residential, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial and storage
buildings which are under construction or demolition, including
buildings not completed to the extent that a nuisance or practice
exists or is being carried out which is a disturbance to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(7) Accessory structures of dwellings, commercial, industrial or vacant
buildings.
B. Nonapplicability. There shall be excluded from the building space and/
or equipment requirements of this Part 1 application to hospitals,
nursing homes, educational facilities and similar structures and
 215-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-3
198:285
 215-4. Conflicts with other provisions.
 215-5. Conformity with other provisions. [Amended 8-10-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992]
Installations, alterations and repairs to buildings and structures and the
materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith shall
be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with
applicable statutes and codes of the State of New York and the City of
Jamestown and orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority
thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or equipment to the
applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the same is reasonably safe
to person and property.
 215-6. Definitions.
premises to which, and to the extent to which, existing or superseding
federal, state or county standards shall apply.
A. The provisions of this Part 1 shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 1, provided
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance, code or regulation which
is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided
in this Part 1, and such more restrictive requirement or higher standard
shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. Where a provision of this Part 1 is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance,32 or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE  A structure the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE  A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily
incidental to the principal use or occupancy of a building. In a multiple
dwelling, such accessory uses may include, among others, the
following:
(1) Offices for the building management.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning; Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction;
Ch. 131, Electrical Standards; Ch. 210, Plumbing; and Ch. 240, Sewers, for example.
 215-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-6
198:286
AGENT  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity designated
by the owner of the premises to manage, operate or otherwise exert
controlling influence over the premises on behalf of the owner. For
purposes of this section, a lodging house operator shall be deemed to
be an agent of the owner, and an individual who reasonably appears
to have authority to act for another whether actual authority has been
conferred (e.g., collects rents without any designation) shall be deemed
to be an agent of the owner. An agent shall accept service of process for
any violation of this chapter.[Amended 3-19-2007]
ALTERATION  As applied to buildings or structures, a change or
rearrangement of the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on the side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one location or position to another. The term
"alter" in its various modes and tenses and its participial forms refers
to the making of an alteration.
APARTMENT or SUITE  A room or suite of two or more rooms
occupied or intended to be occupied as the home or residence of an
individual, family or household.
APPROVED  Adjudged satisfactory by the administrative officer
pursuant to the regulations of this chapter, by an authority designated
by law or this chapter or, when used in connection with materials,
appliances, equipment or devices, by a testing agency recognized under
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
BASEMENT  That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
BATHROOM  An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories
or fixtures serving similar purposes. See definition of "toilet room."
BUILDING  A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior
walls, or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to
persons, animals or property.
(2) Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
(3) Recreation and play rooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants and in connection
with the management and operation of a building.
(4)
Maintenance and work shops, and storage rooms for linen,
bedding, furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects.
(5)
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands.
(6)
Garages within a building or on the premises thereof used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
(7)
 215-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-6
198:287
BUILDING PERMIT  A permit issued pursuant to  215-49 of this
chapter. The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of
this chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
CELLAR  That space of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade and which has more than half of its height, measured from floor
to ceiling, below the average established curb level or finished grade of
the ground adjoining the building.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE  A
certificate issued pursuant to  215-52 of this chapter.[Added
3-19-2007]
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL  The Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer, Rehab and Code Enforcement Officer and Target
Area Code Enforcement Officer, all appointed by the Director of
Development and all inspectors (including but not limited to the
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and Fire Inspector).[Added
3-19-2007]
COURT  An open, uncovered, unoccupied space surrounded on all
sides by the exterior walls of a building or structure or by such walls
and an interior lot line of the same premises.
DEPARTMENT  The Department of Development of the City of
Jamestown.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY  A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY  A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
ENERGY CODE  The State Energy Conservation Construction Code as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.[Added
3-19-2007]
EXIT  That portion of the way of departure from the interior of a
building or structure to the exterior at street or grade level accessible
to a street, consisting of:
FAMILY  One or more persons living together in one dwelling unit
and maintaining a common household, including domestic servants and
Corridors, stairways and lobbies enclosed in construction having
a fire-resistance rating, including the door opening thereto from a
habitable, assembly or occupied space;
(1)
(2) An interior stairway;
(3) A horizontal exit;
(4) A door to the exterior at grade; or
(5) An exterior stairway or ramp.
 215-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-6
198:288
gratuitous guests, together with boarders, roomers or lodgers not in
excess of the number allowed by this Code as an accessory use.[Added
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
FIXED WINDOW  A window whose sash is designed and intended by
the manufacturer of the unit to not open.
GARBAGE  All putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARDS  Those specifications, codes,
rules, guides or procedures in the field of construction and fire
prevention as specified in Chapter G of the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
GRADE, FINISHED  The natural surface of the ground, or surface
of the ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting the
building or the premises.
HABITABLE SPACE  Space occupied by one or more persons for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed
to be habitable space. See definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public
space" and "exit."
HAZARD  A condition which bears a high potential for harm to the
health or safety of an individual or property.
INFESTATION  The presence, within or contiguous to a building, of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
INSPECTOR  An inspector (including but not limited to the Plumbing
Inspector, Electrical Inspector and Fire Inspector) appointed pursuant
to  215-48 of this chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
KITCHEN  Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a
minimum width of five feet, used for cooking or the preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE  Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or the preparation of food.
LEGAL OPEN SPACE  Open space on the premises, such as yards or
courts, or an open space at least 25 feet wide permanently dedicated to
the public use which abuts the premises.
LODGING HOUSE  A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose
of furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT  A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY  Occupancy of a building in part for residential
use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING 
(1) A building containing three or more dwelling units.
 215-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-6
198:289
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE  See definition of "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY  A city, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE  Space used as kitchenettes and pantries,
bath- , toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and
boiler rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance
of the building and those spaces used for access and vertical travel
between stories. See definitions of "habitable space," "public space"
and "exit."
NOTICE OF VIOLATION  A notice issued by code enforcement
personnel pursuant to  215-61 of this chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
OCCUPANT  Any person, including the owner or operator, living and
sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of said dwelling
or rooming unit.
OPERATING PERMIT  A permit issued pursuant to  215-55 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating
permit that is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision
of this chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
OPERATOR  Any person who has the charge, care or control of a
structure in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for
occupancy.
OVERCROWDED  A condition in which a structure exceeds, in part or
whole, its designed occupant load as described in this chapter and the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
OWNER  The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or
lessor of the estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an
assignee of rents, a receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person,
firm or corporation in control of a building or their duly authorized
agents.
PERMIT HOLDER  The person to whom a building permit has been
issued.[Added 3-19-2007]
A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities
occupied by one or two families and more than four lodgers
residing with either one of such families.
(2)
A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or
two-family dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient
paying guests or tenants.
(3)
A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons used or occupied as a club, dormitory or fraternity or
sorority house or for similar uses.
(4)
A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing
home, but not including private or public hospitals or public
institutions.
(5)
 215-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-6
198:290
PERSON  An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust,
association, or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or
description.[Added 3-19-2007]
PLUMBING SYSTEM  The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective
connections, devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the
premises.
POTABLE WATER  Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE  Space within a residential building for public use,
such as lobbies, hallways, lounges, reception halls, meeting, lecture and
recreation rooms, banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens and
swimming pools.
REFUSE  All cardboard, plastic, metal or glass containers,
wastepaper, rags, sweepings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather and similar waste material that accumulates around a home,
business or industry.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON  Any individual, or any corporation,
partnership or association and individual members thereof, who is the
owner, lessor, designated agent, tenant, lessee or person possessing
fiduciary responsibility for real property to which the provisions of this
chapter apply, or any combination thereof, jointly and severally.
SERVICE FACILITY  Any system used by an occupant, installed and
in operating condition on said premises, that aids and/or supplies any
approved form of heating fuel by code standard, gas, electricity or
water to a dwelling.
SEWAGE  Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and which may include industrial wastes and
liquids containing chemicals.
STOP-WORK ORDER  An order issued pursuant to  215-51 of this
chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
STRUCTURE  An assembly of materials forming a construction
framed of component structural parts for occupancy or use, including
buildings.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE  A certificate issued pursuant to
 215-52D of this chapter.[Added 3-19-2007]
TOILET ROOM  An enclosed space containing one or more water
closets, which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and
other plumbing fixtures. See definition of "bathroom."
 215-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-6
198:291
UNFIT PREMISES 
UNIFORM CODE  The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from
time to time.[Added 3-19-2007]
UNOCCUPIED HAZARD  Any building within any residential zoning
district, or within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district, which
remains unoccupied for a period of more than 60 days with either
doors, windows or other openings broken, removed, boarded or
similarly sealed or any building under construction, upon which little
or no construction work has been performed for a period of three
months, or any building within the City which has been fire damaged
or damaged by act of God and allowed to so remain, which shall be
presumed to constitute a hazard.
VENTILATION  The supply and removal of air to and from a space by
natural or mechanical means.
YARD  An open, unoccupied space on the lot, plot or parcel of land on
which the building stands, which extends the entire length of the front
or rear or interior lot line.
Structures lacking ventilation, sanitation, heat or other facilities
adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or the
public.
(1)
Structures or premises which are damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe or infested in such a manner as to create a
hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the public.
(2)
Structures or premises which because of the location, general
condition, state of the premises or number of occupants are
unsanitary, unsafe and overcrowded or are otherwise detrimental
to health and safety that a hazard to the occupant or the public is
created.
(3)
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL  Ventilation by power-driven
devices.
(1)
VENTILATION, NATURAL  Ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or
without wind-driven devices.
(2)
B. Definitions in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code that are not specifically listed here shall also be recognized as
authoritative by this chapter.
 215-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-6
198:292
ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
 215-7. Compliance required.
Buildings occupied, in whole or in part, as defined in this Part 1 shall comply
with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning occupancy, size,
light and ventilation in order to provide a safe and healthful environment.
 215-8. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings for the purpose of this Part 1 shall be classified in respect to their
occupancies as follows:
 215-9. Maximum occupancy.
In dwelling units other than one- and two-family dwellings, the maximum
number of occupants shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor areas of habitable rooms, other than kitchens, as follows:
 215-10. Prohibited uses.
A. One- and two-family dwellings: buildings containing one or two
dwelling units.
B. Multiple dwellings: as defined in  215-6.
A. One occupant per room having a floor area of at least 70 square feet,
two occupants per room having a floor area of at least 120 square feet,
and three occupants per room having a floor area of at least 180 square
feet.
B. In every dwelling unit every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least 70
square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant thereof.
C. In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
D. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories and sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for regular sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space or public space.
 215-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-10
198:293
 215-11. Basements and cellars.
The basement or cellar of any building shall be free from standing water.
It shall be ventilated and free of garbage and/or refuse accumulation or
infestation.
 215-12. Light and ventilation.
 215-13. Nonhabitable space.
B. It shall be prohibited in lodging houses to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen containing less than 60 square feet of floor area or
any nonhabitable space or any public space other than a dining area.
C. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space unless
improved with concrete floors and permanent wall coverings kept
waterproof and permanently drained and provided with two exits not
located in the same wall.
A. Habitable space.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combination thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces above
the adjoining finished grade or are above a roof.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with electric light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof or through openable parts of skylights.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation,
in addition to natural ventilation.
B. Public space.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with electric light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways and porches, artificial
light shall be electric lighting available at all times so as to afford
safe passageway for occupants and users.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation
conforming to the requirements for habitable space or with
mechanical ventilation as set forth in the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, and any other amendments
thereto.
A. Toilet rooms and bathrooms. Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and
two-family dwellings shall have provisions for privacy.
 215-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-13
198:294
 215-14. Stairs and railings.
B. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking
or eating therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Sanitary facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall
be supplied and maintained in a sanitary and safe working
condition:
(a) Water closets. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls
a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords and
which is equipped with a water closet.
(b) Lavatories. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory, which,
when a closet is required, shall be in the same room with said
water closet.
(c) Bathtubs or showers. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room
which affords privacy to a person in said room and which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower. Toilet rooms for employees
in multiple dwellings shall be separate rooms for each sex
where there are five or more employees, shall be readily
accessible to such employees and shall not open directly into
any public kitchen or other public space used for the cooking
or preparation of food. In all dwellings, bathrooms and toilet
rooms shall be provided with floors of moisture-resistant
material.
(2) Light and ventilation.
(a) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided
with electric light approved for the use of such rooms.
(b) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with electric light approved for the intended
use of such rooms.
(c) Stairs shall be provided with electric light to allow safe ascent
or descent.
(d) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided
with ventilation.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Railings shall be provided on all interior stairways and open portions of
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells. Such railings must be wellsecured
and extended the full length of the stairway.
 215-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-15
198:295
 215-15. Exits.
 215-16. Separation of various units and rooms.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings, exits shall be provided in conformance with the
Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
A. Dwelling units shall be separated from each other.
B. Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separate from each other.
C. Lodging units shall be separated from each other.
 215-15 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-16
198:296
ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
 215-17. General requirements.
 215-18. Exterior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural parts.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others, the
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying and termites and other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that grounds- and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces.
A. Foundation walls.
(1) The foundation walls of every structure shall be maintained in good
repair and shall be structurally sound.
(2) Foundation walls shall be considered in good repair and
structurally sound if found free from damage and defects and
capable of bearing imposed loads.
B. Stairs, porches and railings.
(1) The stairs, porches and railings affixed to the exterior of every
structure shall be kept in good repair and structurally sound.
Railings shall be provided for stairs and balconies and, where
necessary, for porches and accessible roofs.
(2) Stairs and porches shall be considered to be in good repair and
structurally sound when found to be free of holes and cracks and
capable of supporting imposed loads. Railings shall be designed to
withstand both vertical and horizontal forces in accordance with
generally accepted standards.
C. Weather- and watertight.
(1) Every structure shall be so maintained that it will be weather- and
watertight.
 215-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-18
198:297
(2) Exterior walls, roofs and all openings around doors, windows,
chimneys and all other parts of the structure shall be so maintained
as to keep water from entering the structure and to prevent heat
loss. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced. All parts of
the structure that show evidence of dry rot or other deterioration
shall be repaired or replaced and refinished. Such replacement
shall be in conformity with the remainder of the structure.
(3) Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and
basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair.
(4) Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied
with glass window panes, or an approved substitute, which are
without open cracks or holes.
(5) Windows to be tight. Every window sash shall be free of rot and
structural defects and shall fit reasonably right within its frame.
(6) Windows to be openable. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be capable of being opened and shall be held in position by
window hardware.
(7) Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch
shall be maintained in good condition.
(8) Doors to fit in frame. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
(9) Window and door frames to fit in wall. Every window, door and
frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain and to substantially
exclude wind from entering the dwelling or multifamily dwelling.
D. Protective coating for wood surfaces.
(1) All exterior wood surfaces of a structure not inherently resistant to
deterioration by the natural elements shall be treated with a
protective coating or preservative to prevent structural
deterioration.
(2) Exterior wood surfaces shall be adequately protected against
deterioration through the application of approved protective
coatings.
(3) Lead-base paint prohibition. In accordance with the Code of
Federal Regulations, the use of lead-base paint is prohibited in
residential structures on applicable surfaces, meaning all interior
surfaces and those exterior surfaces, such as stairs, decks, porches,
railings, windows and doors, which are readily accessible to
children.
 215-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-18
198:298
 215-19. Interior protection.
(4) All exterior surfaces shall be free of all loose, peeling, and/or
blistered protective coatings. [Added 3-19-2007]
E. Overhanging objects.
(1) Every structure shall be free of loose overhanging objects.
(2) Exterior walls, roofs and all those parts of the structure shall be
free from loose and unsecured objects and materials. Such objects
or materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
F. Graffiti. [Added 3-23-2009]
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore any surface
marred by graffiti to a clean state of maintenance and repair within
a reasonable time.
(2) "Graffiti" is defined as any unauthorized inscription, word, figure,
painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched,
scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise
affixed to any surface of public or private property by a device
capable of leaving a visible mark.
(3) If the graffiti is not addressed for an extended period of time, the
Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee may order the
removal of the graffiti in accordance with ㎣ 215-46 and 215-66.
A. Free from dampness.
(1) Cellars, basements and crawl spaces in every structure shall be
reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to
decay or deterioration of the structure.
(2) Ventilation shall be provided in every basement, cellar and crawl
space by means of windows, openings or vents or mechanical vents.
B. Structural members. Supporting structural members of every structure
shall be structurally sound. Supporting structural members shall be
considered to be structurally sound if such members are capable of
bearing imposed loads safely and if there is no evidence of
deterioration.
C. Chimneys, flues and vents.
(1) Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto and all other
flues and vents of every structure shall be structurally sound and
free from defects to assure the performance of the function for
which they were designed and are used.
(2) Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment
shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the
connected equipment. Chimneys, flue linings, where required, flues
 215-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-19
198:299
and gas vents and their supports shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of the flue
gases.
D. Stairs and railings.
(1) Interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound and free from defects. Railings shall be provided
for stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
(2) Treads or risers that evidence excessive wear, as defined by the
National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code, or are
broken, warped or loose shall be repaired. Stairs shall be securely
fastened to supporting structural members and be capable of
supporting normally imposed loads. Properly balustraded railings
capable of bearing normally imposed loads shall be placed on the
open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
E. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Floors, walls and ceilings of every structure shall be structurally
sound and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound where capable
of safely bearing imposed loads. Walls and ceilings shall be
considered to be structurally sound and in good repair when clean
and free from breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions.
(3) Toilet rooms and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to
prevent leakage of water through the floor under normal conditions
of use and floor washing and resultant deterioration or defects in
structural members and ceilings below.
(4) All interior flooring shall be maintained free of gaps between
floorboards and free of broken and loose flooring, warped boards,
splintered flooring and rotted boards.
 215-19 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-19
198:300
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety Requirements
 215-20. Supplemental regulations.
The following requirements shall supplement but in no way restrict the
National Fire Protection Association National Fire Prevention Code or
similar fire code separately adopted by the City of Jamestown.33
 215-21. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
 215-22. Prevention of fire spread.
 215-23. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
A. To accumulate or store on any premises, except in approved locations,
any flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning
fluids and similar materials, or any combustible refuse, such as
wastepaper, boxes, rugs or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where, in
the event of fire, such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flames or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to any building shall be separated from other
spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will retard
the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors originating
within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of the building.
A. Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation
and decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and
interior trim shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off
smoke or gases which constitute a hazard.
B. In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, the use of leadbase
paint is prohibited in residential structures on applicable surfaces,
meaning all interior surfaces and those exterior surfaces, such as stairs,
decks, porches, railings, windows and doors, which are readily
accessible to children.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
 215-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-23
198:301
 215-24. Fireplaces.
 215-25. Smoke detectors.
An approved single-station smoke detector continuously powered by the
house electrical service shall be installed in an approved manner in every
living unit within a building containing three or more separate dwelling
units. In one- and two-family dwellings a battery-operated or electric smoke
detector shall be installed in an approved manner near each sleeping area.
When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which is audible in the
sleeping rooms of each unit. This individual-station smoke detector shall be
in addition to any sprinkler system or other detection system that may be
installed in the building.
 215-26. Fire doors.
Any building containing three or more separate dwelling units shall have
protection for corridors and corridor doors as set forth in Sections 19-3.6,
19-3.6.1, 19-3.6.2, 19-3.6.3 and 19-3.6.4 of the Life Safety Code as adopted
by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., and as thereafter may be
from time to time amended.
 215-27. Solid fuels.
Solid fuels, such as cordwood, shall not be stored within four feet of any
property line. Storage shall be screened through the use of landscaping
C. Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation
and decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and
interior trim shall be of materials that will not, in burning, exceed the
flame-spread characteristics of the surface for which its use is intended
as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. In addition thereto, any building containing three or
more separate dwelling units shall have interior finish which shall
conform to the standards of the 1981 Edition of the Life Safety Code as
adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., and more
specifically set forth therein as Sections 19-3.3 and 19-3.3.2, and any
amendments thereto which may from time to time be adopted.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to 175 F.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to 175 F. or ignited by sparks or embers
from the fire. Fire screens are to be provided over fireplace openings.
 215-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-27
198:302
or architectural features which harmonize with the elements and
characteristics of the property and adjacent properties. Stored solid fuels
shall not block exits or windows or be so located as to hamper fire-fighting
operations. Solid fuel storage shall be limited to the amount required for
one season.
 215-28. Numbering of buildings.
All buildings defined by this chapter shall be designated by a street number
as heretofore issued by the City of Jamestown. The number of such building
shall be permanently affixed upon the front portion of that building, either
numerically or by a combination of letters, which when taken as a whole
correspond to the number which it purports to represent, and shall be large
enough to see from the street upon which said building abuts and shall be
of contrasting color to the remainder of the building.
 215-29. Multiple dwellings.
Multiple dwellings with 12 or more dwelling units shall be equipped with
a manual fire alarm system as required by the National Fire Protection
Association Life Safety Code and any amendment thereto.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to the effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling the water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in
the open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
D. Portable extinguishers. Portable extinguishers required for fire
protection shall be in their designated locations and in a condition
which will permit efficient operation without delay.
 215-27 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-29
198:303

ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
 215-30. General requirements.
 215-31. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigeration, cooking, fire-protection and radiation-production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare or a danger because of structural defects or a source of ignition
or a radiation hazard and will not create noise that changes the
character of the immediate environment. Equipment and systems
include but are not limited to apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe
hangers, pipe covering, wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or
in connection with such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in buildings. The domestic water supply system of the
building shall be connected to such approved source and shall not
be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public source,
the potable water supply system shall not be connected to private
or other water supplies.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage. All water pipes shall be
securely fastened to structural parts of dwellings to prevent
vibration.
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
 215-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-31
198:305
(4) Hot-water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve pressures and temperatures in excess of system
design.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(6) Approved cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(7) The drainage system and its attendant vent pipe shall be vented.
(8) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with Chapter B, Article 9, of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code to eliminate
clogging, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(9) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile foods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewer through the direct
or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
(1) Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an approved system
of stormwater disposal where available. Storm drains shall be
discharged in such a manner that water will not flow onto
sidewalks or adjoining properties.
 215-31 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-31
198:306
(2) Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, provision
shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible materials, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and hot and cold
water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required therein.
(2) Water-heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
water-heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner,
properly maintained and properly connected with hot-water lines
to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under this
subsection.
(a) Water-heating facilities shall be approved to accommodate the
occupancy for which it was designed and capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit water to be drawn at
a temperature of not less than 130 F. or 55 C. Under no
circumstances shall its capacity be less than 30 gallons per
hour.
(b) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least one kitchen sink, one water
closet, one bathtub or shower and one lavatory.
(c) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms, for each multiple of six sleeping
rooms or fraction thereof there shall be provided plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least one water closet, one bathtub or
shower and one lavatory.
(d) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or
fraction thereof there shall be provided plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least one water closet, one bathtub or shower
and one lavatory.
(e) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more
than 1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(f) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
 215-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-31
198:307
 215-32. Fuel gas.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
G. Swimming pools.
(1) The water supply used for filling or for cleaning pools shall be from
a potable source. The water supply shall be protected against
potential pollution from all sources, including cross-connection and
backflow.
(2) Approved drains shall be provided to allow for complete draining of
the pool. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the
swimming pool and arranged so that water from such areas will
drain without entering the pool.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be of sufficient design and capacity to maintain the sanitary quality
of water during each period the pool is in use. Equipment
containing gases or disinfectants capable of giving off irritating,
toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
H. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operations.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in working condition.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for which the
system was designed.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use. All gas
 215-31 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-32
198:308
 215-33. Heating.
piping shall be securely fastened to structural parts of the building
to prevent vibration.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be maintained in
accordance with generally accepted standards.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliances.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas refrigerators
and ranges shall be installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be
maintained in accordance with generally accepted standards.
D. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gauge shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pounds per square
inch gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressures.
E. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
vaporized by devices utilizing open flame or open electrical coil.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve pressures
in excess of system design and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at an approved location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in accordance with generally accepted standards.
A. Equipment. Except in one-family dwellings, heating equipment shall be
maintained so as to provide an indoor temperature of 68 F. measured
 215-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-33
198:309
at a distance of two feet or more from exterior walls and at a level of
five feet above the floor.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission of discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person or to the public.
C. Warm air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on and adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation and clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed 175 F.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to approved
chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to an approved chimney,
flue or gas vent.
I. Safety devices.
 215-33 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-33
198:310
 215-34. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures and
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically-operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature or
pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to an approved rate. When the water level in
a steam boiler drops below a predetermined level, the fuel supply
shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of the pilot light or
main burner occurs, each pilot light and main burner shall be cut
off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing any
building shall be located in heater rooms, except that equipment
burning gas or liquid fuel located in the vehicle storage space shall be
permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so as not to be
exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases but not less than
18 inches from the floor.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air in accordance with generally accepted standards.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking,corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected. Openings for smoke
pipes or gas vent connections shall be provided with means for easy
connection without restriction of flue.
(5) No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(6) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
B. Fire-safety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use, the temperature of any
 215-33 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-34
198:311
 215-35. Incinerators.
 215-36. Electrical.
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed 175 F.
C. Spark arrestors. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may permit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrestor of noncombustible construction. Spark arrestors shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit the unrestricted passage of flue
gases. Openings in spark arrestors shall be of such size as to prevent
the passage of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Fuel-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrestor.
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to an approved chimney,
smokestack or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting the disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. General requirements. Existing electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and
systems shall be maintained in a condition which will avoid a potential
source of shock and fire. Existing electrical systems shall be governed
in accordance with standards in force at the time of installation. Any
alterations, repairs or additional installation shall comply with the
National Electrical Code (National Fire Protection Association 70) and
Chapter 131, Electrical Standards, the Code of the City of Jamestown.
B. Additional residential requirements.
(1) Where there is electrical service available to the building or
structure, every habitable room of a dwelling or multifamily
dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote outlets, one
 215-34 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-36
198:312
of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electrical light fixture.
In kitchens, three separate and remote wall-type electrical
convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets and one
ceiling or wall-type electrical light fixture shall be provided. Every
public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or
furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In
addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry
room, there shall be provided at least one electrical outlet.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
electrical overload by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded so as to
eliminate the danger of high voltage from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed, separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
C. Electric lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric wiring
systems shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point or entrance to such unit.
D. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at the locations from which the
exit doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT with a suitable
 215-36 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-36
198:313
 215-37. Cooking and refrigeration; dining space.
 215-38. Air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation.
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that existing signs shall be at
least 4 1/2 inches high.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
(5) In structures of 12 or more dwelling units, emergency lighting shall
be required in the event of power failure.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with approved cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in
accordance with generally accepted standards.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall
be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
(4) Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements: Communal
kitchens shall contain at least one kitchen sink, at least one kitchen gas
or electric stove equipped with an oven and not fewer than four top
burners and at least one electric or gas-type refrigerator with adequate
food storage capacity, but in no case less than eight cubic feet nominal
size. Dining space and eating facilities where provided in the kitchen
area shall comply with the requirements for communal dining rooms.
Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and two
linear feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a dining room
at any particular time.
A. One- and two-family dwellings.
(1) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
(2) Ducts shall be installed in accordance with generally accepted
standards.
B. Multiple dwellings.
 215-36 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-38
198:314
(1) Refrigerants.
(a) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in
multiple dwellings.
(b) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic
shall not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
(2) Ventilating systems.
(a) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that
the rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system
will be prevented so that under conditions of use, the
temperature of any combustible material adjacent thereto or in
contact therewith will not exceed 175 F.
(b) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall
not be used as plenum chambers.
(c) Ducts shall be installed in accordance with generally accepted
standards.
(d) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of
noncombustible material.
(e) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to create a
fire or smoke hazard.
(f) Ducts passing through or located within combustible
construction shall be separated from such construction by a
clearance of at least 1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating
material of at least 1/4 inch thick.
(g) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or
shall be quality controlled.
(h) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents
may emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to
other occupied spaces within the building.
(3) Air intake and exhaust openings.
(a) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so
as to prevent the possibility of fire, smoke fumes or foreign
matter being drawn into the system.
(b) Intake openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated
source.
(c) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces
that also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be
provided fixed intake openings from the exterior to supply
 215-38 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-38
198:315
 215-39. Fuel oil.
sufficient air so that the operation of fuel-burning equipment is
not affected.
(d) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will
not create a nuisance.
(4) Ventilation requirements.
(a) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or
nuisance shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation
to remove such excess.
(b) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air
supply for the maximum number of persons for which such
spaces are designed.
(5) Safety controls.
(a) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the
operation of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be
conspicuously identified and in readily accessible locations
outside the fan room.
(b) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly
space of more than one fire area or more than one story of a
building shall be provided with controls arranged so that under
an abnormal rise in temperature of the air in the system, the
fans causing normal circulation shall stop and require manual
restart.
(c) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be
provided with an emergency switch and with a durable sign
giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
The switch shall be so located as to be readily accessible to
Fire Department personnel.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
 215-38 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-39
198:316
 215-40. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
an approved distance from building openings.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in
accordance with generally accepted standards.
B. Elevators and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations, on which the rated capacity
shall be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for the storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except when necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
 215-39 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-40
198:317

ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
 215-41. Conformance required. [Amended 3-23-2009]
 215-41.1. Landlord registration form required. [Added
3-29-201034]
 215-42. General requirements.
A. Residential, nonresidential, commercial and industrial buildings and
accessory structures, whether occupied or vacant, shall be maintained
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. In order to prevent the excessive growth of weeds and grass, it is
hereby declared that all lots, whether residential, nonresidential,
commercial or industrial, shall be maintained in conformity with the
standards set out in this chapter so as to assure that the subdivision and
community at large will not be adversely affected.
A. It is a mandatory requirement that all owners of residences which
contain at least one rental unit complete and file a landlord registration
form with the Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk. The form is to be filed within 30 days upon receipt thereof or
immediately upon request of the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk. [Amended 8-28-2017]
B. If the information on a previously filed landlord registration form
changes for any reason, it is the current owner's responsibility to
immediately correct the information on the applicable form on file.
C. Landlord registration forms are available at and are to be filed with the
Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk's office, 200
E. 3rd St., Jamestown, NY 14701. [Amended 8-28-2017]
D. The Director of Development and his/her agents shall be responsible for
enforcement of this Code.
E. Penalties for offenses of this section shall be punishable by provisions
stated in Chapter 215,  215-68 of the Jamestown City Code.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 6-1-2010.
 215-41 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-42
198:319
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean.
E. Overgrown weeds, grass, brush and other vegetation. [Amended
3-19-2007; 3-23-2009]
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or person having
charge of lands within the City of Jamestown to cut down or cause
to be cut down all overgrown weeds, grass, brush and other
vegetation in excess of six inches and to remove or cause to be
removed all garbage, weeds, grass or other rank, poisonous or
noxious vegetation and tree limbs or other debris on said land as
often as necessary to maintain such land in a sanitary and orderly
condition and to comply with the provisions of  215-42.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person having control or ownership of
any type of tenancy in any lot in a residential, nonresidential,
commercial or industrial zone in the City of Jamestown, County of
Chautauqua and State of New York, to permit or maintain on such
land, or portion thereof, any growth of weeds, grass or other rank
vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the average or any
accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush.
(3) Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of
this section and shall be punishable in accordance with ㎣ 215-68
and 215-72.
F. Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which may create
a health, accident or fire hazard. Trees growing within 24 inches of the
foundation of a home must be removed. [Amended 3-19-2007]
G. Exterior property areas shall be free from holes and excavations, sharp
protrusions and other objects or conditions which might cause personal
injury. Walks, steps and driveways that contain holes or tripping
hazards shall be filled, repaired or replaced to conform to their
intended use; wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be securely closed; and
trees or limbs of trees that constitute a hazard shall be removed.
H. No motor vehicle as such is defined by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York nor trailer, camper or boat, whether registered or
unregistered, shall be parked or stored in the front yard of any
residential building whether such building is occupied or vacant.
[Added 9-16-1996]
I. Repair of motor vehicles in residential areas. It shall be unlawful for any
person to perform automotive repair on any motor vehicle in an area
zoned for detached single-family or multifamily dwelling units in the
City, except under the following condition: Any person may perform
automobile repair work on one currently licensed motor vehicle titled
 215-42 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-42
198:320
 215-43. Infestation and screening.
 215-44. Garbage and refuse.
or registered in his/her name or in the name of a member of his/
her immediate family, provided that such work shall be done within
a garage of suitable dimensions for said repairs on the premises of
his/her residence; and provided, further, that such work shall not be
performed in violation of any other City ordinance. A person may
only perform repair work on one motor vehicle at a time. [Added
8-16-2004]
J. Repair of combustion engines in residential areas. It shall be unlawful
for any person to perform repairs on any combustion engine in an area
zoned for detached single-family or multifamily dwelling units in the
City, except under the following condition: Any person may perform
automobile repair work on a currently licensed motor vehicle titled or
registered in his/her name or in the name of a member of his/her
immediate family, provided that such work shall be done within a
garage of suitable dimensions for said repairs on the premises of his/
her residence; and provided, further, that such work shall not be
performed in violation of any other City ordinance. [Added 8-16-2004]
A. Grounds, building and structures shall be maintained free of insects,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall meet the generally
accepted Health Department standards and shall be in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications.
B. The exterior of every structure shall be so maintained as to be vermin
and rodent free. All exterior windows, doors and other openings shall
be screened or protected with approved materials. Defects, cracks or
holes shall be tightly sealed to prevent the entrance of vermin and
rodents.
A. The exterior of the property area shall be kept free from organic and
inorganic material that might become a health, accident or fire hazard,
including but not limited to: [Amended 3-21-2005]
(1) Accumulations of clothing and any other items not designed for
outdoor storage;
(2) All household garbage, dead animals, animal and human waste and
waste material;
(3) Accumulations of dead organic matter and yard debris, with the
exception of small accumulations of such material in a maintained
compost area on the property and only if such material does not
result in a nuisance, such as creating rat harborage or insect
infestation; and
 215-42 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-44
198:321
 215-45. Domestic animals.
Domestic animals and pets shall not be kept on any premises in such
manner as to create unsanitary conditions or to constitute a nuisance.
 215-45.1. Visibility along driveways. [Added 11-22-1993]
No fence, wall, shrub planting, tree foliage or other permanent structure
within five feet of the side of any driveway, which obstructs vision or is three
feet or higher above sidewalk level, shall be placed or maintained within
eight feet of the point at which said driveway intersects a sidewalk.
 215-45.2. Use or storage of indoor furniture. [Added 3-21-2005]
The use, keeping or storage of any upholstered furniture, including
mattresses, manufactured primarily for indoor use, shall be prohibited in
any yard and on any unenclosed porch.
(4) Accumulations of litter, glass, scrap materials (such as wood, metal,
paper and plastics), junk, combustible materials, stagnant water or
trash.
B. Approved sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse. It shall
be prohibited to store or accumulate garbage or refuse in halls or
stairways. Receptacles for storage of garbage, refuse, and recyclable
materials shall not be located in the area which extends from the
primary residential structure to the exterior property line. Every
dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be provided with as many such
receptacles as necessary to contain all garbage and refuse, and all such
receptacles shall be maintained in good repair. Receptacles for garbage
shall be made of durable material, watertight and provided with tightfitting
covers. Garbage and refuse shall not be put out for collection
before 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the regularly scheduled garbage,
refuse and recycling pickup of the Board of Public Utilities or remain at
the front of the property for more than 12 hours after pickup.
[Amended 9-14-1998; 3-19-2007]
C. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
 215-44 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-45.2
198:322
Part 2
Administration And Enforcement
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
 215-46. Nuisances declared; abatement. [Amended 3-23-2009]
 215-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to establish powers and duties for the basic
and uniform administration of and compliance with the applicable standards
of this chapter and to establish the responsibility of the parties concerned
therewith.
A. All buildings, dwellings, dwelling units, studio units, multiple dwellings,
rooming units, rooming houses, yards, courts, open areas and vacant
lots which are in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be abated by being corrected, made sanitary,
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the orders of the
Director of Development by exercise of the powers and duties herein
contained.
B. Five days after the mailing of a notice by regular mail to the last known
address of the property owner, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
make an inspection, and if such inspection discloses that the owner or
occupant has not complied with said notice, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause weeds, grass and other vegetation on such lands or
portions thereof to be cut and removed.
C. If the topography of said land is such to make it impossible or
impractical to use machinery in the clearing and cutting, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall first grade the land in order that the cutting
and removal may be done by machinery. The actual cost of cutting and
removal, and grading if necessary, shall thereupon become and be a lien
upon the property in accordance with the provisions of  215-76.
[Amended 9-25-2017]
D. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the property is in a
state of disrepair in accordance with this chapter and as a result needs
to be secured and/or prepared for demolition, the actual costs of
securing and preparing the property for demolition shall thereupon
become and be a lien upon the property in accordance with the
provisions of  215-76. [Added 7-28-2014; amended 9-25-2017]
 215-46 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-47
198:323

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
[Amended 12-26-1989; 7-25-1994; 1-29-1996; 1-20-2004;
3-21-2005; 6-20-2005; 3-19-2007]
 215-48. Department of Development.
A. The Department of Development of the City of Jamestown shall
administer and secure compliance with the applicable property
rehabilitation and conservation standards as provided for under this
chapter.
B. The Department of Development shall be under the direction and
charge of the Director of Development, who shall have as his
representatives the code enforcement personnel, who shall be
authorized to administer and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code and the provisions of this chapter.
C. All code enforcement personnel of the Department of Development
shall be qualified and appointed as prescribed by local law and shall be
furnished with appropriate official badges or identification cards.
(1) The code enforcement personnel shall possess background
experience related to building construction and/or fire prevention
and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic
training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other
training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel.
D. Powers and duties.
(1) The Department of Development shall be charged with the duty of
administering this chapter and securing compliance therewith and
shall be empowered to adopt administrative rules and regulations
necessary for its own organization and internal management,
provided that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with this chapter.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Director of Development and the code
enforcement personnel and they shall have the power:
(a) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and
the plans, specifications and construction documents
submitted with such applications;
(b) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
 215-48 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-48
198:325
 215-49. Building permits.
conditions as the code enforcement personnel may determine
to be appropriate;
(c) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made
prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(d) To issue stop-work orders;
(e) To review and investigate complaints;
(f) To issue notices of violation pursuant to  215-61, Notice of
violation of this chapter;
(g) To maintain records;
(h) To collect fees as set by the City Council of the City of
Jamestown;
(i) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and
proceedings;
(j) In consultation with the Corporation Counsel, to pursue such
legal actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to
abate or correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code or this chapter; and
(k) To submit to the Mayor and the City Council an annual report
of the Department of Development.
(l) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties
conferred upon the code enforcement personnel by the
Director of Development and by this chapter.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the code
enforcement personnel.
 215-48 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-49
198:326
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(2) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(3) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(4) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(5) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(6) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or the provisions of this chapter.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer. The application
shall be signed by the owner of the property where the work is to be
performed or an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall
include such information as the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer deems sufficient to permit a determination by the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer that the intended work complies with
all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
 215-49 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-49
198:327
The application shall include or be accompanied by the following
information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer,
and one set of the accepted construction documents shall be returned
to the applicant to be kept at the work site so as to be available for use
by the code enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of
accepted construction documents to the applicant shall not be
construed as authorization to commence work nor as an indication that
a building permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and
unless a building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
 215-49 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-49
198:328
 215-50. Construction inspections.
building permit if the proposed work is in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Uniform Code, Energy Code and the
Jamestown City Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer determines that a building permit
was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, or that the work for which a building permit was issued
violates the Uniform Code or the Energy Code, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall revoke the building permit or suspend the building permit
until such time as the permit holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in  175-3 of the Jamestown City Code must be paid
at the time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Building and Zoning
Code Enforcement Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Building
 215-49 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-50
198:329
 215-51. Stop-work orders.
and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer. The permit holder shall notify
the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer when any element
of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in  175-3 of the Jamestown City Code must be paid
prior to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this
section.
A. Authority to issue. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer
is authorized to issue stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a stop-work
order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer to be contrary to any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code, Energy Code, or Jamestown City Code without
regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building
 215-50 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-51
198:330
permit is required, and without regard to whether a building
permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit or under a building
permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof,
to be served on the owner of the affected property (and, if the owner is
not the permit holder, on the permit holder) personally. The Building
and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not
required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served
on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent, or their agents, or any other person
taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work order,
personally or by registered mail/certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under  215-68 (Penalties for offenses) of this chapter or under
any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or
 215-51 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-51
198:331
 215-52. Certificates of occupancy; certificates of compliance.
penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance if the work which was the
subject of the building permit was completed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if
applicable, that the structure, building or portion thereof that was
converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification
to another complies with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code and the Jamestown City Code. The Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the
Director of Development shall inspect the building, structure or work
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance. In addition, where applicable, the following documents,
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer, at the
expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, shall be provided to the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
 215-51 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-52
198:332
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer issuing the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the
temporary occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof,
prior to completion of the work which is the subject of a building
permit. However, in no event shall the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer issue a temporary certificate unless the Building
and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building or
structure or the portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate
may be occupied safely; that any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire
protection equipment which has been installed is operational; and that
all required means of egress from the building or structure have been
provided. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, and the Jamestown
City Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
 215-52 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-52
198:333
 215-53. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee providing fire-fighting
services for a property within the City shall promptly notify the code
enforcement personnel of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
 215-54. Unsafe buildings or structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the City of Jamestown shall be
identified and addressed in accordance with the procedures established
by ㎣ 215-64 and 215-65 of this chapter, as now in effect or as hereafter
amended from time to time.
 215-55. Operating permits.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in  175-3 of the Jamestown City Code must be paid
at the time of submission of an application for a certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the City Council.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
 215-52 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-55
198:334
 215-56. Referral to County Commissioner of Health; immediate
hazards.
acceptable to the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer. Such
application shall include such information as the Building and Zoning
Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit a determination
by the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer that quantities,
materials, and activities conform to the requirements of the Uniform
Code. If the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer determines
that tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests
or reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons
as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer or an
inspector authorized by the Director of Development shall inspect the
subject premises prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate
operating permit for each such activity, or the Building and Zoning
Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her discretion, issue a single
operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions.
The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the
operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed
upon application to the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer,
payment of the applicable fee, and approval of such application by the
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or
building for which an operating permit was issued does not comply with
any applicable provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit
shall be revoked or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in  175-3 of the Jamestown City Code must be paid
at the time submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Violations of such provisions of this chapter which are specifically
covered by or within the scope of the Sanitary Code of the Chautauqua
County Health District and/or the Public Health Law of the State of New
 215-55 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-56
198:335
 215-57. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections; access
to premises.
York shall be referred to the County Commissioner of Health or his
designated representative. These referrals shall be for the following
purposes: to make inspections of said referred alleged violations and
report, in writing, such findings to the Director of Development. At
the time of submitting such referral, the Director of Development shall
request that the Commissioner of Health or his designated
representative making the report inform the Director of Development,
in writing, that all or part of the violations contained in the report will
be administered by and compliance secured in accordance with the
provisions of said Sanitary Code and/or Public Health Law; or all or part
of the violations contained in the report may be administered by and
compliance secured in accordance with the provisions of the Property
Rehabilitation and Conservation Code of the City of Jamestown, and the
inspector shall cooperate with the Director of Development to obtain
compliance. The items of violation contained in the report shall be
included in any notice or order issued by the Director of Development
and in all legal proceedings pertaining thereto.
B. Where violations of the Property Rehabilitation and Conservation Code
of the City of Jamestown exist and pose an immediate hazard or danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the building occupants or of the
public, the Director of Development or his duly authorized
representatives may issue an order citing the violation and directing
such action by the City of Jamestown as is necessary to remove or abate
the immediate hazard or danger.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the code enforcement
personnel or an Inspector designated by the Director of Development at
the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures, which contain an area of public assembly, shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
 215-56 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-57
198:336
 215-58. Complaints.
The Director of Development, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer or other code enforcement personnel shall review and investigate
complaints which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities
that fail to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter,
or any provision of the Jamestown City Code adopted for administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process
for responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as
the Director of Development, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer or other code enforcement personnel may deem to be appropriate:
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the code enforcement
personnel or an inspector designated by the Director of Development
at any time upon: the request of the owner of the property to be
inspected or an authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Director
of Development, Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer or code
enforcement personnel of a written statement alleging that conditions
or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
exist; or receipt by the Director of Development, Building and Zoning
Code Enforcement Officer or code enforcement personnel of any other
information, reasonably believed to be reliable, giving rise to
reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to
comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; provided,
however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law  156-e and Education Law  807-b.
D. Identification of code enforcement personnel. Code enforcement
personnel and authorized personnel of the Department of Development
shall be supplied with official identification and shall exhibit such
identification when entering the premises and all parts thereof.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in  215-61
(Notice of violation) of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
 215-57 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-58
198:337
 215-59. Recordkeeping.
 215-60. Program review and reporting.
The Director of Development shall annually submit to City Council a written
report and summary of all business conducted by the Code Enforcement
Officer and code enforcement personnel, including a report and summary
of all transactions and activities described in  215-59 (Recordkeeping) of
this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending
or concluded.
 215-61. Notice of violation.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Department of Development shall keep permanent official records
of all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
㎣ 215-49 through 215-58, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.35
A. Notice of violation. The code enforcement personnel are authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Records, Public.
 215-58 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-61
198:338
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation
of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding
that any such condition or activity exists, code enforcement personnel
shall issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in
writing; be dated and signed by one of the code enforcement personnel;
specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated
by the specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which
the code enforcement personnel deems to be reasonably necessary
for achieving compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within
the specified period of time; and state that an action or proceeding
to compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time; inform the person or persons to
whom it is directed of his/her right to apply within such time as may
be designated in such notice for a hearing before the Director of
Development or his/her designated representative, or he/she may
appeal in such time designated to the Property Rehabilitation and
Conservation Board of Appeals. A member of the code enforcement
personnel shall cause the notice of violation, or a copy thereof, to be
served on the owner of the affected property personally or mailed to the
owner of the property wherein the violation exists in accordance with
the provisions of New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules  308 and
New York State Criminal Procedure Law  150.40. Code enforcement
personnel shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the notice
of violation, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect,
tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their
agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being
performed at the affected property personally or by registered mail/
certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person
mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The code enforcement personnel and each
inspector are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of
the Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or other code enforcement
personnel pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part thereof during
which such violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this
subdivision shall be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of
this the City of Jamestown.
 215-61 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-61
198:339
 215-62. Emergencies.
Whenever the Director of Development at any time finds that a violation of
this chapter exists which requires immediate action to abate a direct hazard
or immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of
a building or of the public, he may, without prior notice of hearing, issue
an order citing the violation and directing that such action be taken as is
necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Such order may include
an order to vacate. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
such an order shall be effective immediately upon service.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the City of Jamestown, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to
enforce, any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, the Jamestown City Code or any term or condition of any
building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance,
temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance
order, or other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way
of limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is
in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order
obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an
action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of the City of
Jamestown, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the
requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the
building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of
such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection
shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the
Mayor of the City of Jamestown.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
 215-51 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in  215-51 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter,
in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of  382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of  382 of the
Executive Law.
 215-61 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-63
198:340
 215-63. Extension of compliance time.
The Director of Development or other code enforcement personnel may
extend the compliance time specified in any notice or order issued under
the provisions of this chapter where there is evidence of intent to comply
within the period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which
prevent compliance within the time set forth in the notice or order.
 215-64. Vacation of unfit premises.
A. Notice of intent to vacate. Whenever the Director of Development
determines that a building or part thereof is unfit for human habitation
or is an unoccupied hazard or is otherwise in violation of a provision of
this chapter, he shall include such finding within a notice of violation,
and he shall also include a statement of his intent to order the premises
to be vacated or not to be occupied or to be repaired or otherwise
brought into compliance and to post necessary notices on the building
or part thereof if compliance with the provisions of the notice of
violation has not been secured.
B. Notice to vacate. Whenever compliance to a notice of violation has not
occurred, the Director of Development may post a notice on the
premises and order the premises or any part thereof to be vacated. A
copy of any such order or orders shall be served on the owner and/or
other responsible person and the occupant in the same manner, as the
case may require, as provided for serving notice of violation.
C. Time period to vacate. Any building or part thereof designated as unfit
for human habitation and so posted and ordered to be vacated shall be
vacated within such time as the Director of Development may specify in
the order. No such building or part thereof shall be used for human
habitation nor said posted notice removed until written approval is
secured from the Department of Development.
D. Removal of posted notice. No person shall deface or remove the posted
notice from any building or part thereof which has been designated as
unfit for human habitation or an unoccupied hazard, except as provided
in Subsection C.
E. Vacated building made secure. The owner, agent, occupant or operator
of any building or part thereof which has been designated as unfit for
human habitation or an unoccupied hazard shall make such building or
part thereof safe and secure for the protection of the public. Any
vacated building open at the doors and windows, if unguarded, shall be
deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of
this provision. If the owner fails to secure the building, the City may do
so and lien the property. The Director shall notify the owner, in the same
manner as provided for serving a notice of violation, within 14 calendar
days after filing of the lien with the County Clerk.
 215-63 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-64
198:341
 215-65. Demolition of unfit premises.
F. When the Director of Development or his/her agents have designated
any structure or any part of it unfit for human habitation and so posted
such property and ordered it to be vacated as described in ㎣ 215-62 or
215-64, it shall be unlawful to reenter the affected structure or any
portion thereof for any use of or presence in, or to make repairs thereto
pursuant to the issued notice of violation for the property, unless
authorized in writing from the Director of Development or his/her
agents.
G. Any person violating  215-64 shall be charged with trespassing and be
subject to the penalties under  215-68.
A. Notice of intent to demolish. Whenever the Director of Development
designates a building unfit for human habitation or an unoccupied
hazard as provided in this chapter and determines that the cost
necessary to correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value
of the building, he shall include within the notice of violation a
statement of his intent to order the demolition of the structure. A copy
of such notice shall be served on the owner or designated agent
recorded with the Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk prior to the service of any notice and shall contain notice of the
right to appeal. The owner may demolish such structure or correct the
violation regardless of cost, provided that the requirements of Chapter
140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction, and this chapter in
effect at the time of attempted compliance are satisfied and all such
corrections are undertaken in such a manner as to reasonably assure
complete compliance within a period of time agreed upon between the
Department of Development and the property owner. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. Order to demolish. Whenever compliance to a notice of violation has not
occurred, the Director of Development may order the building
demolished. Such order shall be served on the same parties provided in
Subsection A and in the same manner as provided for service of notice
of violation, and demolition shall be completed within the time specified
by the Director but not less than 30 days from the date of service of the
order, unless the Director of Development deems that the property is an
immediate hazard or emergency situation, in which case the property
may be demolished at any time specified by the Director. For the
purpose of this subsection, an immediate hazard or emergency
situation exists when conditions present a danger to the health, safety
or welfare of the occupants or public.
C. Order to make repairs or demolish. Whenever compliance to a notice
and order to remove a violation or secure, vacate or demolish a building
has not occurred and when such failure to comply is deemed by the
Director of Development to constitute a seriously dangerous nuisance,
he may proceed to cause the structure to be demolished, repaired,
altered, secured or vacated or take such other legal action as is
 215-64 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-65
198:342
 215-66. Expenses. [Amended 9-25-2017]
Expenses incurred pursuant to the preceding sections of this chapter shall
be paid by the owner of the premises. The Director of Development shall
file among his records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the
items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by this Part
2. The Director may institute a suit to recover such expenses or may cause
such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien upon the real
property in accordance with the provisions of  215-76.
 215-67. Liability of City.
No officer, agent or employee of the City of Jamestown, New York, shall be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to person or property as a
result of any official determination, order or action required or permitted in
the discharge of his duties under this chapter. The City of Jamestown shall
indemnify and hold harmless any such officer, agent or employee for any of
the above actions which occurred in the scope of the officer's, agent's or
employee's duty with the City of Jamestown.36
 215-68. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-22-2007; 3-23-2009]
necessary to abate the nuisance. Abatement authorized by this
subsection shall not commence until 30 days after service of such order
upon the owner or his representative, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
A. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by any of the following or
combination thereof:
(1) Imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
(2) Actual cost of the work performed to bring property into
compliance.
(3) A fine of not more than $1,000.
(4) A conditional discharge.
(5) An unconditional discharge.
B. For the purpose of this section, each day that an offense occurs shall be
deemed to be a separate offense and shall be punishable by any of the
above remedies or combination thereof for each day that the property
remains in violation.
C. Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass or other
vegetation as directed in this chapter, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the provisions of any notices herein provided, or who shall
resist or obstruct the Code Enforcement Officer in the cutting and
36.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, Defense and Indemnification of Officers and Employees.
 215-65 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-68
198:343
 215-69. Duties of legal officer.
The Corporation Counsel or his designee may, upon complaint of the
Director of Development or upon his own motion, institute appropriate
action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or remove violations of
this chapter and to take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out
the terms and provisions of this chapter. In the event that the Corporation
Counsel or his designee shall decline to prosecute any violations of this
chapter, he shall submit to the Director of Development, in writing, his legal
justifications thereof within five business days. The remedies provided for
herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to
any other remedies provided by law. Any and all remedies may be pursued
concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be
construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of
the others.
 215-70. Board of Appeals.
removing of weeds, grass and other vegetation, or grading, if necessary,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100, and each day on which said violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, violations of
provisions of this chapter, except as outlined above, shall be punishable
as follows: Upon a determination of guilt by the City Court Judge of a
violation of any provision of this chapter, the fine shall not be less than
$125 for a first offense, not be less than $250 for a second offense
within a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period following the initial
determination of violation and not be less than $500 for a third or
subsequent offense within a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period
following the initial determination of violation, which fine shall not be
suspended, waived or otherwise reduced below these amounts.
A. There is hereby created a Property Rehabilitation and Conservation
Board of Appeals consisting of nine members, each appointed for terms
of three years, and at the expiration of such terms, the terms of office of
their successors shall be three years, except that the members of such
Board first appointed shall be appointed for terms in a manner such
that the term of three members expire in one year, three members'
terms expire in two years and three members' terms expire in three
years. In addition, one City Council member shall be appointed by the
Council President to serve as a liaison. All appointments to fill vacancies
shall be for the unexpired term. The Board shall choose its own
Chairman, and the Director of Development or his duly authorized
representative shall act as Secretary but shall not vote on any issues
presented to the Board. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to prepare
an agenda and minutes for each meeting which briefly explain the
nature of each matter to be considered by the Board, and he shall send
a copy of said agenda to each member of the Board and to the
 215-68 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-70
198:344
 215-71. Authority of code enforcement personnel.
Wherever under this chapter the Director of Development is given
authorization to sign certain notices and orders, including but not limited to
notices of violation and orders to demolish, the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer or two senior-most code enforcement personnel of the
Department of Development shall have concurrent authority to sign such
notices or orders, regardless of the presence or absence of the Director of
Development from the City at the time such notices or orders are signed.
Corporation Counsel. The Board shall meet upon call of the Chairman.
Appointments to the Board shall be made by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Jamestown City Council.
B. A majority of the total membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum and a majority vote of the members present at a given meeting
shall be sufficient to render a determination.
C. The Property Rehabilitation and Conservation Board of Appeals shall
hear and determine matters referred to the Board by the Director of
Development or his duly authorized representative or appeals from any
person presented with a notice of violation in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 2. Any person seeking relief from the Board
following a notice of violation must file a notice of appeal with the
Director of Development or his duly authorized representative of his/
her desire to appeal to the Board prior to the expiration of the time limit
for compliance stated in the notice of violation.
D. It shall be the function of the Board to review and investigate each
matter and/or appeal. The Board shall have the authority to modify the
application of the provisions of this chapter when strict enforcement
would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. If the
Board determines the violation is proper and the individual has been
afforded a reasonable opportunity to correct the violation, the Board
shall communicate its determination to the Director of Development
and to Jamestown City Court. The Board will not have the authority to
impose penalties.
 215-70 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-71
198:345

ARTICLE IX
Compliance
[Amended 10-22-1990; 9-30-1996; 1-24-2005; 3-19-2007]
 215-72. Responsibilities of owners and/or agents.
 215-73. Responsibilities of occupants.
The occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for compliance with the
Property Rehabilitation and Conservation Code standards in regard to the
following:
 215-74. Mandatory administration fee. [Amended 8-27-2012;
8-28-2017; 9-25-2017]
All property owners and/or other responsible parties who have been duly
served by the Department of Development with a legal notice to appear
in Jamestown City Court for violations of this chapter shall be required to
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
Property Rehabilitation and Conservation Code standards and shall
remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact that this Part 2 may
also place certain responsibilities on the occupants and regardless of
any agreements between owners and occupants as to which party shall
assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for the proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities and for furnishing heat and
hot-water supply in multiple dwellings.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls to the maximum permitted by the Property Rehabilitation and
Conservation Code standards.
B. Maintaining that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintaining all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities,
in that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Disposing garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
E. Exterminating insects, rodents or other vermin within his dwelling unit
if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
F. Hanging and removing required screens.
G. Keeping his domestic animals and pets in a lawful manner.
 215-72 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-74
198:347
pay a mandatory administrative fee in the amount of $100 for each and
every appearance which is required in Jamestown City Court. Said fee shall
not apply in instances where the City Court Judge makes a determination
that there was no legal basis for the service of the court appearance notice
and rules to dismiss said court case. Said mandatory administrative fee
shall be separate and independent from any fines or penalties imposed in
conjunction with  215-68 of this chapter and shall be payable to the City
of Jamestown Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk at the time of
each court appearance. Any unpaid administrative fee shall be chargeable
as a lien against the property in accordance with  215-76.
 215-75. Reports and assessments. [Added 3-23-2009; amended
8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall keep an account of
all such work done in accordance with this chapter and shall report to the
City Council all parcels of land upon which such work has been performed
and the names of the owners of said parcels who have not paid for the
cost of the work performed, and the City Council shall thereupon order
assessments upon such lands for the amounts reported.
 215-76. Liens. [Added 9-25-2017]
A. Any and all expenses incurred pursuant to this chapter, regardless of
and not requiring specific reference to this chapter, plus a fee of 20%
for inspection and administrative overhead therewith, shall be certified
by the Director of Development to the City Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
property and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officer in the same manner as taxes levied and assessed
against such property.
B. The City Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall notify the
owner by first class mail to the address on file with the taxing authority
within 14 days of filing of the lien with the County Clerk.
C. Except with respect to a lien proposed for expenses incurred in
demolition, nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon the
property which has priority over the lien of any recorded mortgage or
lien on such property executed and recorded prior to the existence of a
lien herein authorized.
 215-74 JAMESTOWN CODE  215-76
198:348
Chapter 220
RECORDS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification  See Ch. 15. Historian  See Ch. 28.
 215-76 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  215-76
198:349

ARTICLE I
Public Access
[Adopted 10-7-1974]
 220-1. Legislative authority.
This City Council hereby promulgates this set of rules in accordance with
Chapter 578 of the Laws of 1974.37
 220-2. Records access officer. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is hereby designated as
the records access officer of the City of Jamestown.
 220-3. Availability of records; copying fee; conference with
Corporation Counsel.
A. Persons seeking public records shall make application to the records
access officer upon the application form supplied by such officer in the
event that such records are not readily available.
B. The records access officer is hereby directed to make available to
persons requesting records those public records which, by law, are
required to be made available for public inspection and copying. In the
event that the request for public records interferes with the operation
of the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and
makes it difficult for members of the public to receive the regular
services of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, the
records access officer is hereby authorized to establish hours during
each day when he shall process requests for records, including the
times when such requests shall be made, in order to enable him to find
the records for review and copying. The times so established by the
records access officer shall be conspicuously posted in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. The records access officer is authorized to copy any records which are
within the purview of the law and to charge $0.25 per page size 8 1/2
inches by 11 inches and $0.35 per page and and inches by 15 inches. No
records shall be reproduced until payment is first received.
D. No records shall be removed from the lawful custody of any public
office charged with the duty of maintaining such records.
E. In the event that any requests cannot be met because such records are
being used for current working purposes, the applicant shall be advised
of such fact and every effort will be made to arrange a specific time
when such records will be available.
37.Editor's Note: See the Freedom of Information Law (Article 6 of the Public Officers Law).
 220-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  220-3
198:351
 220-4. Denial of access.
In the event that any person is denied access to any public records in
violation of the law, that person shall advise the City Council of such denial,
in writing, and set forth the records requested, the reason for denial and
the fact that the fees for such records were, in fact, tendered.
 220-5. Regulations to be temporary.
These regulations shall be temporary and considered as such until the state
guidelines are promulgated and until more comprehensive regulations can
be prepared.
 220-6. Purpose.
The purpose of such regulations shall be to maintain the spirit of the law
and to recognize that the concept of open records is consistent with the
purpose of the City Council.
F. In the event that a question arises as to the nature of the records in that
public viewing of such records may result in an unwarranted invasion of
a citizen's personal privacy or may result in a disclosure of material that
must be confidential to promote effective law enforcement or for any
other reason which, in the opinion of the records access officer, is valid
to promote the public interest while consistent with the new law, the
records access officer shall confer with the Corporation Counsel before
determining if such records shall be made available for inspection.
 220-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  220-6
198:352
ARTICLE II
Records Management
[Adopted 11-26-1990]
 220-7. Program established; Records Management Officer.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
There is hereby established a records management program which shall
be under the jurisdiction of the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk and shall be headed by a Records Management Officer who shall be
appointed by the City Council. The Records Management Officer shall be
responsible for administering the noncurrent and archival public records
and storage areas of the City of Jamestown in accordance with local, state
and federal laws and rules, regulations and guidelines established
thereunder.
 220-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES  Those official records which have been determined by the
Officer and the Advisory Committee to have sufficient historical or other
value to warrant their continued preservation by the City.
RECORDS  Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microfilm or any other materials, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in
connection with the transaction of official City business.
RECORDS CENTER  An establishment maintained by the department
primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of records
which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not be
retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION 
RECORDS MANAGEMENT  The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial activities involved in
The removal by the City, in accordance with approved records control
schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct of business
by such agency through removal methods which may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation.
The transfer of records to the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk for temporary storage of nonarchival records and
permanent storage of records determined to have historical or
other sufficient value warranting continued preservation.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
(2)
A.
B. The transfer of records from one City agency to any other City agency.
 220-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  220-8
198:353
records maintenance, use and disposition, including records preservation
and disposal, records centers or other storage facilities.
SERVICING  Making records which are the property of a particular
department available to the department for official use, as well as making
nonconfidential or historical records available to the public.
 220-9. Powers and duties of Records Management Officer.
The Records Management Officer is hereby vested with all powers
necessary to carry out the efficient administration, determination of value,
use, preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival
records kept, filed or received by the various officers, departments, boards
and commissions of the City of Jamestown. In performing his duties, the
Records Management Officer shall:
A. Continually survey and examine public records and recommend their
classification so as to determine the most suitable methods to be used
for the maintaining, storing and servicing of:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records pursuant to New York State
records retention and disposition schedules thereby subject to
disposition.
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrants permanent records
retention.
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to the laws of the
State of New York.
B. Establish guidelines for proper records management for the various
departments, agencies, boards and commissions of the City in
accordance with local, state and federal laws, rules, regulations and
guidelines relating thereto.
C. Review all requests for records storage equipment, microfilm
equipment and the like and to coordinate and participate in planning
for the development of micrographics and automated data processing
systems.
D. Operate a City records management center for the storage, processing
and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all City
departments and agencies.
E. Report annually to the Mayor and the City Council on the activities of
the Records Management Officer with respect to the responsibilities
enumerated herein.
 220-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  220-10
198:354
 220-10. Records Advisory Board. [Amended 2-12-1996; 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
There is hereby established a Records Advisory Board, which Board shall
work closely with and provide advice to the Records Management Officer.
The Board shall consist of the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk, the City Historian, a representative of the City Council appointed by
the President of the City Council, the Mayor or his designee, the President
of the Fenton Historical Society or his designee and an archivist to be
selected by the City Historian. All members of the Records Advisory Board
shall be residents of the County of Chautauqua. The Board shall meet
periodically and have the following duties:
 220-11. Custody and control of records.
The Records Management Officer shall maintain physical custody and
official responsibility for all records in his possession. The department
heads in the City of Jamestown shall retain constructive control and
authority over all records of their respective departments.
 220-12. Disposal of records.
No records of the City of Jamestown shall be destroyed or otherwise
disposed of by any department, board or commission of the City without the
express written approval of the Records Management Officer. No records of
the City of Jamestown shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the
Records Management Officer without the express written approval of the
department head having authority.
A. Provide advice to the Records Management Officer on the development
of a records management program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and where
necessary make recommendations for changes and modifications to
improve and enhance the program.
C. Review retention periods proposed by the Records Management Officer
for records not covered by the New York State Archives' schedules.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value.
E. Be the final arbiter as to what is or is not archival.
 220-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  220-12
198:355
Chapter 224
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public works  See Ch. 68.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
 224-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
It is the goal of the City of Jamestown to facilitate the collection and
disposal of solid waste generated by the residents of the City of Jamestown
in the most economical and environmentally acceptable manner, to reduce
the total amount of solid waste disposed of by the residents of the City
of Jamestown, to encourage all residents to recycle reusable materials, to
protect the environment and to provide for the general health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City of Jamestown and the environment
thereof. The City Council of the City of Jamestown accordingly adopts this
chapter in order to provide for the public health, safety and welfare and to
facilitate the conservation of vital natural resources.
 224-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be
construed herein as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from
the context that a different meaning is intended. When not inconsistent
with the context, the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the plural shall include the singular and vice versa. A masculine
pronoun shall include the feminine, and the word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated.
CARDBOARD  A thick corrugated paperboard, including corrugated
boxes and cartons and similar corrugated materials.
DWELLING UNIT  A one or more rooms designed for occupancy by
one family for living and sleeping purposes.
GLASS  All bottles, jars and other food and beverage containers
regardless of color, the principal component of which is glass, but
excluding any caps or lids of such bottles, jars or other food and
beverage containers.
HAZARDOUS WASTE  Waste defined in  27-0903 of the New York
Environmental Conservation Law, as amended, and the regulations
thereunder, and at Section 1004 of the Federal Resource Conservation
 220-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  224-2
198:356
and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, 42 U.S.C.  6903, and the
regulations thereunder.
METAL CANS  Food and beverage containers made entirely of metal
to which there may be added paper or plastic labels.
NEWSPAPERS  A paper product printed on newsprint, including
all newspaper, newspaper advertisements and comics, but excluding
magazines, telephone books or other advertising material printed on
glossy or slick papers, including such advertising material printed on
glossy or slick paper which is enclosed with newspapers.
PRIVATE HAULER  A person, firm or corporation providing to
residents the service of collecting and disposing of solid waste and/or
recyclables to residents who do not for whatever reason receive the
solid waste collection and disposal services of the City of Jamestown.
RECYCLABLES  Solid waste consisting of cardboard, newspapers,
glass bottles and jars, metal cans and soft plastic, together with such
other materials as may from time to time be designated by the General
Manager of the City of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities and
approved by the Jamestown City Council.[Amended 2-27-2017]
RESIDENCE  A building or parcel of land containing dwelling units.
RESIDENT  A person residing in a residence.
SOFT PLASTIC  Containers consisting of the type of plastic upon
the bottom or some other part of which there is embossed a universal
recycling symbol as determined by the General Manager of the City
of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities, but excluding the caps or lids
of such containers; also, milk containers made of plastic regardless of
whether embossed with the universal recycling symbol and such other
food and beverage containers as may from time to time be designated
by the General Manager of the City of Jamestown Board of Public
Utilities, but excluding the caps or lids of such milk containers or other
containers.[Amended 8-13-1990; 2-27-2017]
SOLID WASTE  Putrescible substances discarded or rejected as being
spent, useless, worthless or in excess by the owners at the time of
such discard or rejection, organic waste material, both animal and
vegetable, waste material, both animal and vegetable, and wastepaper,
but excluding white goods, tires, hazards waste, building materials,
trees, tree parts, shrubs, grass clippings and related yard waste,
commercial waste, construction and demolition debris, furniture and
all other materials and substances which are not accepted by the
Chautauqua County Landfill for disposal.
WHITE GOODS  Household mechanisms, including but not limited
to televisions, air conditioners, refrigerators, washers, dryers, stoves,
lawn mowers and other large and/or bulky items.
 224-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  224-3
198:357
 224-3. Separation required.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all persons who are residents
of the City of Jamestown to separate recyclables from all residential solid
waste whether such persons receive the solid waste collection and disposal
services of the City of Jamestown or such persons dispose of solid waste
by private hauler or any other lawfully accepted method of solid waste
disposal.
 224-4. City collection and disposal; placement at curb.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all persons residing in the City
of Jamestown who receive the solid waste collection and disposal services
of the City of Jamestown to separate recyclables from all residential solid
waste and place such recyclables out for collection in the following manner:
A. Newspapers, cardboard, boxboard, paper, plastic, metal (aluminum,
tin), and clear and colored glass, shall be placed in the appropriate
recycling container approved by the City of Jamestown Board of Public
Utilities. Cardboard boxes and other cardboard containers shall be
flattened prior to placement in the appropriate recycling container
approved by the City of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities. [Amended
8-13-1990; 2-27-2017]
B. Prior to placement for collection and removal, newspapers and
cardboard shall be free of staples, glass jars and bottles, and soft plastic
and metal cans shall be cleaned and the contents removed therefrom.
Caps and lids shall be removed from all soft plastic and glass
recyclables. Metal cans shall be flattened whenever possible.
[Amended 2-27-2017]
C. Recyclables for collection by the City of Jamestown shall be placed at
curbside on the day of the week specified by the General Manager of
the City of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities. Cardboard and
newspapers, soft plastics, metal cans and glass shall be collected on
separate weeks in accord with a schedule designated by the General
Manager of the City of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities. Recyclables
placed for collection shall be collected on the same day of the week
designated by the General Manager of the City of Jamestown Board of
Public Utilities for the collection of solid waste. [Amended 8-13-1990;
2-27-2017]
D. No person shall place any solid waste or recyclables at curbside for
collection earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the appointed day
for the pickup of said solid waste and recyclables by the City of
Jamestown. [Amended 8-13-1990]
E. Recyclables shall not be placed or mixed in the same container or
otherwise commingled with other forms of solid waste.
F. Ownership of recyclables set out for collection shall thereupon vest
with the City of Jamestown. It shall be unlawful for any person other
 224-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  224-4
198:358
 224-5. Private collection and disposal.
 224-6. Display of building number.
The owner of a residence shall cause to be displayed on such residence the
street number of such residence. Such number shall be of no less than two
inches in length and/or width so as to be legible from the curbside of the
main entrance on the street upon which such residence is located.
 224-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-23-2009]
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation, punishable as follows:
than a person authorized by the City of Jamestown to collect, remove or
dispose of recyclables, the ownership of which has vested with the City
of Jamestown as herein provided. [Amended 2-27-2017]
G. The General Manager of the City of Jamestown Board of Public Utilities
is hereby empowered to designate the day of the week on which solid
waste and particular recyclables will be collected and removed from a
particular area. [Amended 2-27-2017]
H. No person shall put out for collection and disposal any hazardous
waste, nor shall any person commingle with any solid waste or
recyclables put out for collection any hazardous waste. [Amended
2-27-2017]
A. No person receiving solid waste collection and/or disposal services
from a private hauler at a residence shall mix or commingle recyclables
with solid waste in the same container. All recyclables of such person
shall be placed in separate containers from the containers of solid
waste of such person for pickup and disposal by a private hauler.
B. No person receiving solid waste collection and/or disposal services
from a private hauler at a residence shall place at curbside or upon any
other real property of the City of Jamestown any solid waste,
recyclables, white goods or hazardous materials for collection by such
private haulers.
C. No private hauler shall collect from any residence in the City of
Jamestown any solid waste in which there is mixed or commingled
recyclables in the same container as such solid waste. Such private
hauler may, however, collect all recyclables from such residences that
are placed in containers separate from containers of solid waste.
A. For a first conviction: a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50.
B. For a second conviction within one year: a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $100.
 224-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  224-7
198:359
Chapter 229
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials  See Ch. 83.
Auctions and auctioneers  See Ch. 101.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
 229-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LICENSE  A license issued pursuant to this chapter.
LICENSEE  Any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to
this chapter.
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT and ADVERTISING 
Conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a
sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by magazine
advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed
display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement or by any
other means either written or printed.
SALE  The sale or any offer to sell to the public goods, wares and
merchandise of any kind and description on hand and in stock in connection
with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the part of the
seller, that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation,
windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in
connection with such sale. It shall also include all other sales advertised
or conducted in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that
upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued.
 229-2. Supervision and issuance of licenses. [Amended 2-10-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is hereby authorized
and empowered to supervise and regulate sales or special sales defined in
 229-1 and to issue the appropriate license or licenses therefor.
C. For a third conviction within one year: a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $250.
D. For a fourth and each subsequent conviction within one year: a fine of
not less than $250 nor more than $500.
 224-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  229-3
198:360
 229-3. License required. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
No person shall publish or conduct any sale of the type defined by  229-1
without a license therefor, such license to be issued at the discretion of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 229-4. Application information.
 229-5. Investigation; term of license; renewal. [Amended 3-9-1992
by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-27-1995; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. Licenses shall be issued as described in  229-3 upon submission of
written application in a form approved by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk and verified by the person who or by an officer of
the corporation which intends to conduct the sale. [Amended
3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. Such application shall contain a description of the place where such
sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or
sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy and
the means to be employed in publishing such sale, together with the
proposed language content in any advertisement. Such application
shall further contain an itemized list of the goods, wares and
merchandise to be offered for sale and the source from which such
stock was purchased or acquired, together with the dates of purchase
of each article and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
Such application shall also specifically state that ownership of the items
or articles to be offered for sale is vested solely in the applicant. Such
application shall further contain representations that it is the
applicant's intention to discontinue doing business in the City
immediately upon the expiration of the license applied for or upon the
expiration of the period for which a renewal of such license is issued
and that the applicant will discontinue such business immediately upon
the expiration of the license applied for or the expiration of the period
for which a renewal of such license is issued.
C. The list described above shall be verified by the applicant, if he is an
individual, by one of the partners if a partnership or by a duly
authorized officer of a corporation.
D. Such application shall contain such additional information as the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may require. [Amended
3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. On receipt of the application and payment of the fee prescribed by this
chapter, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall cause
the application to be examined and the statements therein investigated.
 229-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  229-5
198:361
 229-6. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 3-9-1992 by
L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall have the power,
upon recommendation of the Mayor, at any time for cause to suspend or
revoke any license granted in accordance with this chapter.
 229-7. Fee. [Amended 8-11-1986; 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992;
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Any person desiring to conduct a sale or a special sale as defined in  229-1
of this chapter shall pay a fee of $500 to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, all except $75 of which shall be returned to said person,
provided that the business or premises which is the subject of the sale or
special sale as defined in  229-1 is closed within 60 days of the receipt of
such license. The sum of $75 not returned to said person shall be retained
by the City of Jamestown to cover the expense of investing the statements
contained in the application to conduct a sale or special. sale or any renewal
application therefore. In the event that the business or premises conducting
a sale or special sale as defined in  229-1 does not close its doors within
sixty days of the receipt of such license, the applicant shall not be entitled to
a refund of any portion of such fee. If any application or renewal application
is disapproved, the City shall retain from such fee the sum of $75 to cover
the costs of investigating the statements contained in such application or
If after such investigation the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in such
application and as to the form and content of the advertising to be used
in connection with such sale, he may then issue a license permitting the
publication and conduct of the sale, provided that such license shall not
be issued until the lapse of five days from the time of the filing of the
application with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
B. Such license shall be for a period not exceeding 30 days, except that
upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock in the original
application has not been disposed of, the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk may renew such license for an additional thirty-day
period. Such proof for a renewal license shall be furnished in a form to
be issued by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. Such
renewal application shall contain an itemized list of stock on hand, and
the same shall be verified by the applicant. The Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall cause the renewal application
to be examined and the statements therein investigated, and, if satisfied
as to the truth of the statements therein contained, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk may issue a renewal license for a
period not exceeding 30 days. No license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, when combined with a renewal license as
herein provided, shall exceed a total of 60 days.
 229-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  229-7
198:362
renewal application and the remaining portion of such fee shall be refunded
to the applicant.
 229-8. Display of license; stock list; advertisements. [Amended
3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 229-9. Promulgation of rules regulating sales. [Amended 3-9-1992
by L.L. No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is empowered to make
such rules and regulations for the advertisement and conduct of such sales
or special sales as in his opinion will serve to prevent deception and to
protect the public.
 229-10. Termination of business at expiration of sale.
Any person who shall publish or conduct any sale pursuant to a license or
renewal of license issued under this chapter shall discontinue the operation
A. On commencement of any sale as defined in  229-1, the license issued
by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be
prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. A duplicate
original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such license
was issued shall at all times be available to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, and the license shall permit the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk to examine all
merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock list.
B. All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein
shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the
application pursuant to which a license was issued, and the wording of
such advertisements shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the
application. Such advertising shall in no manner or form whatsoever,
either directly or indirectly, indicate that such sale is held with the
approval of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. Such
advertising shall contain a statement in these words and no others:
"Sale held pursuant to license No. _____, issued by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown, on the
_____ day of __________, 19____," and in such blank spaces shall be
indicated the license number and the date of issuance of the license.
C. Suitable books and records as prescribed by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall be kept by the licensee, and
they shall at all times be available to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk. At the close of business each day the stock list
attached to the application shall be revised and those items disposed of
during each day shall be so marked on such list. No additional
merchandise shall be added to the stock in the establishment of the
licensee after the issuance of the first license.
 229-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  229-10
198:363
of such business in the City upon the expiration of the license or the
expiration of any renewal of such license.
 229-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
 229-12. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-27-1995]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 235
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department  See Ch. 65.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Minors  See Ch. 185.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 235-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-12-1982; 4-8-1985]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL  Material or a combination of materials which
burns, ignites, supports combustion or liberates flammable vapor or gas.
HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS  Materials such as flammable solids, corrosive
liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive
chemicals, highly toxic materials and poisonous gases.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  Materials which are highly flammable or
which may react to cause fires or explosions or which by their presence
create or augment a fire or explosion hazard or which because of toxicity,
flammability or liability to explosion render fire fighting abnormally
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as sheriffs and marshals.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction.38
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Auctions and Auctioneers.
 229-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-1
198:364
dangerous or difficult; also flammable or combustible liquids which are
chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive
compounds or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or with
sufficient evolution of heat are a fire hazard.
JUNK  Any previously used iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other
base metals, cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, fabrics, rubber, tires, bottles,
glass, bones, wastepaper, motor vehicles no longer used as such and such
other waste or discarded material which may or may not be prepared to
be used again in some form. The term "junk" shall not include cans and
bottles held for recycling purposes pursuant to Title 10 of Article 27 of
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law, materials or objects
accumulated by persons as by-products, waste or scraps from the operation
of his own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer
as an integral part of his own manufacturing process.
JUNK DEALER  Any person engaged In the purchase and sale of any
previously owned or used material, machinery, tools, equipment, scrap iron,
scrap metals and automobiles for the purpose of scrapping such articles and
operating a junkyard.
JUNKYARD  A yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an
enclosed building, containing junk as described above, upon which occurs
one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or
offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business
or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such business or
commercial purpose are to be used for charity.
MOTOR VEHICLE  All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power and originally intended for use as a means of transportation
and which are no longer capable of being operated as such or of being
registered for use on the public highways of New York State.
SECONDHAND DEALER  Any person engaged in the purchase and/or sale
of previously owned or used gold, silver, jewelry, silverware, dinnerware,
coins, furniture, household goods, tools, pottery, flatware, precious gems,
precious metals, radios of every type and kind, electronic devices of every
type and kind, wearing apparel, firearms, automobile accessories and
musical instruments. The items of personal property hereinbefore
mentioned shall not include items previously owned if such items were
originally purchased at retail or wholesale and thereafter returned to the
original retailer or wholesaler for exchange, refund or credit.
 235-2. License required.
No person, either as principal, agent or employee, shall within the City
establish, engage in or carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or
junk dealer, either separately or in connection with some other business,
without first having obtained and paid for and having in full force and effect
a license as provided by this chapter.
 235-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  235-3
198:365
 235-3. Application for license. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Every person desiring to procure a license, as provided in this chapter,
shall file with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk a written
application upon a blank form prepared and furnished by the City.
 235-4. Bond. [Amended 4-8-1985; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
Each application required by  235-3 shall be accompanied by a certificate
of zoning compliance issued by the Building Inspector and by a bond to
the City, approved as to form by the Corporation Counsel, in the penal sum
as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, with sufficient surety
or sufficient collateral security condition for the faithful performance of
the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed, the due
observance during the term of the license of any and all ordinances and laws
which are now enforced or may hereafter be adopted or enacted respecting
the businesses defined in this chapter and the accounting for and paying
over of all moneys which he shall be liable to pay as such secondhand dealer
or junk dealer to the City or any person.
 235-5. Suspension or revocation of license; forfeiture of bond.
A. Such application shall contain the names and residences of the
applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the names and
residences of the principal officers, if the applicant is an association or
corporation. Such application shall also describe, in detail, the
character of the business in which the applicant desires to engage. The
application shall also state the following:
(1) The length of time such applicant, or the manager or person in
charge if the applicant is a firm, partnership, corporation or
association, has resided in the City, his places of previous
employment, whether he is married or single, whether he has been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if so, what offense, when
and in what court.
(2) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on,
giving the street and number.
(3) Whether the applicant has either alone or with someone else ever
engaged in the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer.
B. Such application shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary
public or other official authorized to administer oaths in the City.
A. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may at any time
suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this
chapter for the following reasons: [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 235-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-5
198:366
(1) The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall suspend
any license granted under the provisions of this chapter for a
period of up to 30 days, upon a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall suspend
any license granted under the provisions of this chapter for a
period of up to 60 days, upon a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter and such
noncompliance is the second such offense within a one-year period.
(3) The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall revoke any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter upon a finding
that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and such noncompliance constitutes the third such offense
within a one-year period.
(4) The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall revoke any
license granted under the provisions of this chapter upon a finding
that the licensee has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude during the period when the license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter was in full force
and effect.
B. Whenever any license shall be so suspended or revoked, no refund of
any unearned portion thereof shall be made, and no license shall be
granted to any person whose license has been revoked within a period
of two years from the date of such revocation. Notice of such
suspension or revocation and the reason therefor, in writing, shall be
served by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk upon the
person named in the application by mailing the same to the address
given in the application and upon filing a copy of such suspension or
revocation. If the licensee shall deem himself aggrieved by the
suspension or revocation, he shall be entitled to apply to the City
Council within 30 days after such suspension or revocation for a review
of the same. The decision of the City Council shall be final. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. Any person who himself or by his clerk, agent or employee shall
establish, engage in or carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or
junk dealer without having obtained a license as provided by this
chapter or who, by himself or by his clerk, agent or employee, shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who, having had his
license suspended or revoked, shall continue to engage in or carry on
the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall, in addition to
the penalty imposed, have his license canceled or revoked and the bond
upon such license forfeited. Upon such forfeiture, the amount of the
bond shall thereupon become due and payable to the City, and the
amount thereof may be recovered in a civil action based upon such
forfeiture.
 235-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  235-6
198:367
 235-6. Investigation. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
When an application is filed pursuant to this chapter, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made
by the Police Department to ascertain the validity of the information
provided on such application pursuant to the provisions of  235-3 of this
chapter. The Chief of Police shall furnish to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, in writing, the information derived from such
investigation.
 235-7. Issuance or rejection; form of license; reapplication.
 235-8. Fee; term, transferability and loss or destruction of license.
A. Upon the filing of the application, bond and information as provided in
this chapter, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may,
upon his approval of such application and bond as to the sufficiency of
surety or collateral securities and the payment to the City of the license
fee provided by  235-8, issue to the applicant a license to engage in the
business as required by  235-2. No license shall be refused except for
reason that the applicant has previously been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or by reason that the location
from which the business would be operated would, if operated,
constitute a violation of the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the
Code of the City of Jamestown or by reason of the fact that an applicant
has previously had such license suspended or revoked. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the location of the place of business in which the
person receiving such license shall be authorized to establish, engage
in and carry on the business, the kind of business, the dates of issuance
and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and address of
the licensee.
C. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since
the last previous rejection, unless he can establish that the reason for
such rejection no longer exists.
A. Each secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee
as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk for each established place of
business. [Amended 12-26-1990; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992;
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. All licenses shall be issued as of May 1 and shall continue in force until
April 30 next succeeding the issuance thereof, unless sooner suspended
or revoked by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 235-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-8
198:368
 235-9. Changing place of business. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
If any licensee shall move his place of business from the place designated
in the license, he shall immediately give notice to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk and have the same endorsed on the
license. No licensee shall carry on business at any other place than the one
designated in his license. No licensee shall carry on business at any place
not permitted by the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the
City of Jamestown.
 235-10. Required reports; notification of police.
It shall be the duty of every licensee to make or cause to be made to the
Chief of Police or his representative at least once a week, and daily if the
Chief of Police shall so require, a copy of the record required to be kept by
 235-11 of every article purchased or exchanged by a secondhand dealer
or junk dealer. All reports required in this section shall be made on forms
prepared and furnished by the Chief of Police, and each report shall be
signed at the end by the licensee or his representative. It shall be the duty
of every licensee to cooperate with the Police Department in preventing the
sale or exchange of stolen property. If a licensee has reason to believe that
an attempt is being made to sell stolen property, he shall so notify the Police
Department at once.
 235-11. Records to be kept by licensee.
C. No license shall be used by any person other than the original licensee,
and any holder of such license who permits it to be used by any other
person and any person who uses such license granted to any other
person shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
D. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part
of the holder or his agent or employee, a duplicate license in lieu
thereof under the original application and bond may be issued by the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, at his discretion, upon
the filing with him of an affidavit by the licensee setting forth the
circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for its
recovery. No person shall destroy, deface or injure a license in any
manner or change the name, number or date thereon. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. Every licensee pursuant to this chapter shall keep records, in duplicate,
on forms prepared and furnished by the Chief of Police. Said records
shall be legibly written in ink or typewritten and in English. Appropriate
entries on said records shall be made at the time of making a purchase
or exchange, and said records shall include but not be limited to a
description of the goods, articles or things purchased or exchanged,
including the number and any monogram inscription or other marks of
identification that may appear thereon, the amount of the purchase
 235-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  235-11
198:369
 235-12. Transactions with minors.
No licensee by himself or by his clerk, agent or employee shall make any
purchase or exchange with any individual under the age of 18 years without
the prior written consent of the parent or lawful guardian of such individual.
 235-13. Junkyards. [Added 4-8-1985]
On and after October 1, 1985, all persons maintaining junkyards, all junk
dealers and all junkyards shall comply with the following requirements:
price, the date of purchase or exchange and the name and residence
of the person selling or exchanging such goods, such articles or things.
Such records and all articles purchased and exchanged shall at all
reasonable times be open to the inspection of any Police Officer, the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk or the Corporation
Counsel, any Magistrate of the City or other person duly authorized,
in writing, for such purpose by the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk, Corporation Counsel, Chief of Police or Magistrate, who
shall exhibit such written authority to the licensee. No entry on any
such record shall be erased, obliterated, altered or defaced. One copy
of such record shall be delivered to the Chief of Police or his
representative at least once a week, and daily if the Chief of Police
shall so require, pursuant to the provisions of  235-10 of this chapter.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the purchase in bulk of
scrap iron, scrap metal or other scrap materials produced in the normal
course of business by industrial, manufacturing or commercial
concerns. [Amended 6-12-1982]
A. All junkyards, including all equipment used in connection with the
operation of a junkyard, but excluding parking lots and junkyard offices,
shall be contained within an enclosed building or within an area
enclosed by a solid wall or solid fence.
B. Where fences or walls are utilized to enclose a junkyard as hereinbefore
provided, such walls or fences shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All fences and walls shall be of uniform height in relation to the
ground upon which they are erected and shall be not less than eight
feet nor more than 15 feet in height. Where such fences or walls
exceed a height of 10 feet and are located on a street or highway
frontage, such fences or walls shall be set back at least five feet
from the lot line.
(2) All fences and walls open to view from any public street, highway or
waterway or in any area in a residential or commercial district or
zone shall be constructed of metallic panels, at least 0.024 inch
thick and painted with a baked-on enamel or other similar
 235-11 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-13
198:370
permanent finish, or shall be constructed of masonry or such other
materials comparable to the foregoing with the approval of the
Building Inspector.
(3) All fences and walls shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner
and shall consist solely of new materials unless the Building
Inspector approves the substitution of used materials where, in his
opinion, such materials will provide the equivalent in service,
appearance and useful life.
(4) All fences and walls open to view from any public street, highway or
waterway or in any area in a residential or commercial district or
zone shall be painted a uniform neutral color and shall be
maintained in a uniformly painted condition at all times.
(5) All such fences and walls shall contain no painted or illuminated
signs or posters, except that such fences or walls may contain no
more than two painted signs of commercial quality, which signs
shall be no more than eight feet in width and four feet in height and
shall only display thereon the name of the person or business entity
in whose name the junkyard is operated.
C. All fenced or walled junkyards shall be equipped with suitable gates
which shall be closed and locked except during the working hours of
such junkyards and shall be of sufficient width to permit access to such
junkyards by emergency vehicles, including but not limited to fire
trucks, ambulances and police vehicles, and shall further conform to all
appropriate provisions of Article 231A of the Code of the National Fire
Protection Association and Section 1164.15 of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. No junkyard owner or operator shall place any junk or permit any junk
to remain on junkyard property located beyond the confines of any
enclosed junkyard area, whether or not such area is enclosed by a
building or fence or wall.
E. All junkyards, together with all junk kept therein, shall at all times be
maintained in a sanitary and orderly condition.
F. No water shall be allowed or permitted to stand in any place in any
junkyard in such a manner so as to afford a breeding place for
mosquitoes or other insects.
G. All weeds and other vegetation, including grass within any junkyard,
and excepting trees, shall be kept at a height of not more than four
inches.
H. No garbage, including but not limited to animal or vegetable material,
capable of giving off a foul odor or of attracting vermin shall be
maintained on any junkyard, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept in
any junkyard unless such garbage, waste or other refuse is junk as such
is defined by this chapter.
 235-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  235-13
198:371
I. No junk shall be permitted or allowed to rest upon or protrude over any
public street, walkway, highway, parkway, terrace or curb or be
maintained in such a manner as to permit such junk to become
scattered or blow off the junkyard.
J. No hazardous materials, hazardous chemicals, toxic waste or explosives
shall be kept or maintained in any junkyard except where such material
is necessary to the operation of the junkyard and has been approved for
use as such, in writing, by the Fire Inspector and Building Inspector.
[Amended 2-24-2003]
K. No junkyard shall keep or maintain any scrap engines, machinery,
motor vehicles or other equipment containing therein gasoline, oil,
antifreeze, transmission fluid, power steering fluid, brake fluid,
hydraulic fluid or any other hazardous chemical or hazardous material.
L. No junk or other materials shall be burned in any junkyard in any
incinerator not meeting the requirements of the Building Code or Fire
Code,39 nor shall any junk or other material be burned on the premises
in the open.
M. No processing of junk or other activity in connection with the operation
of any junkyard which produces a noise audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the enclosed portion of a junkyard shall be conducted on Sundays
or public holidays or at any other time between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
N. No gasoline, oil, antifreeze, power steering fluid, brake fluid, hydraulic
fluid, hazardous chemical, hazardous material or other substance
deemed extra hazardous by the Fire Chief shall be allowed to
accumulate in any junkyard other than in containers approved by the
Fire Chief and/or the Chautauqua County Department of Health and/or
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and/or
the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
O. No gasoline, oil, antifreeze, power steering fluid, brake fluid, hydraulic
fluid, hazardous chemical, hazardous material or other substance
deemed extra-hazardous by the Fire Chief shall be permitted to run off
or flow from any junkyard.
P. All junkyards shall comply with all requirements for sanitary and storm
sewer connections of the City of Jamestown.
Q. No junkyard shall be operated or maintained in a manner injurious to
the public health, safety or welfare.
R. No junk shall be buried or covered with any earthen material within any
junkyard.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
 235-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-13
198:372
 235-14. Presumption of possession of unreported stolen property.
A junk dealer or secondhand dealer who possesses stolen property is
presumed to know that such property was stolen if he obtained it without
having made the record required by  235-11 of this chapter.
 235-15. Applicability. [Added 6-12-1982]
The provisions of ㎣ 235-2, 235-4 and 235-8 of this chapter shall not apply to
any furniture or automotive business primarily engaged in the sale of new
goods, products and other merchandise at retail or wholesale.
 235-16. Enforcement. [Added 4-8-1985; amended 2-24-2003]
Responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of  235-17 of this chapter
is hereby vested with the Fire Inspector and the Building Inspector.
 235-17. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
S. The junkyard license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be plainly displayed on the premises of any junkyard at all times.
T. The owner and/or operator of any junkyard shall permit inspection of
such junkyard by the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Inspector or
their designated representatives between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. in weekdays and at all other times which such junkyard is
open for or transacting or conducting business or is otherwise
occupied. [Amended 2-24-2003]
U. No single pile or accumulation of combustible material shall exceed a
maximum storage area of 1,600 square feet at a height of 15 feet, and
each single pile or accumulation of combustible material shall be
separated from any other pile or accumulation of junk by a distance of
20 feet.
V. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, all junkyards shall
be operated and maintained according to generally accepted standards
pertaining to indoor and outdoor storage, including but not limited to
the Code of the National Fire Protection Association and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
 235-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  235-17
198:373
Chapter 240
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public works  See Ch. 68.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Plumbing  See Ch. 210.
 235-17 JAMESTOWN CODE  235-17
198:374
ARTICLE I
Wastewater Charges and Debt Retirement Apportionment
[Adopted 11-17-1980]
 240-1. Scope of chapter.
This article defines and regulates the following items within the City of
Jamestown, County of Chautauqua and State of New York, with respect to
sewer use:
 240-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, definitions contained in
the Sewer Ordinance40 and the following terms used in this article shall be
as follows:
DRY INDUSTRY  Any industrial or commercial user which discharges
primarily domestic wastewaters, as distinguished from industrial
wastewaters.
INDIVIDUAL, INDIVIDUAL USER or USER  Any individual, family, firm,
company, association, society, corporation or group.
INDUSTRIAL USER  Any user which contributes wastewater discharges
other than domestic sanitary wastewaters to the City sewerage system.
RESERVE CAPACITY  That capacity required by an industry in excess over
that which it actually intends to use during the initial connection period.
SEWER RENTS  A scale of monthly charges established and imposed by
the City of Jamestown through its Board of Public Utilities for the use of
the sewerage system or any part or parts thereof.[Amended 12-28-1987;
1-11-1988; 8-26-2013]
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER  One that will contribute greater than
10% of the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works.
USER COSTS  The costs of operation and maintenance of all wastewater
treatment service provided by the City, and includes replacement costs.
A. A system of proportioning operation and maintenance costs (sewer
rents) required to operate and maintain the City's wastewater
collection and treatment facilities among the contributors who benefit
by its use.
B. A system of proportioning debt retirement costs required to design and
construct City wastewater collection and treatment facilities among the
contributors who benefit by its use.
40.Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sewer Use, of this chapter.
 240-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-3
198:375
 240-3. Industrial users.
Industrial users of the City of Jamestown sanitary sewer system discharging
wastewaters other than domestic wastes shall be required to participate
in the user charge and debt retirement program. The Director of Public
Works for the City of Jamestown shall stipulate which industries shall be
included in addition to significant industrial users. User charges and debt
retirement costs will be established on the basis of individual wastewater
characteristics and reserved capacity as they affect the cost and operation
of transmission and treatment works. Wastewater characteristics may
include volume, strength and flow rates.
A. Uncontaminated cooling water is prohibited from the City sanitary
sewer system as specified in  240-22B. Should it be necessary to
discharge such cooling water, it must be considered process waste and
must be included in the fee computations.
B. Industrial users which pretreat process wastewaters prior to their
discharge to the City sanitary sewer system must pay their portion of
these sewer rents based on the characteristics of the pretreated
process waste flows.
C. An industrial user may reserve excess capacity in the collection and/or
treatment systems to accommodate projected growth of that user. This
shall be excess capacity over that which it actually intends to use
during the initial connection period. In such cases, the reserved
capacity allotted to an industrial user must be included as part of that
industry's debt retirement repayment. Reserved capacity must be
requested through a formal, written agreement with the City of
Jamestown through the Director of Public Works' office. The industrial
user shall be required to pay the full debt retirement fee for its initial
and reserved capacity. Should the industrial user exceed its reserved
capacity, it shall be required to pay its portion calculated on the initial
and reserved capacity, plus additional fees for use above the reserved
capacity limits.
D. Should the collection or treatment systems be upgraded, the industrial
users with reserved capacity contracts shall be required to pay
additional user charges and debt retirement fees attributed to the cost
of upgrading.
E. Any new industrial users shall be required to participate in the user
charge and debt retirement program. Payments by a new industry shall
begin on the date use is initiated and shall continue until the industry
discontinues the use of the collection and/or treatment facilities.
F. The wastewater characteristics of each industrial user contributing to
the City sanitary sewer system shall be determined through a
monitoring system as described in  240-23I of Article III, Sewer Use.
Monitoring shall be scheduled on a random basis at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works. In each case, monitoring shall be
conducted during a period of normal industrial wastewater discharge.
 240-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-3
198:376
 240-4. Hearing Board.
A Hearing Board shall be appointed as needed in accordance with  240-31,
Hearing Board, of Article III, Sewer Use.
 240-5. Component cost allocation.
In addition to the monitoring program, industries shall be required to
maintain records which will assist in accurately defining each user's
wastewater characteristics.
G. In the event that an industrial user discontinues use of the collection
and/or treatment systems of the City of Jamestown, its payment for user
charges and debt retirement shall cease. Discontinuance of use shall
include the termination of any agreement for reserve capacity. Written
notification to the Director of Public Works providing the date of
cessation must be received by the City of Jamestown not later than 90
days prior to the effective date of termination. Termination of the
agreement shall acknowledge all conditions (i.e., reserved capacity)
that have been provided. The discontinuance of use by an industrial
user shall not affect the payment responsibilities of the remaining
industries. Payment responsibility of the departing industry shall be
restricted to the total cost during the period of use.
H. Each industrial user shall be provided the opportunity to request an
administration hearing to appeal the reasonableness of the allocations.
Prior to being assessed its respective charges for repayment, each
industrial user shall be advised by the Director of Public Works of its
impending indebtedness. The industrial user shall have a period of 30
days from the date of said notice to appeal. In the event that an industry
chooses to appeal its assessment, representatives of that industry shall
be required to appear before a Hearing Board, which Board shall decide
in each dispute the objectives of this article.
A. Universal agreement regarding cost allocation for various collection or
treatment components is not possible. General considerations,
however, are included in this article to provide guidelines for
establishing charges. As of the date of this article, the City of
Jamestown shall relate collection and treatment facilities to the
following principal parameters: flow (Q), biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), suspended solids (SS) and total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN). The
foregoing represent the major design considerations affecting
construction operation and maintenance of sewerage facilities in the
City's system. Cost allocations shall be divided over these parameters
per component. General guidelines are as follows:
 240-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-5
198:377
 240-6. Sewer rents.
Component/Facility
Cost Allocation
(percent)
Component Q BOD SS TKN
Sewers 100 - - -
Pumping facilities 100 - - -
Sewage treatment facilities
Preliminary treatment 100 - - -
Primary treatment 100 - - -
Secondary treatment 50 50 - -
Secondary effluent pumping 100 - - -
Tertiary treatment facilities 70 - - 30
Chlorination facilities 100 - - -
Outfall 100 - - -
Sludge handling facilities - 20 50 30
Auxiliary power 100 - - -
Administration building 50 25 25 -
Miscellaneous modifications 70 10 10 10
Water supply facilities 100 - - -
Electrical and instrumentation 70 10 10 10
Subtotals 1210 115 95 80
Total 1500
B. The percentage cost allocations shown above are not to be considered
mandatory, nor should they be considered uniformly applicable in all
situations. The Director of Public Works may allocate costs associated
with flow, BOD, SS, TKN, etc., as a whole without resorting to a
component-by-component analysis.
A. A system of sewer rents shall be established by the City of Jamestown
through its Board of Public Utilities, and such system shall assure that
each recipient of wastewater treatment services within the City's
service area shall pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation
and maintenance of all wastewater treatment services provided by the
City of Jamestown. Operation and maintenance includes replacement
which is construed to be expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the service life of the treatment facilities to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
The costs of operation and maintenance of publicly owned treatment
 240-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-6
198:378
facilities shall be distributed to the pollutant source to promote selfsufficiency
of treatment works with respect to operation and
maintenance. [Amended 8-26-2013]
B. Sewer rent system.
(1) The sewer rent system shall result in the distribution of the cost of
operation and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment
within the City's service area to each user in proportion to such
user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of these
facilities. Volume, strength and flow characteristics shall be
considered and included as the basis for the user's contribution to
ensure a proportional distribution of the operation and
maintenance costs to each user.
(2) The City of Jamestown, through its Board of Public Utilities, shall
review sewer rents annually and revise them to reflect actual
operation and maintenance costs. [Amended 8-26-2013]
(3) The sewer rent system shall generate sufficient revenue to offset
the cost of all wastewater collection and treatment and operation
and maintenance costs provided by the City.
(4) In the event that wastewaters are accepted from sewerage systems
owned by others, then the subscribers receiving wastewater
services from the City shall have adopted sewer rent systems. Such
sewer rent systems shall also be incorporated in the appropriate
municipal legislative enactments or other appropriate authority.
C. Wastewater flows.
(1) Four classes of wastewaters are hereby established and include the
following: residential user; industrial user; industrial user sanitary
wastewater; and commercial user. Specific interpretation of
individual wastewaters shall be established by the Director of
Public Works and generally follow the following guidelines:
(a) Residential user: an individual home, apartment or dwelling
whose wastewaters are generated by sanitary facilities, food
preparation, laundry or dishwashing facilities.
(b) Industrial user: a business engaged in the manufacture of a
product and that discharges an industrial waste from the
manufacturing operation.
(c) Industrial user sanitary wastewater: the wastewater
discharged by an industry consisting of wastewaters from
sanitary facilities. This is assumed to equal 25 gallons per
employee per working day.
(d) Commercial user: an establishment generally rendering a
service whose wastewaters are from sanitary facilities.
 240-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-6
198:379
Included but not limited to this class are schools, small private
businesses, churches and the like.
(2) It is the intent to apportion the user costs equitably to all users of
the City's wastewater collection and treatment facilities in relation
to each user's approximate wastewater flow. For each class of user,
the following methods of flow determination shall be used:
(a) Residential user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the yearly
water usage as determined from water meter measurements.
(b) Industrial user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the
wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer system per
year as determined by the industry's records and the industrial
waste monitoring program.
(c) Industrial user/sanitary wastewater: the wastewater flow
equivalent to 25 gallons per employee per day for the number
of days of operation per year.
(d) Commercial user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the yearly
water usage as determined from water meter measurements.
D. Method of assessment. To establish the cost obligation charged an
individual user, the Director of Public Works shall prepare the list of
expenditures for operation and maintenance which constitute the user
cost portions of the City of Jamestown's sanitary sewer collection and
treatment system. Expenditures shall include operation and
maintenance costs for transmission, equipment and treatment. The
share of user costs of each component in relation to the principal
parameters shall be established by the Director of Public Works.
Principal parameters shall include flow (Q), biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN)
and any other design parameter which influences the costs. The costs
for operation and maintenance shall be distributed in proportion to the
flow of all users of the City wastewater collection and treatment system.
Flow figures shall be the primary criteria for assessing costs. In the
event that a user continuously discharges a wastewater containing
pollutant concentrations above the average values recorded at the
treatment plant, that user shall be surcharged a cost commensurate
with its discharge characteristics. The following sewer rent and user
surcharge formulation shall be used to calculate individual user costs:
SEWER RENT FORMULATION
(1) A user shall be assessed an annual sewer rent equivalent to that
portion of the total operation and maintenance costs as a ratio of
that user's annual wastewater flows to the total annual wastewater
flows. Provisions are included to assess a surcharge fee should a
user discharge wastewaters with characteristics in excess of
average design parameter.
 240-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-6
198:380
User cost is expressed in dollars per year per user.
Total annual sewer rent represents the total operation and
maintenance costs for the City wastewater disposal
system, in dollars.
Total annual wastewater flow represents the total
cumulative wastewater flows for all classes of users as
defined by Subsection C above, expressed in cubic feet x
100.
Annual user wastewater flow represents that user's total
annual wastewater flow as defined by Subsection C above,
expressed in cubic feet x 100.
(2) A user surcharge will be assessed if it is demonstrated that a user is
discharging wastewaters with characteristics in excess of average
design criteria. The principal parameters used to evaluate
excessive pollutant strengths are biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), suspended solids (SS) and total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN).
Component cost allocations are provided in  240-5.
User surcharge cost is expressed in dollars per year per
user.
Total annual sewer rents represent the total operation and
maintenance costs for the City wastewater disposal
system, in dollars.
Component cost allocation ratio is the ratio of component
cost allocations per parameter to the total component cost
allocations. (See  240-5.)
Annual user wastewater flow represents that user's total
annual wastewater flows as defined by Subsection C and
expressed in cubic feet x 100.
Total annual wastewater flow represents the total
cumulative wastewater flows for all classes of users as
defined by Subsection C above, and expressed in cubic feet
x 100.
User parameter is the strength of a parameter discharged
by a user, expressed in milligrams per liter, pounds per
year, etc.
 240-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-6
198:381
 240-7. Debt retirement.
Average City parameter is the average strength of a
parameter received by the City treatment plant, expressed
in milligrams per liter, pounds per year, etc.
A. Each user of the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City
of Jamestown shall pay its proportionate share of costs of debt
retirement for the City of Jamestown wastewater collection and
treatment system.
B. Debt retirement system.
(1) The debt retirement system shall result in the distribution of the
cost of debt retirement for wastewater collection and treatment
facilities within the City's service area to each user in proportion to
such user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of said
facilities.
(2) The City of Jamestown, through its Board of Public Utilities, shall
review debt retirement charges annually and revise them to reflect
current flows, flow rates and wastewater characteristics.
[Amended 8-26-2013]
(3) The debt retirement system shall generate sufficient revenues to
offset the amortization costs of all wastewater collection and
treatment facilities projects provided by the City.
(4) In the event that wastewaters are accepted from treatment works
owned by others, then the subscribers receiving wastewater
treatment services from the City shall be required to assume their
proportionate share of the debt retirement costs in accordance
with the provisions of this article. Participation in this debt
retirement program shall not constitute ownership of that portion
of the City's wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
C. Wastewater flows. Four classes of wastewaters are established by the
Director of Public Works and include residential user, industrial user,
industrial user sanitary wastewaters and commercial user. Specific
interpretation of individual wastewaters shall be established by the
Director of Public Works. For each class of user, the following methods
of flow determination shall be used:
(1) Residential user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the yearly
water usage as determined from water meter measurements.
(2) Industrial user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the wastewater
discharged to the City's sanitary sewer system per year as
determined by the industry's records and the industrial waste
monitoring program.
 240-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-7
198:382
(3) Industrial user sanitary wastewater: the wastewater flow
equivalent to 25 gallons per employee per day for the number of
days operation per year.
(4) Commercial user: the wastewater flow equivalent to the yearly
water usage as determined from water meter measurement.
D. Method of assessment. To establish the cost obligation charged an
individual user, the Director of Public Works will prepare the list of
amortization costs for wastewater collection and treatment projects
which constitutes the cost portions of indebtedness owed by the City of
Jamestown. The expenditures shall include principal and interest
payments required per year. The portion of debt retirement costs of
each wastewater facility component in relation to the principal
parameters shall be established by the Director of Public Works.
Principal parameters shall include flow (Q), biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN)
and any other design parameter which influences the project cost. The
costs for debt retirement shall be distributed in proportion to flow for
all users of the City's wastewater collection and treatment system. In
the event that a user continuously discharges wastewater containing
pollutant concentrations above the average value record in the
treatment plant, that user shall be surcharged a cost commensurate
with its discharge. The following debt retirement and debt retirement
surcharge formula will be used to calculate individual debt retirement
costs:
DEBT RETIREMENT FORMULATION
(1) A user shall be assessed an annual debt retirement charge
equivalent to that portion of the total debt retirement cost as a ratio
of that user's annual wastewater flows and reserved capacity to the
total annual wastewater flows. Provisions are included to assess a
surcharge fee should a user discharge wastewaters with
characteristics in excess of average design parameters.
Debt retirement is expressed in dollars per year per user.
Annual user wastewater flow and reserved capacity
represents that user's total annual wastewater flows as
defined by Subsection C above and that user's reserved
capacity as defined by  240-3C, expressed in cubic feet x
100.
 240-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-7
198:383
Total annual wastewater flow and reserved capacity
represents the total cumulations wastewater flows for all
classes of users as defined by Subsection C above and the
total cumulative reserved capacity for all classes of users
as defined by  240-3C, expressed in cubic feet x 100.
Total annual debt retirement represents the total cost for
debt retirement for the City's sewerage system.
(2) A debt retirement surcharge will be assessed if it is demonstrated
that a user is discharging wastewaters with characteristics in
excess of average design criteria. The principal parameters used to
evaluate excessive pollutant strengths are biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS) and total kjeldahl nitrogen
(TKN). Component cost allocations are provided in  240-5.
Debt retirement surcharge cost is expressed in dollars per year
per user.
Total annual debt retirement represents the total debt
retirement costs for the City wastewater disposal system, in
dollars.
Component cost allocation ratio is the ratio of component cost
allocations per parameter to the total component cost
allocations. (See  240-5.)
Annual user wastewater flow and reserved capacity
represents that user's total annual wastewater flow and
reserved capacity as defined by Subsection C above and
 240-3C, and expressed in cubic feet x 100.
Total annual wastewater flow and reserved capacity represents
the total cumulative wastewater flows and reserved capacity
for all classes of users as defined by Subsection C above and
 240-3C, and expressed in cubic feet x 100.
User parameter is the strength of a parameter discharged by a
user, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Average City parameter is the average strength of a parameter
received by the City treatment plant, expressed in milligrams
per liter.
 240-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-7
198:384
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 11-17-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980]
 240-8. Rents imposed; purpose.
Pursuant to Public Law 92-500 (the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and
amendments thereof) and pursuant to the authority of the Sewer Rent Law
of the State of New York (Chapter 765 of the Laws of 1951) and any and all
amendments thereto,41 there is hereby established and imposed sewer rents
as a means of proportioning operating and maintenance costs required to
operate and maintain the sewerage system of the City of Jamestown among
the contributors who benefit by its use and a means of proportioning debt
retirement costs required to design and construct the sewerage system of
the City of Jamestown among the contributors who benefit by its use.
 240-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean and include:
ATTRIBUTED FLOW  A property's contribution to the sewerage system
based upon the number of residents, occupants or employees of the
premises serviced by the sewerage system.
CFR  The Code of Federal Regulations.
INDUSTRIAL USER  Any industry which contributes wastewater
discharges other than domestic sanitary wastewater to the City's sewerage
system.
MONITORED SYSTEM  A system of measuring a user's contribution to
the sewerage system at a point where the wastewater exits the premises
served by the sewerage system and enters the sewerage system of the City
of Jamestown.
PARTS  As used in relation to the term "system," all lateral sewers or all
branch sewers or all interceptor sewers or all trunk sewers in any sewage
treatment and disposal works with necessary appurtenances, including
sewage pumping stations.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM  All sewer pipes and other appurtenances which
are used or useful, in whole or in part, in connection with the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes which
are owned, operated or maintained by the City of Jamestown, including
sewage pumping stations and the sewage treatment plant.
SEWER RENTS  A scale of monthly charges established and imposed by
the City of Jamestown through its Board of Public Utilities. for the use of
the sewerage system or any part or parts thereof.[Amended 1-11-1988 by
L.L. No. 1-1988; 8-26-2013]
41.Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law  450 et seq.
 240-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-9
198:385
WASTEWATER  The water carrying human or animal wastes from
residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together
with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present,
together with any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance or
combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural
resources.
 240-10. Metered consumption; monthly service charge.
A. Sewer rents as herein imposed shall be based upon the metered
consumption of water on premises connected with and served by the
sewerage system of the City of Jamestown or such part or parts thereof.
In those instances where it is determined to be impracticable or
impossible to meter water consumption, contribution to the sewerage
system or such part or parts thereof shall be by monitored system as
measured by a meter approved by the Director of Public Works and
installed at the expense of the property owner at a point where the
sewage or industrial waste exits the premises served and enters the
sewerage system of the City of Jamestown. For industrial users where it
is impracticable or impossible to utilize a system based upon water
consumption or a monitored system, the attributed flow to the
sewerage system shall be based upon 3.35 cubic feet (25 gallons) of
water contributed per day per occupant or employee of the premises so
affected.
B. A monthly service charge is hereby assessed to all users of the sewer
system who are connected to the City of Jamestown water system,
which monthly service charge shall be based upon the size of the water
meter servicing each individual residential, commercial and industrial
connection to the City of Jamestown water system. Said basic service
charge per meter size per month shall be as follows: [Amended
1-23-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989; 6-11-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990;
12-12-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994; by L.L. No. 3-2001; by L.L. No.
10-2003; 12-18-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
Meter Size
(inches)
Effective
January 1, 2007
Effective
January 1, 2009
5/8 $3.30 $3.59
3/4 $3.30 $3.59
1 $3.30 $3.59
1 1/2 $4.29 $4.68
2 $6.59 $7.19
3 $13.19 $14.38
4 $22.42 $24.44
6 $48.80 $53.19
 240-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-10
198:386
 240-11. Assessment of rent; billing. [Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L.
No. 1-1988; 8-26-2013]
To provide for the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system
of the City of Jamestown and to provide for debt retirement expenses
required for the design and construction of the sewerage system of the City
of Jamestown among the contributors who benefit by its use, an annual
sewer rent payable by monthly installments shall be assessed to such
contributors by the City of Jamestown through its Board of Public Utilities.
Each contributor shall be notified at least annually in conjunction with a
regular bill of the rate and portion of sewer rents for wastewater treatment
and debt retirement as per 40 CFR 35.929-2(f).
 240-12. Establishment of rent by resolution. [Amended
8-26-2013]
The City of Jamestown, through its Board of Public Utilities, shall by
resolution, prior to April 1 of each year establish the sewer rent and
contributor rate per 100 cubic feet of water consumed for that year. The
annual sewer rent and contributor rate shall be established by utilization of
the provisions and formulas set forth in Article I, Wastewater Charges and
Debt Retirement Apportionment, of this chapter.
 240-13. Payment of rent. [Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
Each contributor's annual sewer rent shall be paid in monthly installments
due and payable no later than 15 days from the billing date. Each monthly
installment shall be billed simultaneously with each contributor's water
bill to the contributor in whose name the water account is listed with the
Board of Public Utilities of the City of Jamestown. Contributors who receive
no water bill or are monitored or attributable contributors shall be billed
monthly, and such bills shall be mailed to the owner or occupant of the
real property wherein contribution is monitored or attributable. Such bills
likewise shall be due and payable no later than 15 days from the billing date.
 240-14. Late penalty; collection. [Amended 8-28-2017]
All sewer rentals not paid within 15 days of the billing date as herein
provided shall have a penalty in the amount of 1 1/2% per month on the
unpaid principal balance added to the bill. The Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall collect all sewer rents established hereunder, and
any unpaid bills, including penalties, shall be included in the annual tax
levy against the real property parcels in default, notwithstanding the fact
that the bill or bills were unpaid by tenants or other nonowners of the
Meter Size
(inches)
Effective
January 1, 2007
Effective
January 1, 2009
8 $85.73 $93.44
10 $133.21 $145.20
 240-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-14
198:387
real property parcel so affected. Such amount of sewer rents, together
with penalties thereon, as remain unpaid for a period of two years shall
be collected and enforced in the same manner and at the same time as
provided by law for the collection and enforcement of real property taxes.
 240-15. Toxic waste costs.
Any user of the sewerage system of the City of Jamestown that discharges
toxic wastes which cause increased treatment and handling costs will be
required to pay such costs pursuant to 40 CFR 35.929-2(c).
 240-16. Periodic review. [Amended 8-26-2013]
The City of Jamestown, through its Board of Public Utilities, shall review not
less often than every two years the wastewater contributions and the total
cost of operation and maintenance and revise this article as needed to meet
the requirements of 40 CFR 35.929-2(b)(1) through (3).
 240-17. Disposition of revenues.
All revenues derived from the sewer rents hereby imposed shall be credited
to a Sewer Fund established by the City of Jamestown. Moneys in such
funds shall be used only in the manner and for the purposes specified and
in the order required by the Sewer Rent Law of the State of New York.42
42.Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law  450 et seq.
 240-14 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-17
198:388
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
[Adopted 1-16-1984; amended in its entirety8-19-2002]
 240-18. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY  The NYDEC if New York State acquires
an approved state pretreatment program and the Region II USEPA
administrator if it does not.
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand)  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 C, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER  The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS  National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
CITY  City of Jamestown, New York.
COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand)  The amount of oxygen
required for complete chemical oxidation of organics and oxidizable
inorganics in a liquid.
COMBINED SEWER  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
CONTROL AUTHORITY  The approval authority, defined herein, or
the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities if the City has
an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR
403.11.
COOLING WATER  The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD
or SS, each in excess of 10 parts per million (ppm) by weight, or
deleterious substances, as limited in  240-23F of these regulations.
COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT  The Chautauqua County Health
Department.
 240-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-18
198:389
DEC or NYDEC  The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DIRECT DISCHARGE  The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of New York.
EPA or USEPA  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EFFLUENT  Wastewater, after some degree of treatment, flowing out
of any treatment device or facilities.
GARBAGE  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GENERAL MANAGER  The General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities and/or of Water Pollution Control of the City of Jamestown, or
his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
GRAB SAMPLE  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HEALTH COMMISSIONER  The Chautauqua County Health
Commissioner.
HEARING BOARD  That Board appointed to the provisions of
 240-31.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE  The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.  1317), into the POTW (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER  A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402, of the Act (33 U.S.C.  1342).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES  Those liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trades or businesses which possess
characteristics significantly different than normal sanitary sewage.
INDUSTRY  Any establishment which uses water in a product or
generates a wastewater during the manufacturing of a product or
the rendering of a service where such service results in the creation
of a wastewater which differs substantially in character from normal
domestic sewage.
INTERFERENCE  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations or which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the City's SPDES permit. The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405
of the Act, (33 U.S.C.  1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state
criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management
 240-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-18
198:390
plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method
of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATURAL OUTLET  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is, or may be, a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C.  1317) of the Act which
will be applicable to such source if such standards are therefore
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
PASS-THROUGH  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the City뭩 NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.[Added 12-21-2009]
PERSON  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH  The negative logarithm to the base 10 of the molar concentration
of hydrogen ions in solution. It indicates the intensity of acidity and
alkalinity of the pH scale running from zero to 14. A pH value of seven
represents neutrality. Values above seven indicate alkalinity, and those
below seven represent acidity.
POLLUTANTS  May be so defined now or hereafter by appropriate
local, state or federal authorities or by the Commissioner as substances
which may be present in wastewater, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
the amount of which may contain soluble or insoluble material of
organic or inorganic nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source, or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the building
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these
are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which
the new facility is integrated into the existing plant, and the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
 240-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-18
198:391
content of natural waters, contribute solids, contain oil, grease or
floating solids which may cause unsightly appearance on the surface of
such waters, or contain materials detrimental to aquatic life.
PREMISES  Any parcel of real property including land, improvements
or appurtenances, such as buildings, grounds, etc.
PRETREATMENT  The treatment of wastewater from sources before
introduction into the sewage treatment works.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS  Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.[Added
12-21-2009]
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS  A list of substances which the USEPA
considers to be of environmental concern.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE  The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW)  A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.  1292), which is owned
in this instance by the City. The definition includes any sewers that
convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside
the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the
City's POTW.
PUBLIC SEWER  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE  Wash water, culinary wastes and liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter, flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution.
SANITARY SEWER  A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes to which storm-, surface and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT  Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
 240-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-18
198:392
SEWER SYSTEM  All sewers, laterals or other connections or plants
which connect with or pertain to a connection with the sewers, plants,
public works and/or projects of the Department.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER  Any industrial user of the POTW's
wastewater disposal system who:[Amended 12-21-2009]
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE  A violation that meets one of the
following criteria:[Amended 12-21-2009]
(1) Is subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards;
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater) or discharges 5% or more of the
dry weather flow or organic capacity of the POTW;
(2)
Uses on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons
of raw material containing priority pollutants/substances of
concern and discharges a measurable amount of these pollutants
to the sewer system from the process using these pollutants; or
(3)
Is found by the City, NYSDEC or USEPA to have a reasonable
potential, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment
system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air
emissions generated by the system or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement. [Amended 12-21-2009]
(4)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits.
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and
1.2 for all other pollutants, except for pH).
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or
(4)
 240-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-18
198:393
 240-19. Use of public sewers required.
SLUG  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five (five
times more the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during
normal operation.
SS (denoting suspended solids)  The laboratory determination of the
dry weight expressed in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per liter
(mg/l) of solids that either float on the surface, are in suspension or are
settleable and can be removed from wastewater by filtering through a
0.45 microfilter.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
1972.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer")  A sewer which
carries storm- and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN  A list of substances which the NYDEC
considers to be of environmental concern.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES  Any substance whether gaseous, liquid or
solid, which when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient
quantities may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent
from the sewage treatment plant, pose a hazard to men working in the
sewer system or constitute a hazard to fish or animal life.
WASTEWATER  The water-carried domestic, human or animal wastes
from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such groundwater infiltration, industrial and commercial
wastes as may be present.
WATERCOURSE  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to
halt or prevent such a discharge.
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(5)
B. 밪hall is mandatory; 뱈ay is permissive.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the City of Jamestown, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
 240-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-19
198:394
 240-20. Private sewage disposal.
said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Jamestown, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article,
the Chautauqua County Sanitary Code or under the provisions of the
Public Health law of the State of New York.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or
combined sewer of the City is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provision of this
article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provision of  240-19D, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
article and the Chautauqua County Sanitary Code.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Health Commissioner of the Chautauqua County Health Department.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the Chautauqua County Health department, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are
deemed necessary by the Health Commissioner of the Chautauqua
County Health Department.
C. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Chautauqua County Health Commissioner. He shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Chautauqua County Health
Commissioner when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Chautauqua County
Health Commissioner.
 240-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-20
198:395
 240-21. Building sewers and connections.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Health of the State of New York.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in  240-19D hereof, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
G. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer of Chautauqua County.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the General
Manager of the Board of Public Utilities or his designee.
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service, and for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the General
Manager of the Board of Public Utilities. A permit and inspection fee of
no dollars for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and no
dollars for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the City
at the time the application is filed. All permit applications for
establishments discharging industrial wastes shall be reviewed by the
Chautauqua Health Department.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
enter the building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building. When a building is
divided and sold to more than one person for individual ownership,
separate sewer laterals may be required. Final decision will be at the
discretion of the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities. When
 240-20 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-21
198:396
a building is subdivided for separate businesses and, in the opinion
of the Board of Public utilities, the proposed uses for the building are
not compatible, separate sewer laterals may be required. Final decision
will be at the discretion of the General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the General Manager
of the Board of Public Utilities or his designee, to meet all requirements
of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City.43 In the absence of the code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials
and Water Pollution Control Federation manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code44 or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing
Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice
No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities before
installation.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the General
Manager of the Board of Public Utilities or his designee when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction, and Ch. 210,
Plumbing.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Fire Prevention and Building Construction, and Ch. 210,
Plumbing.
 240-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-21
198:397
 240-22. Prohibited sewer uses.
General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities or his designee, or his
representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the General Manager of the
Board of Public Utilities or County Health Commissioner. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet, only upon approval of
the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities and only by a
discharger who possess a valid discharge permit issued by the NYDEC
and/or the USEPA.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140 Fahrenheit, or 60 Centigrade using the
test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk container, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(3) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 40
Centigrade (104 F).
(4) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, or oil
products, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 0 and 40 C (32 and 104 F).
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
 240-21 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-22
198:398
 240-23. Industrial use of public sewers.
horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities.
(6) Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.5, unless
the works is specifically designed to accommodate such
discharges.
(7) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which are likely to cause
obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
(8) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentrations which will
cause interference with the POTW.
(9) Heat in the amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant
exceeds 40 C. (104 F.) unless the approval authority, upon the
request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits.
(10) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(11) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(12) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
A. Permits required for discharge. On or after June 30, 1977, any
discharge of industrial wastes to the public sewer system shall be
unlawful, unless specifically authorized by a sewer use permit issued by
the General Manger of the Board of Public Utilities.
B. Types of permits.
(1) Class I sewer use permits shall be issued by the General Manager
authorizing the discharge of industrial wastewaters to the sanitary
sewer system. The permits shall be specific in terms of the quantity
of flow to be discharged and the contaminants contained herein.
Permits shall be issued to significant industrial users, and any other
dischargers designated by the General Manager of the Board of
Public Utilities.
(2) Class II sewer use permits shall be issued by the General Manager
to industries utilizing public storm sewers as a means of conveying
uncontaminated cooling waters to the receiving waters.
 240-22 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-23
198:399
(3) No sewer use permit is required for industries discharging only
normal sanitary sewage from facilities such as toilets, urinals,
sinks, showers, etc., and for that portion of each industry's flow
which is comprised of strictly domestic sewage.
C. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the City during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in this section are modified or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed
changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
D. Permit transfer. Sewer use permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
City. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit.
E. Applications for sewer use permits.
(1) All industries presently discharging industrial wastes to the public
sewer system shall submit a proper application to the General
Manager of the Board of Public Utilities using forms provided by
the General Manager.
(2) Industries presently discharging process wastes to the sanitary
sewer system shall submit with the application form the following
general information:
(a) A brief description of the process or processes employed in the
facility and data concerning the maximum daily production and
the maximum daily consumption of raw materials.
(b) A material balance flowsheet showing the sources, treatment
and distribution of raw water and the sources, volumes and
proposed disposition of the generated wastewaters.
(c) A recent analysis of the composite process wastewaters
performed by a qualified chemist.
(3) Industries presently discharging treated effluent and/or cooling
waters to the storm sewer system shall provide the General
Manager with a copy of a valid USEPA or NYDEC discharge permit,
along with a letter requesting the issuance of a sewer use permit. A
completed discharge permit application with proof of submittal to
EPA or DEC, or a copy of a draft discharge permit issued by either
 240-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-23
198:400
agency, shall be considered as an acceptable substitute for a final
discharge permit for purposes of applying for a sewer use permit,
until such time that a final discharge permit is in effect.
(4) All new sources shall submit, at least 90 days before
commencement of discharge, an engineering report which contains
the following information:
(a) Identifying information. The facility shall submit the name and
address of the facility including the name of the operator and
owners.
(b) Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief
description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operations(s) carried
out by such industrial user. This description shall include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge
to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(d) Flow measurement. The user shall estimate daily average and
maximum flows.
(e) Measurement of pollutants. The user shall identify anticipated
pollutants and estimate discharge concentrations.
F. Limitations on permit issuance.
(1) No Class I permit shall be issued at any time for the discharge of
uncontaminated wastewaters and/or cooling waters to the sanitary
sewer system where there is ample evidence that such wastewaters
could be discharged directly to the storm sewers and/or receiving
stream without further treatment.
(2) No Class II permit shall be issued, at any time, for a discharge to
the storm sewer system of uncontaminated cooling waters which
contain contaminant quantities in excess of those prescribed in
either the EPA or DEC discharge permits as allowable for discharge
to the receiving stream.
(3) No Class I permit shall be issued at any time permitting the
discharge or infiltration into the public sewers of any of the
following:
(a) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at
the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 C. (104 F).
(b) Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease, oils, or oil products,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/liter of solvent
 240-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-23
198:401
soluable materials or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures below 40 C. (104 F).
(c) Any water or wastes that contain more than two parts per
million by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide,
sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen.
(d) Any residues from petroleum storage, refining or processing,
fuel or lubrication oil, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, explosive or
inflammable liquids, solids or gases.
(e) Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers such as,
but not limited to, mud, straw, metal, rags, glass, tar, plastics,
wood and shavings.
(f) Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing an interference with the proper operation of
the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, feathers, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(g) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(h) Any liquid having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of
the sewage works.
(i) Any liquid containing the discharge of acidic pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(j) Any liquid containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(k) Any materials which exerts or causes:
[1] Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride sodium sulfate).
[2] Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
solutions and vegetable tanning solutions).
[3] Unusual BOD, COD, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
[4] Any unusual concentration or flow or any given constituent
which for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes
 240-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-23
198:402
exceeds more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentrations or flow rates during normal operation.
(l) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect
in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation
set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.
(m) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient
to crease a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(n) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with
the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse
and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance
discharge to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines,
or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state or
county criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(o) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water
quality standards.
(p) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
(q) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates
a public nuisance.
(r) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(s) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(4) No Class I permit shall be issued any time allowing the discharge of
industrial process waste waters to the sanitary sewer system when
any of the pollutant characteristics exceed the limits specified
below. These concentrations shall be applied to wastewater
effluents at a point just prior to discharge to the City sewer system.
 240-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-23
198:403
Samples shall be obtained as twenty-four-hour composites unless
otherwise specified in the user's permit. [Amended 3-20-2006]
Substance
Effluent Concentration Limit*
(milligrams per liter)
Arsenic 1.00
Cadmium 0.30
Chromium (hexavalent) 1.50
Chromium (total) 4.00
Copper 1.25
Lead 0.30
Manganese 5.00
Mercury 0.004
Nickel 0.90
Selenium 0.20
Silver 0.20
Zinc 3.00
Cyanide (total) 0.65
Phenol 0.50
*All concentrations listed for metallic substances shall be as 뱓otal
metal, which shall be defined as the value measured in a sample
acidified to a pH value of less than 2 without prior filtration.
G. Federal pretreatment standards.
(1) The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471, are hereby incorporated. The
General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities shall notify all
affected uses of the applicable reporting requirements under 40
CFR 403.12. [Amended 12-21-2009]
(2) No sewer use permit shall be issued for any discharge which does
not conform to the requirements of any specific EPA pretreatment
standard, providing that such standard has been in effect at least
18 months prior to the effective date of the requested permit.
(3) In those cases where EPA pretreatment standards are issued either
after a sewer use permit is granted for an existing discharge or less
than 18 months prior to the requested effective date of a new sewer
use permit, the applicant shall be granted an interim sewer use
permit which will become null and void 18 months from the date of
the published pretreatment standard. If, by the expiration of the
interim sewer use permit, the discharge does not comply with the
published pretreatment standard, no additional sewer use permit
 240-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-23
198:404
will be issued and the continued discharge of wastes shall become
unlawful.
H. Local pretreatment option.
(1) The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes that
contain the following shall be subject to review by the General
Manager of the Board of Public Utilities:
(a) A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight,
(b) More than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids,
(c) An average daily flow greater than 5% of the average daily
sewage flow of the receiving treatment plant, or
(d) Characteristics which exceed any of the limitations established
in Subsection F.
(2) After proper review, the General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities may:
(a) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers, prior to the issuance of a permit.
(b) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge as a
condition of the permit.
(c) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes as a condition of the permit.
(3) Where pretreatment and/or equalization are required, plans and
specification for such equalization and/or pretreatment facilities
shall be subject to the review and approval of the General Manager
of the Board of Public Utilities and subject to all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. Such pretreatment facilities when
constructed shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense. The owner,
subsequent to the commencement of operation of any pretreatment
facilities, shall make periodic reports to the General Manger of the
Board of Public Utilities setting forth therein data upon which he
may determine the effectiveness and adequacy of such installation
in reducing the concentrations to acceptable limits. Any approval
by the General Manger of a type, kind or capacity of an installation
shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of revamping,
enlarging or otherwise modifying an installation to accomplish its
intended purpose to the degree necessary to comply with any and
all rules and regulations.
(4) No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in
 240-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-23
198:405
any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or
state.
(5) Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City
for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of
the facility. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions.
(a) Written notice: Within five days following an accidental
discharge the user shall submit to the General Manager a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user
of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fishkills, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
(b) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on
the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
I. Facilities for sampling and flow measurement required.
(1) The General Manager shall at least once per year sample each
significant industrial discharge and measure the volume of flow.
The data collected shall be used in the calculation of sewer use
charges and to determine compliance with these regulations.
(2) Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made, whenever
economically and technically feasible, at a common manhole into
which all industrial wastes from such premise are combined. Such
manhole shall be constructed by the owner of such premises, at the
owner's expense, prior to the issuance of any sewer use permit
under Subsection B of this section of this article. Such manhole
shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at
all times. Whenever the installation of such a common manhole is
deemed by the owner to be economically and/or technically
unfeasible, the owner shall accept the burden of preparing and
 240-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-23
198:406
presenting to the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities,
an alternative plan whereby the City may obtain the information,
(flow and analytical data) which the City deems necessary to the
successful operation of their industrial wastewater monitoring
program.
(3) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall
be determined in accordance with the latest version of 40 CFR, Part
136, Analysis of Pollutants, and shall be determined at the control
manhole or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of any hazards.
(4) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the General Manager of the Board of
Public Utilities a report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user
facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional.
(5) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently in
the pretreatment standard or by the General Manager, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent
which are limited by such pretreatment standards. At the
discretion of the General Manager and in consideration of such
factors a local high- or low-flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc.,
the General Manager may agree to alter the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted.
(6) The General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities may impose
mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the report required by Subsection I(4) shall indicate the
 240-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-23
198:407
 240-24. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and
nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested
by the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the administrator pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with
any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the administrator.
(7) Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the City that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the
person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
will not be recognized as confidential information. [Amended
12-21-2009]
J. Nothing under this article shall be construed as reducing in any manner
the authority of the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities to
temporarily refuse the acceptance of a discharge if, in his opinion,
complete compliance with the provisions of any section of these rules
and regulations is lacking. Such temporary refusal shall be in effect
until such time that there is evidence that complete compliance will be
achieved by the discharger.
 240-23 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-24
198:408
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
 240-25. Powers and authority of inspectors.
 240-26. Penalties.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except  240-24
shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Any user who violates
the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal
A. The General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities and other duly
authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article. The General Manager or
his representative shall have the authority to install monitoring
equipment on any sewer user's property and shall also have the
authority to inspect and copy any records pertaining to a sewer user's
discharge. The General Manager or his representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A above the General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and
the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City
employees, and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against
the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in  240-23I.
C. The General Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.
D. Authorized employees of the EPA and the DEC shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing.
 240-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-26
198:409
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the
procedures of  240-27 of this article:
 240-27. Suspension of service and permit.
The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons to the environment, causes interference
to the POTW or causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES
permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as
deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to
any individuals. The City shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit
and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City within
15 days of the date of occurrence.
 240-28. Penalties for offenses; liability for damages;
misrepresentations.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of this discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or,
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in  240-26 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $1,000 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
C. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or
wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
 240-26 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-28
198:410
 240-29. Public notification. [Amended 12-21-2009]
The public will be notified in the City's largest daily newspaper, on an
annual basis, of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were
in significant noncompliance, as defined in  240-18A of this article.
 240-30. Equitable relief. [Amended 12-21-2009]
When the General Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may seek the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user.
 240-31. Hearing Board.
 240-32. Validity.
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six
months, or by both.
A. A Hearing Board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of
differences between the General Manager of the Board of Public
Utilities and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and
execution of the provisions of this article by the General Manager. The
cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the municipality
and the sewer user.
B. One member of the Board shall be a registered professional engineer;
one member shall be a practicing sanitary engineer; one member shall
be a representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one
member shall be a lawyer; and one member shall be selected at large
for his interest in accomplishing the objectives of this article.
C. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City
of Jamestown to serve for the duration of the controversy requiring
arbitration. If the General Manager and sewer user involved in the
controversy can agree in writing on the members to be appointed to the
Board, the Mayor shall appoint such members. The Mayor shall fix the
compensation of Hearing Board members and the General Manager
shall certify their attendance at hearings and approve warrants drawn
for the payment of the members of the Board so serving.
D. The findings of the Hearing Board shall not become effective until
approved by the appropriate divisions of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and/or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
 240-28 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-32
198:411
 240-33. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial or
commercial concern whereby an industrial or commercial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern and subject where required to
the approval by the NYDEC and USEPA. However, under no circumstances
shall modification of the article or other control document be implemented
to allow the discharge or prohibited discharges under 40 CFR 403.5(a)
and (b). Further, the revision of any categorical pretreatment standards to
reflect the removal of pollutants through the POTW must follow the formal
process outlined in 40 CFR 403.7.
 240-34. Recordkeeping. [Added 12-21-200945]
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and
any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques
or methods used; and the results of such analyses. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the City or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the General Manager of the Board of Public Utilities.
 240-35. Ordinance in force.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval as provided by law.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
B. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this article
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article which can be
given effect without such invalid part of parts.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former  240-34,
Ordinance in force, as  240-35.
 240-32 JAMESTOWN CODE  240-35
198:412
Chapter 245
SIGNS AND ENCROACHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials  See Ch. 83.
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Gasoline sales  See Ch. 165.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Special sales  See Ch. 229.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 240-35 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  240-35
198:413

ARTICLE I
Application and Permit
 245-1. Permit required; installation restrictions. [Amended
1-28-1974; 2-9-1987]
No person shall within the City construct, erect, install or maintain
advertising signs, electrical or otherwise, awnings, canopies and marquees
temporarily or permanently attached to the buildings which extend over the
public sidewalks, public alleys, public highways or other public property,
nor shall any person within the City construct, erect, install or maintain
sidewalk elevators, hoistway openings, cellar openings, sidewalk vaults,
areaways, gasoline pumps, gasoline storage tanks, fire escapes, building
entrances, walls, fences, planters, barberpoles, lamps, grates, telephone
poles, newspaper stands or steps temporarily or permanently in, on, over
or under the public sidewalks, public alleys, public highways or other
public properties of the City, without having obtained a permit to install,
construct or maintain the same. No sign, awning, canopy or marquee or
other suspended installation shall be erected over any public property, and
no permit to install the same shall be issued, unless the description for
installation and actual installation provide a clearance above the public
sidewalk, public alley, public highway or other public property of at least 7
1/2 feet.
 245-2. Application information. [Amended 2-9-1987]
A. The owner of any such sign, awning, canopy or marquee and the owner
or lessee of any such sidewalk elevators, hoistway openings, cellar
openings, sidewalk vaults, areaways, gasoline pumps, gasoline storage
tanks, fire escapes, building entrances, walls, fences, planters,
barberpoles, lamps, grates, telephone poles, newspaper stands or steps
in, on or under the public sidewalks, public alleys, public highways or
other public properties of the City shall make and file an application
with the Building Inspector for a permit to maintain the same.
B. Such application shall contain a description of such sign, opening or
other installation referred to in  245-1 of this chapter and the precise
location upon which it is to be maintained.
C. Where the application maintains more than one of the installations,
structures or openings authorized by this chapter, one application only
need be filed which shall describe all of the installations, structures or
openings. A separate permit shall be issued to maintain each such
installation, and the fee provided for in this chapter shall be paid for
each permit.
D. Each application shall provide as a condition to receiving a permit or
any renewal thereof that the applicant agrees to maintain such
installation in good condition and that the applicant agrees as
additional consideration for receiving a permit to indemnify and hold
the City of Jamestown and its agents, servants, officers and employees
 245-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-2
198:415
 245-3. Action on application; term of permit; City records; notice
for renewal. [Amended 2-9-1987]
 245-4. Denial; appeals; removal of encroachments.
If the Building Inspector denies the application, the applicant shall
eliminate the encroachment for which a permit was applied within 10 days
after such denial unless the applicant, within 10 days after the denial,
appeals to the City Council; and in such case, if the City Council sustains the
ruling of the Building Inspector, the encroachment for which the permit was
applied shall be eliminated 10 days after a resolution by the City Council
has been adopted sustaining the decision of the Building Inspector.
 245-5. Issuance of permit; fees. [Amended 11-9-1981; 7-28-1986;
12-26-1990; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
harmless from any and all damages, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees and disbursements which may result to the
City of Jamestown or its agents, servants, officers and employees by
third parties for property damage, personal injury and/or death which
may result to such third parties by virtue of the installation for which
a permit is being requested. Each application shall additionally provide
as a condition to receiving a permit or any renewal thereof that the
applicant agrees to assume sole responsibility for damages which may
result to the installation for which a permit is being applied for by virtue
of City work forces in the performance of normal and customary duties,
including but not limited to snow removal operations and street and
sidewalk maintenance.
E. No application shall be accepted unless signed by the legal or equitable
owner of any such installation or installations, which signature shall be
acknowledged in the presence of a notary public.
A. The Building Inspector within 10 days after the filing of such
application shall act thereon, and if he approves the same, he shall
grant a permit.
B. All permits granted shall expire on December 31 of each year.
C. The Building Inspector shall keep an accurate record of all applications
made and permits issued, and on or before the first day of December in
each year, beginning with the year following the granting of each
permit, the Building Inspector shall notify each person holding a permit
to renew the same for the ensuing year beginning January 1.
D. For purposes of this chapter, the permit referred to throughout this
chapter shall be known as an "encroachment permit."
 245-2 JAMESTOWN CODE  245-5
198:416
A. Upon approval by the Building Inspector of an application pursuant to
this chapter, such application shall be filed with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, who shall issue such permit.
B. Every applicant, upon receiving a permit, shall pay the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk a fee as provided in Chapter 175,
Licenses and Permits, for issuing the same, and the amount as provided
in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, shall be paid upon each renewal
thereof.
 245-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-5
198:417

ARTICLE II
Electrical Signs
 245-6. Application information; approval of Board of Public
Utilities.
Proper application with complete details shall be filed with the Building
Inspector prior to the erection of an electrical sign. This application shall
give the overall measurements of the sign, the methods of support, the
wording to appear on the sign, the method of illumination, the distance from
the building, the distance from the outer face of the sign to the curbline,
the approximate location of the nearest ornamental lamppost, the height of
the sign above the walk, the location of the property where the sign is to be
erected, the permission of the owner for the erection of such sign under the
terms of this chapter and such other detailed information as may be deemed
necessary. This application shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, who
shall receive the approval of the Lighting Division of the Board of Public
Utilities prior to granting the authority to proceed with erection of the sign.
 245-7. Placement and construction requirements.
 245-8. Erection and safeguarding methods.
The following conditions, methods, appliances and safeguards are
prescribed in the placing or erecting of electrical signs within the City:
A. Every electric sign overhanging the sidewalk must be placed so that the
lowest part of any portion of the sign will be at least 12 feet above the
level of such walk and may be placed as close to the building as is
practical. Such sign must not extend to a point closer than three feet
inside of the curbline.
B. All electric signs shall be double-faced signs and shall be illuminated on
both sides.
C. No sign shall be constructed of material that is not completely
waterproof and of material that will not shrink or crack. The letters
shall not be made of material that will allow the snow, sleet or rain to
penetrate or any material other than as prescribed by this article.
A. Signs extending over sidewalks. Signs extending over the sidewalk
shall have at least two individual steel attachments to each building or
pole.
B. Signs weighing less than 100 pounds. Signs weighing less than 100
pounds shall have one main support in the form of a bolt through the
building wall, where possible, anchored by a washer plate of at least 24
square inches of surface and 1/8 inch in thickness, unless the
supporting chain or cable is located at an angle greater than 45, in
which case approved expansion bolts may be used. If the cable or chain
is attached to a bolt located at a distance greater than one foot from the
 245-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-8
198:419
building wall, such bolt shall be supported by a brace. For signs
weighing less than 100 pounds, the minimum size of steel cable allowed
shall be 1/4 inch in diameter, and the minimum size of chain allowed
shall be of material 3/16 inch in diameter. Where the angle of the
supporting cable or chain is less than 45, the steel cable shall be 5/16
inch in diameter.
C. Signs weighing between 100 and 250 pounds. Signs weighing between
100 and 250 pounds shall have one main support in the form of a bolt
through the building wall, where possible, anchored by a washer plate
of at least 24 square inches of surface and 1/8 inch in thickness. If the
cable or chain is attached to a bolt located at a distance greater than six
inches from the building wall, the bolt shall be supported with a brace.
For signs weighing between 100 and 250 pounds, the minimum size of
steel cable allowed shall be 3/8 inch in diameter, and the minimum size
of the chain allowed shall be of material 5/16 inch in diameter. Where
the angle of the supporting chain or cable is less than 45, the steel
cable shall be 1/2 inch in diameter, and the chain shall be of material 3/
8 inch in diameter.
D. Signs weighing between 250 and 350 pounds. Signs weighing between
250 and 350 pounds shall have at least two main supports in the form of
bolts through the building wall, anchored by washer plates, each of
which shall be at least 24 square inches of surface and 1/8 inch in
thickness. Each support shall be anchored at the building wall by two
other supports in the form of bolts or plugs. For signs weighing between
250 and 350 pounds, the minimum size steel cable allowed shall be 9/16
inch in diameter, and the minimum size chain allowed shall be of
material 3/8 inch in diameter. Where the angle of the supporting cable
or chain is less than 45, the steel cable shall be 5/8 inch in diameter,
and the chain of material 9/16 inch in diameter.
E. Marking of sign weight. All signs erected under this chapter shall have
the weights marked on the sign box in plain figures.
F. Signs up to 30 square feet where side guys spread an angle greater
than or less than 45. Signs having 30 square feet or less on side
surface and guys spread at an angle greater than 45 shall be supported
by steel cables 1/4 inch in diameter or chains of material 3/16 inch in
diameter. Such signs, when supported by guys spread at an angle less
than 45, shall be supported by steel cables 1/2 inch in diameter or
chains of material 3/8 inch in diameter. No guys shall be spread at an
angle of less than 25. Where the side guys can be attached to only one
side of such signs, a stiff brace consisting of gas pipe 3/4 inch in
diameter and of standard thickness shall be used.
G. Side guys spread at angles greater than 45. Side guys spread at angles
greater than 45 shall be fastened with approved expansion bolts in a
solid brick or stone wall or by a machine screw in an iron front or by a
lag bolt in solid woodwork.
 245-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  245-8
198:420
 245-9. Inspection by and approval of Board of Public Utilities.
The Board of Public Utilities, having charge of the municipal lighting
system, shall have the right to approve the location of electric signs so that
they will not interfere with the ornamental lighting system now in existence
or hereafter installed within the City. Such Board shall also have the right to
inspect such signs erected under the authority of this chapter to determine
if the electrical appliances used and the wiring done are in accordance with
the requirements of the National Electrical Code and the regulations of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters and such ordinances of the City
regarding electrical wiring.46
 245-10. Illumination; inactive signs and removal.
H. Bolts and screws.
(1) Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window frames. Lag bolts in
solid woodwork shall not be smaller than 1/4 inch in diameter and
shall enter woodwork at least three inches.
(2) Machine screws in an iron front shall be not less than 1/2 inch in
diameter and shall enter clear through ironwork. Expansion bolts
shall be at least 3/8 inch in diameter and shall enter brick or stone
walls at least 2 1/2 inches.
I. Attachment to or near fire escapes. Signs shall not obstruct or be
attached to any part of the fire escape, and where a sign is hung near
any fire escape, it shall be arranged to swing away from such fire
escape.
J. Cable sleeves and clips; turnbuckles for side guys. All cables shall be
provided with sleeves, and two cable clips must be provided for each
cable and placed near the sleeve. Turnbuckles of suitable size shall be
provided for all side guys and for one of the supporting cables, where
more than one is used.
K. Commutating devices. Commutating devices shall be mechanical and so
arranged that they will operate standard switches or their equal. Drums
used in connection with such mechanisms shall not be in electrical
connection with any part of the circuit.
L. Lamps to be provided with rubber ring. Lamps shall be provided with a
rubber ring or equivalent device placed between the socket opening
and lamp to prevent moisture, rain, etc., from entering the socket.
A. All electric signs erected under the authority of this chapter shall be
illuminated on both sides between the hours of dusk and 10:00 p.m.
B. If the sign is not so lit for one consecutive week, it can be deemed an
inactive sign and ordered removed by the Building Inspector.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Electrical Standards.
 245-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-10
198:421
C. The owner of the building giving authority for the erection of a sign on
his building assumes the responsibilities and cost of removing the sign
when it becomes inactive under the terms of this section.
 245-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  245-10
198:422
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Cafes
[Added 5-23-201147]
 245-11. Permit; serving of alcoholic beverage; operation
standards.
A. The issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit is a privilege granted by the City
of Jamestown. The City requires compliance with all rules and
regulations contained herein. Operators of sidewalk cafes are required
to abide by these regulations and to show respect for the community in
which the sidewalk cafe is located. Failure to do so may result in the
revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit. The City of Jamestown Policy
Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement and Ordinance
Enforcement will monitor the operation of all sidewalk cafes in the City
of Jamestown and are empowered to issue citations for any violations of
these rules and regulations and all local laws, ordinances, and rules and
regulations of the City that may apply.
B. A sidewalk cafe permit is valid from April 1 to October 31 of the year
the permit is issued.
C. Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit, the operators of
sidewalk cafes are required to provide the City of Jamestown with a
certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for general liability
coverage naming the City of Jamestown as an additional insured and
$500,000 for workers' compensation coverage. The City of Jamestown
shall be listed as the certificate holder.
D. Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit, the operators of
establishments that serve alcoholic beverages are required to submit to
the Building Inspector a copy of a valid New York State liquor license
for the establishment, along with an affidavit stating that the
establishment has a valid liquor license. The affidavit must be signed
and notarized stating that the establishment has provided significant
proof and paperwork to the New York State Liquor Authority of the
addition of the sidewalk cafe to the business operations.
E. For establishments that did not require a liquor license at the time the
sidewalk cafe permit was issued and elect to serve alcoholic beverages
after the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit, proof of a valid liquor
license must be provided to the Building Inspector upon obtaining said
license.
F. Sidewalk cafes shall not operate earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than
12:00 midnight.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Art. III,
Penalties, as Art. IV and former  245-11 as  245-13.
 245-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-11
198:423
G. All sidewalk cafes and the employees thereof shall be subject to and
comply with all applicable requirements and standards for a retail food
establishment, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Patrons must wear shoes and shirts at all times.
(2) All sidewalk cafes must have an opening for ingress and egress at
all times (into the main building) and a signed "emergency only"
egress.
(3) All sidewalk cafes must adhere to the size, design and any other
specifications approved by the City at all times. Strict adherence to
required design standards as set forth herein is mandatory.48
(4) Strict adherence to hours of operation, approved layout of all
components of the sidewalk cafe, clear space for pedestrians and
required landscaping is mandatory.
(5) Table seating is required for all patrons utilizing the outdoor cafe.
(6) The cafe area is a no-smoking zone and is considered part of the
main building for interpretation of the public smoking setback.
H. Where the City has installed a permanent structure such as a parking
meter, planter, light pole or other device, the operator of the sidewalk
cafe shall make accommodation for the required clearance for
pedestrian passage (five feet). Operators of sidewalk cafes shall be
mindful of the rights of pedestrians traveling past their sidewalk cafe at
all times during the operation of the sidewalk cafe. Complaints
regarding sidewalk cafes will be investigated by the City, and violations
of the rules and regulations herein will result in citations being issued
to the operator and/or revocation of the operator's sidewalk cafe
permit.
I. All areas within and surrounding the sidewalk cafe must be maintained
in a clean, neat and sanitary condition and shall be policed routinely by
the operator to ensure removal of all litter and debris. Daily sanitary
cleaning of the sidewalk cafe is required. Sidewalks within and adjacent
to the sidewalk cafe must be washed down and cleaned on a daily basis.
The operator shall not wash garbage cans or any other container or
other personal property of any nature on the sidewalks. All cleaning
must be performed in accordance with applicable federal and state
regulations.
J. Sidewalk cafes shall be prohibited from playing amplified music,
whether live or recorded. No speakers, microphones, televisions or
other audio or video devices shall be permitted at a sidewalk cafe.
K. All tables, chairs, plants, planters, and any other items of the sidewalk
cafe, hereinafter referred to collectively as "sidewalk cafe elements,"
48.Editor's Note: See  245-12, Design standards.
 245-11 JAMESTOWN CODE  245-11
198:424
 245-12. Design standards.
In order to remain consistent with the City of Jamestown's objective of
developing outdoor dining spaces, including furniture, objects, structures
and dcor associated therewith, inasmuch that applicants desiring to use
public space for semiprivate use as outdoor cafes are enhancing the private
interests of their enterprise as well as that of the City, the following design
shall be approved as a part of the permit approval process as set forth
in the regulations for sidewalk cafes. Sidewalk cafe elements shall be
promptly stacked and/or set aside immediately after the sidewalk cafe
discontinues its daily operation.
L. At the expiration of the sidewalk cafe permit, all apparatuses utilized
for the outdoor cafe operation must be removed from the sidewalk area.
The sidewalk area will be returned to the condition that existed prior to
the set out of the outdoor sidewalk cafe.
M. Canopies, awnings and umbrellas must be firmly installed to withstand
typical weather conditions. These units must be rolled up and securely
fastened when the outdoor cafe is closed, or they must be dismantled.
An encroachment permit must be obtained from the City Building
Inspector.
N. The outside eating area must be confined within a clearly defined
boundary using temporary materials. Acceptable materials will include
planters with flowers or foliage, decorative fencing, or other approved
material. The maximum height of the boundary material must not
exceed three feet six inches and be black and constructed of an
approved metal decorative fence.
O. A City of Jamestown Fire Department inspector will visit the site to
determine the proper "occupancy" for the proposed sidewalk cafe and
issue a certificate of maximum occupancy for that area.
P. City Code Enforcement Officer(s) will inspect all sidewalk cafes after
permits have been issued and the cafe is in operation. Any violation of
the provisions of these rules and regulations or any deviation from
approved plans or willful omissions of the application will result in
citations being issued to the operator and/or revocation of the sidewalk
cafe permit for the premises.
Q. Should any operator, his or her employees, agents or contractors violate
or resist enforcement of any provision of the sidewalk cafe rules and
regulations, the operator may be subject to immediate permit
revocation by the City and/or shall be subject to the issuance of a
citation.
R. Operators of sidewalk cafes shall be required to abide by all federal,
state and local laws, rules and regulations applicable to the operation of
a sidewalk cafe.
 245-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-12
198:425
standards shall apply to establishments seeking permission to erect
sidewalk cafes throughout the City:
A. Site plan. A site plan of the sidewalk area must be submitted, and this
must be included within a copy of a full-scale survey (not reduced or
faxed) of the property indicating the following (to scale):
(1) Dimensions of property frontage.
(2) Dimensions from building face to edge of sidewalk and from edge
of sidewalk to the curb (or grass or brick area).
(3) Dimensions of all tables, chairs and other apparatus.
(4) The location on the sidewalk of all tables, chairs, barriers, planters
and other apparatus.
(5) The specific materials, furniture and colors to be used.
(6) A description of how this area will be managed and maintained.
(7) Show Fire Department connections (if applicable).
(8) Details of the proposed railings, canopy, tables, chairs, barriers,
planters and other apparatus.
B. Space and clearances.
(1) The linear width of the cafe should fit within the property
boundaries.
(2) The cafe may extend from the face of the building toward the curb,
assuring that a clear pedestrian passageway that is a minimum of
five feet is maintained at all times, exclusive of all meters, sign
posts, tree grates, etc. The grass or brick area between the
sidewalk and the curb may not be used as part of the five-foot
passageway.
(3) The tables and related apparatus will not be permitted to obstruct
the sight distance of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(4) The cafe shall not interfere with any utilities or other facilities such
as telephone poles, fire hydrants, tree grates, signs, parking
meters, or benches located on the sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(5) Fire connections on the building must not be blocked.
(6) The cafe may not impinge on any required clear distance for
maneuvering around entrances or exits. The outdoor dining area
shall be accessible to disabled patrons and employees, and any
building adjacent to these areas shall maintain building egress as
defined by the current local codes.
 245-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  245-12
198:426
ARTICLE IV
Penalties
 245-13. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article, I, Penalties.
 245-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  245-13
198:427
Chapter 249
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance  See Ch. 155.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order  See Ch. 198.
Peddling and soliciting  See Ch. 204.
 249-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and the City Council find that streets and other public places
in the City are from time to time temporarily closed and used as sites
for ethnic festivals, art shows, neighborhood celebrations and other public
events which are privately sponsored but open to the public. Events of this
kind serve to improve the quality of life of the residents of the City and
often result in large numbers of people congregating within the confines
of the temporarily closed streets or public places, and the resulting crowd
conditions create concerns for police and fire access and control and other
concerns relating to the health, safety and welfare of the public and of
persons and property in the closed area. It is therefore essential that
a policy be established for governing these events which shall facilitate
control over them by the sponsor and by city officials from departments
involved with the event to safeguard persons and property.
 249-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK PARTY  Event held by the residents of a defined section of the City
to be attended by the residents of that particular section.
DOWNTOWN AREA  The area of the City bounded on the north by Sixth
Street, on the east by Foote Avenue, on the south by Harrison Street and on
the west by Monroe Street.
PUBLIC PROPERTY  Property which is owned, operated, maintained,
and/or controlled by the City which is not rental in nature. Examples of
public property include, but are not limited to, parking lots, plazas, streets,
sidewalks and parks.
SPECIAL EVENT  A preplanned single event or series of events that,
because of its nature, interest, location, promotion or any combination of
similar influences, is expected, or later found, to draw a large number of
people, sponsored by an individual or entity other than the City, proposed
to be held on public property or on private property but affecting public
property or requiring city support services, for the purpose(s) of
entertainment, celebration, amusement, cultural recognition, arts and
 245-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  249-2
198:428
crafts displays and/or sales, amateur sports demonstration or competition,
or similar activities generically considered recreational in nature. Examples
include, but are not limited to, ethnic festivals, street fairs, street art
shows, public celebrations, outdoor concerts, parades, road races and walka-
thons.
SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR  A peddler conducting business during a
special event with the written permission of the event sponsor.
SPONSOR  The individual, group of individuals, corporation or other
entity responsible for organizing the event.
SUPPORT SERVICES  Those which can or must be provided by the City to
ensure that a special event is conducted in such a manner as to protect the
safety, health, property and general welfare of its citizens. Examples include
fire protection, crowd management and control and traffic management and
control.
 249-3. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, group or
organization within the corporate limits of the City of Jamestown to conduct
a special event or to act as a special event vendor as herein defined without
first having obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a valid,
current permit or license therefor.
 249-4. Application and cost estimation. [Amended 11-17-2003;
11-26-2007]
A. Application for special event permit. The sponsor of the special event
must submit a completed application form to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk. All applications are to be submitted
on the forms provided by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk. Any application submitted less than 30 days prior to the event
shall be subject to late fees. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. City costing process. The completed forms shall be distributed to the
appropriate City departments, which will estimate the additional costs
that would be incurred as a result of the event. This information may be
used in establishing terms and conditions under which an event may be
conducted when the use of police or other City personnel is
appropriate, possible and not in conflict with any other administrative
policies and procedures and/or labor agreements.
C. Application for special event vendor license. The sponsor of a special
event may authorize vendors to operate within the defined area of the
special event. Local businesses located outside the designated confines
of the special event will be required to obtain written authorization
from the event sponsor to operate as a vendor. However, businesses
located within the designated confines of the special event area may
operate as a vendor on the sidewalk which immediately abuts their
 249-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  249-4
198:429
 249-5. Fees. [Amended 11-17-2003; 11-26-2007; 11-27-2012]
 249-6. Approval process.
The Public Safety Committee of the Jamestown City Council will review all
special event applications and shall be authorized to either approve or deny
said applications.
 249-7. Requirements.
business during the duration of the special event (and during any time
during the year) by paying to the City of Jamestown a fee as provided in
Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits. [Amended 11-27-2012]
D. The application for a special event vendor license must be submitted on
the forms provided by the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk. Said application, signed by the event sponsor, must be submitted
by the vendor to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk,
along with the appropriate fees, no less than seven days prior to the
date of an approved event. Upon receipt of a properly competed
application, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall
issue a special event vendor license. Said license shall be prominently
displayed or carried by the vendor at all times during participation in
the special event. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
A. The fee for a special event permit for an application submitted by a notfor-
profit organization 30 days prior to the date of the event shall be
$100 per event. The fee for a special event permit for an application
submitted by a for-profit organization 30 days prior to the event shall be
$175 per each day of the event. For an application submitted less than
15 days prior to the date of the event, the fee shall be increased by $25.
For an application submitted less than seven days prior to the event, the
fee shall be increased by $50. In the case of a for-profit organization,
the increased fee will be imposed for each day of the event.
B. The fee for a not-for-profit special event vendor license shall be $30 per
day/per vendor. The fee for a for-profit special event vendor license
shall be $60 per day/per vendor. [Amended 8-25-2014]
A. Permits and licenses. Approval to conduct a special event by this
process does not relieve the sponsor or any participant, including but
not limited to foodstands, vendors, peddlers or exhibitors, from the
responsibility of applying for any other permits or licenses or meeting
any other requirements which may be applicable.
B. Insurance. All events must obtain a liability insurance policy in the
amount of $1,000,000 with the City named as an additional insured, or
a larger amount at the discretion of the City. This insurance shall satisfy
all insurance requirements for the City for holding the special event.
Additional insurance requirements of city departments shall be
 249-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  249-7
198:430
 249-8. Event guidelines.
considered by the Public Safety Committee in formulating the amount
of coverage required. The insurance policy shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Corporation Counsel of the City.
C. Due date. All required permits, licenses, security deposits and
insurance policies must be obtained no later than seven days prior to
the date of the event.
A. Daily time restriction. The hours of operation for any special event
taking place on the streets of the City shall be between 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
B. Memorial Day restriction. No special event other than the Memorial
Day Parade shall be permitted to operate in the downtown area
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Memorial Day.
C. Safety lane restriction. The placement of any vehicle, trailer or other
installation associated with the special event shall be directed by the
Deputy Fire Chief and the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety of
the City of Jamestown or their designated representative(s) to ensure
that a safety lane remains open at all times. [Amended 2-24-2003]
D. Site maintenance. All areas used must be left in a clean condition.
E. Services available from the City. The city will provide certain equipment
and materials to facilitate comfort and control over the event, subject to
availability and the City's prior need for such equipment and materials.
(1) Temporary parking signs. All temporary signs for restricting
parking must be posted 24 hours in advance and maintained by the
sponsor. Requests for the necessary materials should be directed to
the Jamestown Police Department, Parking Enforcement Unit,
which shall have responsibility for the initial posting of the
temporary signs either through physical placement or directive as
to locations. Any usage of temporary signs without the
authorization of the Parking Enforcement Unit will be neither
recognized nor enforced. Upon the event's completion, all signs
must be taken down by the sponsor and returned to the Parking
Enforcement Unit.
(2) Barricades. Moveable barricades shall be delivered to the site
where the sponsor or its designated representative shall sign for
their receipt. The cost of replacing lost or damaged barricades lies
with the sponsor.
(3) Fees. A fee for providing police officers above the number normally
scheduled may be charged. Said fee is to be determined by the
Chief of Police and shall not be in excess of the actual cost.
 249-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  249-8
198:431
 249-9. Penalties for offenses.
 249-10. Exclusion from policy.
Chapter 252
F. Other restrictions. The following are prohibited within the confines of
any special event:
(1) Overnight camping, except for security personnel.
(2) Unlicensed gambling or illegal games of chance.
(3) Littering and the use of glass containers.
(4) Open fires that are not under the guidelines established by the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
(5) No grease or substance of any kind can be discharged upon the
streets or sidewalks or into the storm drains and sewers.
A. Fine. Special events shall not be held without the authorization of the
Public Safety Committee nor held in contravention of the terms and
conditions set forth by the Public Safety Committee. Violation of this
chapter may subject the sponsor to a fine of $500 in addition to any
other penalty provided in the ordinances or in any other law on account
of commencement of said special events without required permits,
licenses or authorization.
B. Closing of unauthorized special events. The Police Chief may close any
special event conducted without authorization of the Public Safety
Committee, and the sponsors and participants may be subject to arrest.
C. Closing of events due to public safety hazard. The Police Chief/Director
of Public Safety, the Deputy Fire Chief or their designated
representative(s) may close any special event or any portion of a special
event that is subsequently determined to be an imminent hazard to the
public health, safety or welfare. [Amended 2-24-2003]
A. Block parties. Block parties as herein defined are excluded from the
provisions of this policy. Requests for block parties are to be submitted
to the Public Safety Committee and shall comply with the requirements
established by the Committee.
B. City events. Events initiated by and/or sponsored or cosponsored by the
City are excluded from the provisions of this policy.
C. Events solely within parks. Events that are held entirely within the
jurisdiction of the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission that
do not require the intervention of any other city department shall be
deemed an event sponsored or cosponsored by the City for the purposes
of this chapter and shall be regulated by the Policy for Use of Park
Facilities.
 249-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  249-10
198:432
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public works  See Ch. 68.
Bicycles  See Ch. 107.
Open fires  See Ch. 142.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse  See Ch. 160.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Peddling and soliciting  See Ch. 204.
Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
Street adoption program  See Ch. 253.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Taxicabs  See Ch. 274.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
Vehicles and traffic  See Ch. 290.
Vehicles, unlicensed  See Ch. 292.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 249-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  249-10
198:433

ARTICLE I
Obstructions and Excavations
 252-1. Prohibited activities; permit required. [Amended
3-21-2005]
No person shall place, deposit or leave upon any street, sidewalk or alley of
this City any material whatever, except as provided by this chapter or other
City ordinances. No person shall dig, mar, change or alter any sidewalk,
street, grade or highway in the City or make or cause or permit to be made
any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the limits of the City or change, raise
or lower any grade, line boundary, curbstone or any of the other designated
indications of street lines, highways or other public places within the limits
of the City, provided that a person may do any of such acts prohibited by this
section as shall be permitted by a right-of-way permit issued by the Director
of Public Works or his authorized agent or officer pursuant to this chapter
after formal application is made and accompanied by a bond as provided in
this chapter.
 252-2. Application for permit.
 252-3. Bond and insurance required. [Amended 8-8-1967;
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
The application for a permit as required by  252-2 shall be accompanied by
a bond to the City, approved as to form and sufficiency by the Corporation
Counsel, in the amount provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits,
A. Any person desiring to procure a permit as required by  252-1 shall file
with the Director of Public Works a written application stating the name
and the business or residence address of the applicant, the name of the
street or public place in or under which it is desired to make the
excavation or opening or otherwise, as the case may be, the name and
the business or residence address of the person for whose benefit the
work is to be done, the lot or street number where the opening or
excavation or other work is to be made and the time during which it is
desired such opening is to be permitted and the reason for and the
nature of such excavation, opening or work to be made.
B. The Electric Division, Water Division, Sewer Division and District
Heating Division of the Board of Public Utilities, National Fuel Gas
Distribution Corporation, Windstream, DFT Communications and Time
Warner Cable, because of their on-going openings of public streets and
sidewalks, shall obtain, on an annual basis, the permit required by
 252-1 of this chapter to cover all excavations made by each respective
entity for a period of one year from the date of issuance of such permit.
The annual fee for each such permit shall be paid at the time of
application therefor in the amount provided in Chapter 175 of the Code.
[Added 4-29-1996; amended 11-29-2009]
 252-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-3
198:435
given by a surety company authorized to transact business as such in the
state, conditioned for the faithful performance of such work in accordance
with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the City, conditioned upon
the restoration of such places, sidewalks or highways to the state or shape
existing prior to the commencement of such permitted work and to a safe
condition for the use thereof and thereafter by the public. The application
for a permit required by  252-2 shall also be accompanied by an insurance
certificate naming the City upon such policy and providing that the person
making the application will protect, indemnify and save harmless the City
against and from any and all damages or claims for damages for injury
to persons or property by reason of such permitted work which may arise
during such permitted work or arising after the completion or abandonment
of such permitted work. Such insurance certificate shall have liability limits
in the amount provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits. Any person
who, in pursuit of his regular calling, has frequent occasion to open or to
make excavations in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places may
file a bond in the amount provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits,
conditioned as above to cover all excavations made by him for a period of
one year from the date of filing, but permits for all excavations must be
applied for with the insurance certificate hereinabove required and issued
as provided by this chapter.
 252-4. Bodies exempt from bonding requirement. [Amended
8-8-1967; 3-21-2005; 11-29-2009]
A bond or insurance certificate as provided by  252-3 shall not be required
to be furnished, in the discretion of the Director of Public Works, when
application for a permit is made by Windstream, DFT Communications,
Time Warner Cable, National Fuel Gas, the Board of Public Utilities or any
person employed by the City to perform any of the acts specified by this
chapter.
 252-5. Issuance of permit.
A. The Director of Public Works or his authorized agent or officer, upon the
filing of the application, bond and insurance certificate, may, in his
discretion, issue a permit as provided for in this chapter, which shall
state the name and address of the applicant, the location, nature,
purposes and extent of the excavation or opening or other work and the
dates of granting and of the expiration of such permit. [Amended
8-8-1967]
B. All permits provided for in this chapter shall be consecutively
numbered.
C. One copy shall be given to the applicant, one copy shall remain on file in
the office of the Director of Public Works, and one copy, together with
the application, shall be given to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
 252-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-6
198:436
 252-6. Emergencies.
In case of an emergency arising out of office hours, at night or on Sundays
or legal holidays when the office of the Department of Public Works is not
open for business, when an immediate excavation may be necessary for
the protection of public or private property, the same shall be reported to
the Police Department, which shall grant permission to make the necessary
excavation on the express condition that an application be made in the
manner provided by this chapter on or before 12:00 noon of the next
following business day.
 252-7. Exception to permit requirement. [Amended 3-21-2005]
A permit as provided by this chapter shall not be required, in the discretion
of the Director of Public Works, for the installation and maintenance of curb
boxes by ALLTEL NY, Inc., National Fuel Gas or the Board of Public Utilities.
 252-8. Discontinuance of privilege.
The granting of permits or privileges to use portions of the walks or
highways of the City for a temporary purpose shall not vest in the person to
whom such permit or privilege is granted the right to refuse to discontinue
the exercise of such permit or the use of such privileges for the time being
should such use or exercise for the time being be prohibited by the Chief of
Police or the Mayor.
 252-9. Revocation or suspension by City Council.
No section in this chapter vesting in a certain officer the power to grant
permits or privileges or the right to refuse to grant such permits or
privileges shall be interpreted to divest the City Council from either
exercising concurrent jurisdiction or of the right of such City Council to
rescind, alter, revoke or repeal any such permit, privilege or action granted
by any officer.
 252-10. Restoration of street surface. [Added 7-10-1972]
A. Temporary patch. Any excavation or opening in the streets or highways
of the City shall be closed with a temporary patch as soon as possible
after the work requiring such excavation or opening shall have been
completed. Such temporary patch shall be sufficiently stable that the
repaired portion shall not be above or below the grade of the
surrounding pavement and that normal traffic use by the general public
will not be rendered dangerous or unsafe.
B. Final repair; responsibility of permittee for backfill. Upon completion of
such work and installation of such temporary patch, such person shall
notify the Director of Public Works. Final repair of such pavement shall
in all cases be made by the City, and the cost thereof shall be charged to
the permittee. In the event that such repaired pavement should sink or
become uneven during the period of one year following the excavation
 252-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-10
198:437
 252-11. Permit fee. [Amended 7-28-1986; 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
A fee as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, shall be paid by the
applicant for each permit issued under this chapter.
or opening, it shall be presumed that the excavation or opening was
improperly filled, and such pavement and excavation should be
repaired by the City at the expense of permittee.
C. Payment for work performed in the right-of-way. Each permittee shall
be responsible for all costs associated with repair of the damaged rightof-
way infrastructure, regardless of prior conditions. [Amended
3-21-2005]
D. Determination of costs of repair of pavement. The costs of repairs and
patching of pavements shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works and shall, where practicable, be based upon the area in square
feet being repaired.49
49.Editor's Note: Former  252-10E, regarding excavation in street where pavement was laid
less than three years previous to application, which subsection immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-21-2005.
 252-10 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-11
198:438
ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Provisions
 252-12. Goods and boxes on street or sidewalk in front of business
premises.
No person shall occupy any portion of the sidewalk or public highway in
displaying foods or merchandise in front of his premises in the business or
mercantile districts of the City as described by Chapter 300, Zoning. No
person shall allow goods, boxes or other articles to remain more than 30
minutes on the sidewalk in front of his business premises, nor shall the
specific enumeration of this privilege vest the owner or occupant of such
premises with the right to refuse to remove such goods, boxes or other
articles upon the summary order of the Chief of Police or any member of the
police force.
 252-13. Vehicles on sidewalks, curbs and parkways. [Amended
6-9-1980]
 252-14. Removal of snow and ice; marking of obstructions.
[Amended 2-23-1976]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall run any vehicle along any sidewalk
of the City except for the transportation of children or invalids. No
person, firm or corporation shall run any vehicle across any sidewalk of
the City except for the purpose of moving from the highway to the
adjacent premises by use of a driveway, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation delay the movement or passage of a vehicle across the
walks of the City in such a manner as to blockade the thoroughfare or to
impede the passage of pedestrians.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, build,
establish or maintain any driveway, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation run any vehicle across or upon any portion of the public
curb, public parkway or a public sidewalk, for purposes of gaining
access to private property without first having obtained a written
permit to do so from the Director of Public Works of the City of
Jamestown.
C. Subsections A and B shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the lawful delivery of goods, merchandise or services for
hire to private businesses and dwelling houses nor to any person, firm
or corporation engaged in the business of moving and storage of goods
for hire.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this section:
ROADWAY  That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
 252-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-14
198:439
SIDEWALK  That portion of the street between the curblines or the
lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY  The entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to use
of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TERRACE  The land lying between the street curb and the outer limits
of the sidewalk running parallel with such street curb. The words 뱋uter
limits of the sidewalk mean the outer or street side of any sidewalk. In
localities where the sidewalk is not clearly visible because of a covering
of cement or blacktop or otherwise, the outer limits of the sidewalk
shall be determined to be a projection of the outer line of the sidewalk
measured along the entire length of the street.[Amended 2-23-2009]
B. Every person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company or
syndicate in charge or control of any building or lot of land within the
City fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall remove and clear away or
cause to be removed or cleared away snow and ice from so much of the
sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot.
C. The foregoing notwithstanding, in the event that snow and ice on a
sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed without
likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person or entity charged with
its removal shall cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on the
sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk to be
thoroughly cleaned.
D. No person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company or syndicate
shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow, gravel or stone or other
debris or material on or against a fire hydrant, or mailbox, or any
sidewalk, highway, street, roadway or loading and unloading areas of a
public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be pushed,
brushed, blown, plowed, swept, or shoveled to any terrace area within
the City where necessary to effect the removal of snow from sidewalks
and driveways; provided, however, that such snow does not encroach
onto the roadway or highway between the outside faces of the curb nor
obstruct any sidewalk, nor impede, impair or obstruct any pedestrian
traffic; and provided, further, that such snow does not impede obstruct
any established terraced sidewalks. Every person, partnership,
corporation, joint-stock company or syndicate shall, wherever practical,
store snow, ice, gravel or other debris or material removed from the
property on the terrace area which abuts the property from which it
was removed. [Amended 2-23-2009]
E. No person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company or syndicate
shall leave any ditch, excavation of the highway or other hole or pile of
dirt, material or building on the surface of the highway or sidewalk
without having placed a barricade, fence, covered walk or other
 252-14 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-14
198:440
 252-15. Blockading of highways.
No person shall do any act or permit an object or vehicle under his control
to be the subject of any act or situation which blockades or tends to
blockade the highways of the City, nor shall any person refuse to desist
from doing any act which tends to blockade the highways of the City when
ordered to so desist by the Chief of Police or any of the subordinates.
 252-16. Removal of weeds and cutting of grass. [Amended
11-10-1997]
No person shall allow the weeds or grass to grow on any portion of his
premises between the sidewalk and the curbline or any other area of
the City street right-of-way bordering said premises without removing or
cutting the same once each month between the first day of June and the
15th day of October in each year.
 252-17. Air or gas hoses on streets and sidewalks.
No person shall maintain an air or gas hose across or over any sidewalk or
public highway of the City.51
 252-18. Heavy machinery. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
No person shall run any traction engine or other heavy machine having
the surface of its wheels, flanges, spikes or other projections coming into
contact with the pavement or highway in the operation thereof over any
pavement or any street in the City without first obtaining permission from
the Chief of Police and filing a bond with the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk in such amount as the Chief of Police shall require and
approve, conditioned for the protection of the City against any damages to
protection as may be required by the Director of Public Works or any
law or regulation of the State of New York, including but not limited
to the Vehicle and Traffic Law, and during the hours from sunset to
sunrise display on and around the obstructed part or parts of the street
or sidewalk such number and type of amber or red lights as shall be
deemed proper and necessary by the Director of Public Works.50
F. Such owner or occupant, and each of them, shall be liable for any injury
or damage by reason of omission, failure or neglect to make, maintain
or repair such sidewalk. Any person violating the provisions of this
section may be liable, in addition to the general penalties, to the
penalties established in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Penalties. [Added 9-25-2006]
50.Editor's Note: Former Section 26.14E, which immediately followed this subsection and
established a penalty for offenses, was deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992.
51.Editor's Note: Former Section 26.17 Burning of paper, leaves, rubbish, etc., as amended
5-23-1983, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992. See now Ch. 142, Fires, Open.
 252-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-18
198:441
the pavement. Unless a special permit is given by the Chief of Police, in
writing, to the contrary, no person shall run any traction engine, machine
or vehicle upon or over any pavement without placing upon the pavement
planks of sufficient width to prevent such spikes, flanges or projections
coming in contact with the pavement and doing damage thereto.
 252-19. Safeguarding areas beneath platforms. [Amended
3-21-2005]
Whenever any person, either as owner, lessee, tenant, contractor, employer
or employee, shall erect platforms adjacent to a building or suspend a
platform or supports by means of ropes, tackle or by other means from the
roof or side of a building for purposes of painting, repairing or otherwise
working on such structure, then such person shall cause the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to the part of the building under such repair or upon
which work is being done to be roped off, together with an indication
of a means by which pedestrians may pass around such point or place
immediately adjacent to or under the portion of the structure being
subjected to work, paint, repairs and the like. No person shall proceed with
such painting, repairs, work and the like without first obtaining a right-ofway
permit.
 252-20. Entrances and exits.
A. The placing, erecting, constructing or permitting of any way, opening,
hole or exit or entrance or means of entrance or exit, or both, for
persons or things in, upon, across, through, over, above or below any
highway, street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or thoroughfare or
the public approaches thereto by any person is prohibited within the
City except as otherwise allowed under Subsection B below.
B. A person desiring to place or construct a way, opening, exit or entrance
from, to, below, above or across any street, sidewalk, alley or highway
of the City or to exercise or seek to exercise similar privileges within
the City as described by the Subsection A above shall in the first
instance make a written application to the City Council for permission
so to do. Such application shall contain the place it is desired to
exercise such privilege, a description of the proposed way, opening, exit
or entrance or the like, the purpose thereof and the means proposed to
be provided to protect the public therefrom, together with the consent
of the owner of such premises, if a tenant or other persons file such
application, to such erection, construction or placing, coupled with the
owner's waiver of any permanent right or vested interest in or to the
means, ways or privileges if thereafter granted by the City Council. If
after receiving an application including the conditions specified by this
subsection the City Council grants such permit, it is hereby declared to
be with the express understanding and reservation that no owner,
tenant or lessee shall derive any right or permanent interest in any
privileges thus granted and that the City Council may summarily revoke
such grant and withdraw any such privileges at any time, with or
 252-18 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-20
198:442
 252-21. Coasting, sliding and skiing.
No person shall coast on any of the sidewalks or highways of the City or
slide thereon or ski, except on such sidewalks, highways or places as are
designated from season to season by the City Council.
 252-22. Block parties and festivals. [Added 9-10-1984]
No person, association, firm or corporation shall utilize any portion of any
public street for purposes of engaging in or holding any block party, festival,
gathering or celebration without first obtaining the written permission of
the Public Safety Committee of the Jamestown City Council, which Public
Safety Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to impose such
restrictions or conditions upon any such block party, festival, gathering or
celebration it deems necessary for the preservation and protection of public
health, safety, welfare, convenience and good order.
 252-23. Repair of motor vehicles. [Added 9-25-1989]
No person, association, firm or corporation shall engage in the repair
or maintenance of any motor vehicle on the public streets, highways,
roadways, sidewalks, parkways or City-owned parking lots or parking ramps
of the City of Jamestown. For purposes of this section, the term "repair
or maintenance" shall include but not be limited to bodywork, including
painting, oil changes, radiator flushes, transmission fluid flushes, brake
jobs, the changing of tires, except for the changing of a flat tire, ignition
and electrical system repairs, all engine repairs and repairs to steering,
transmission, drive train, exhaust system, axles and the like. Nothing in
this section shall be deemed to prohibit the making of repairs necessary
to enable a temporarily disabled motor vehicle to become operable. For
purposes of this section, a "temporarily disabled motor vehicle" shall be
deemed to be a motor vehicle not disabled when purchased or a motor
vehicle which has stalled during its operation or which has otherwise been
rendered inoperable because of unanticipated mechanical failure; provided,
however, that if such disabled motor vehicle cannot be rendered operable
within 24 hours of becoming disabled, the owner, operator or lessee of such
motor vehicle shall cause the same to be towed or otherwise removed from
the public street, highway, roadway, sidewalk, public parking lot or parking
ramp of the City of Jamestown until such repairs can be completed.
without cause, and that any grants made or privileges permitted, given
or extended upon the filing of an application as provided by this
subsection shall be made, received and accepted upon the condition
that the City Council may empower and direct its officers and agents
to summarily withdraw such rights and privileges and to close, block,
cover or abolish any way, hole, exit, entrance or the means of carrying
persons or things in, upon, over, across, through, above or below any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the City.
 252-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-24
198:443
 252-24. Skateboards, roller skates and blades. [Added 3-12-1990;
amended 5-13-1991]
 252-25. Placement of building materials in street during
construction. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
No person shall deposit or place within any portion of any street or public
place within the City any building materials or similar supplies to be used in
construction or repair of any building except as permitted by the terms of
this chapter. If an abutting owner or his lessee, agent or contractor desires
to proceed with the construction or repair of a building on a site adjacent
to a given public street or place and his plans have been approved as to
use and design by the Building Inspector or by the Board of Appeals, if
application is made to such body, then such abutting owner or his lessee,
agent or contractor shall have the privilege of applying, in writing, to the
Building Inspector for permission to occupy not more than 1/3 of the width
of the highway in front of the building site for the purpose of storing
building materials during the period of construction. The Building Inspector
shall grant the permit, in writing, under such conditions and restrictions as
he may deem advisable to specify therein for the purpose of lessening the
inconvenience to the vehicular traffic and the danger to pedestrians.
 252-26. Moving buildings through public streets or places. [Added
8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
A. No person shall operate or ride any devices commonly known as
"skateboards," "roller skates" or "blades" on any of the public streets,
highways, roads or parking lots owned, operated or maintained by the
City of Jamestown, nor shall any person operate or ride any devices
commonly known as "skateboards", "roller skates" or "blades" on any of
the sidewalks, parking ramps or any other property owned, operated or
maintained by the City of Jamestown located within the congested
district as such is defined by Chapter 290, Vehicles and Traffic, of the
Code of the City of Jamestown. For purposes of this section, the term
"skateboard" shall be deemed to mean a device consisting of a board,
regardless of material composition, to which there is affixed one or
more wheels for purposes of supporting said board and providing
locomotion thereto. The term "roller skates" shall be deemed to mean
shoes or boots to which there are attached wheels for purposes of
supporting said shoes or boots and providing locomotion thereto. The
term "blades" shall be deemed to mean shoes or boots to which there
are attached one or more wheels in tandem for purposes of supporting
said shoes or boots and providing locomotion thereto.
B. The Chief of Police and the authorized officers under his command are
hereby authorized to impound the skateboard, roller skates or blades
being operated or ridden by any person found to be in violation of the
provision of this section.
 252-24 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-26
198:444
A. No person shall move a building across or through any public highway
or place of the City without a permit from the Building Inspector. An
application for a permit to move a building through a public street or
place of the City shall be signed by the owner of the structure and the
person undertaking the moving of the building and shall be submitted
to the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector is authorized to grant
a permit for the moving of the building through the public streets or
places of the City under such restrictions as he may determine to be
necessary for lessening the inconvenience of vehicular traffic,
protecting the safety of pedestrians and assuring the accessibility of
abutting owners to their residential and business premises. He shall
have the right to recite in the permit a definite period of time in which
the building shall be moved between the enumerated points and to
require from the owner and a moving contractor a joint and several
bond, upon a form to be approved by the Corporation Counsel,
specifying conditions for the movement of the structure through the
public streets or place under the terms of the permit and this chapter,
together with suitable clauses protecting the City against liability by
reason of the structure being moved through its streets or public places
and providing that the obligors shall compensate the City for any
damage to its pavements, curbs or sidewalks by reason of the moving of
the structure. Such authority shall not authorize the Building Inspector
to grant a permit for the movement of a structure through any street,
alley or public place within the business districts as bounded by this
chapter or as those districts may be bounded from time to time by
amendment to this chapter. The movement of structures across or
through the streets, alleys or public places within the boundaries of the
business districts is hereby prohibited except in a case where the owner
of the structure proposed to be removed deems himself aggrieved by
the provision. Such owner shall have the right to apply, in writing, to the
Board of Appeals to be relieved from the specific prohibitions of this
section.
B. Such owner shall enumerate in his petition the facts which he claims to
be the basis of his grievance and the grounds upon which he asks the
Board to except him from the expressed prohibitions of this section.
Such petition shall recite the route through which he proposes to move
the structure and the signal lights and public utility wires to be
intercepted, cut or raised together with the values of the structure to be
moved. The Board of Appeals shall give notice of a hearing on the
matter upon application therefor by publishing a notice of the time
place and purpose of such hearing in the official newspaper at least two
days preceding the date of such hearing. The Secretary of the Board
shall at once transmit a copy of such notice to the Director of Public
Works, charged with the protections of public property, the Chief of
Police/Director of Public Safety, charged with the administration of the
Traffic Ordinance,52 the Superintendent of Public Utilities, charged
with the supervision of the municipal utility wires, the Deputy Fire
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Vehicles and Traffic.
 252-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-26
198:445
Chief and/or his designee, Alltel and any other persons who appear to
have an interest in the application or whose rights may be involved
along the route which is proposed to move the structure. If the Board
of Appeals find upon public hearing that the expressed prohibitions of
this section work an unusual hardship upon the owner of the structure
proposed to be removed and if it further finds that such structure
may be moved without detriment to the public interest, safety or
convenience and without injury to the owners abutting the route of the
proposed movement, then the Board, in exercise of its discretion, may
relieve the applicant from the expressed prohibitions of this section
and authorize the Building Inspector to grant a permit. [Amended
2-24-2003]
 252-26 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-26
198:446
ARTICLE III
Penalties
 252-27. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
 252-27 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-27
198:447

ARTICLE IV
Complete Streets
[Added 6-25-2012]
 252-28. Declaration of policy.
In the interest of improving multimodal transportation options, safety and
accessibility for all users, the concept of complete streets has been
recognized and adopted in numerous localities across the United States.
The City of Jamestown will make complete streets practices a routine part
of everyday operations, will approach every transportation project and
program as an opportunity to improve City streets, will incorporate all
relevant existing and future planning documents approved or adopted by
the City Council, and will work in coordination with other departments,
agencies and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets. Complete streets
design and practices include, but are not limited to, sidewalks, crosswalks,
curb ramps, accessibility features for people with disabilities, paved
shoulders for biking, designated bike lanes, off-road paths, signage and
traffic calming measures.
 252-29. Designs and practices.
Complete streets designs and practices shall be incorporated in new
construction, and reconstruction projects in the City, except when the
Director of Public Works demonstrates that one of the following conditions
is met:
A. Bicyclists and pedestrians are prohibited by law from using the
roadway. In this instance, bicyclists and pedestrians will be
accommodated elsewhere within the right-of-way or within the same
transportation corridor; or
B. The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need based on
the following factors: population density, land use, projected and
current traffic volumes, and projected and current bicycle and
pedestrian use; or
C. The existing right-of-way does not allow for sidewalks, paved shoulders
or other improvements, in which case potential alternatives will include
the appropriate use of lane restriping, signage, traffic calming
measures and or enhanced education and enforcement; or
D. Where severe topographic or natural resource constraints prohibit such
accommodations; or
E. Where conditions or restrictions outside the purview of the City of
Jamestown prohibit such actions.
 252-28 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER  252-30
198:449
 252-30. Guidelines.
Complete streets designs and practices shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the guidelines adopted by the United States Department of
Transportation (USDOT) and New York State Department of Transportation
(NYSDOT) and with best practices identified by the City of Jamestown
Department of Public Works.
 252-30 JAMESTOWN CODE  252-30
198:450
Chapter 253
STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public works  See Ch. 68. Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
 253-1. Establishment of program.
The City of Jamestown hereby implements and establishes an Adopt-AStreet
Program as authorized by  277 of the General Municipal Law, the
purpose of which shall be to reduce and remove litter from the City's streets
and roadways.
 253-2. Definitions.
ADULT SUPERVISION  A designated person of authority that can
represent the organization or group and is at least 18 years of age.
DEPARTMENT  The Public Works Department of the City of Jamestown.
DIRECTOR  The City of Jamestown Director of Public Works or his
designee.
ORGANIZATION and GROUP (shall be interchangeable)  Any nonprofit or
profit-making nonpartisan group.
PARTICIPANT  Any person associated with the organization or group.
RESIDENCY  Any of the Department of Public Works' facilities located
within the City of Jamestown.
STREET WORK PERMIT  As referenced in  52 of the Highway Law as
defined by Part 126 of Title 17 NYCRR, as prepared, distributed and from
time to time amended by the City of Jamestown Public Works Department.
 253-3. General provisions.
A. The Public Safety Committee of the Jamestown City Council retains the
sole discretion to accept an organization or street site for inclusion in
the Adopt-A-Street Program.
B. The organization will be permitted to perform the following roadside
maintenance activities: litter pickup; mowing; brush control and
cutting; tree trimming; and planting and maintaining Departmentapproved
vegetation. The Director may modify this list as needed to
accommodate specific situations.
C. The organization will place trash bags and other collected debris at one
or more designated locations along the adopted facility. The debris will
be picked up and disposed of by Department forces on the next
workday.
 252-30 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  253-3
253:451
 253-4. Safety.
 253-5. Materials and supplies.
 253-6. Agreement; specifications; termination.
D. The minimum age of participants without adult supervision is 18 years.
The minimum age with adult supervision is 12 years. The group will
provide a minimum of one adult supervisor for every six youngsters
between the ages of 12 and 18.
A. The organizations will be required to organize and hold a safety briefing
before each day's activity. The Department will provide a representative
to present the first safety briefing designating persons from the group.
All participants must attend the safety briefings before participating in
the cleanup efforts.
B. All participants must wear Department-approved protective safety gear.
C. Any vehicle used by a participant must be parked off the roadway
shoulder, even for purposes of dropping off and picking up participants.
D. No work of any nature is to be performed by a participant on the
roadway pavement.
A. The group will be required to pick up those materials and supplies,
provided by the Department, at the residency during normal work
hours.
B. Materials and supplies will be returned to the residency within one
week following the pickup.
C. The Department shall provide protective gear and trash bags. Groups
may provide their own Department-approved protective gear.
A. The specific obligations of the organization and the Department shall be
as stipulated in an executed agreement, subject to the provisions of
 277 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
B. The adoption shall be for a minimum two-year period.
C. The group may adopt any section of street other than one which is a
state or county highway.
D. The nominal length of street to be adopted shall be two blocks. The
Director may modify the length requirements to accommodate requests
to adopt intersections or other specific variations from nominal length.
The normal length shall not be reduced if to do so would, in the sole
judgment of the Department, cause sign pollution by the erection of
numerous signs.
E. The minimum frequency of litter pickup along streets is four times per
year, with the first litter pickup occurring during the April-May spring
 253-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  253-6
253:452
 253-7. Obligation of Department of Public Works.
 253-8. Street work permit required; waiver of fee.
cleanup period. The Director may modify the minimum frequencies to
accommodate to the specific conditions encountered.
F. The Director will be the Department's contact with the group and
manage the agreement. The group will be required to designate one of
its members as the coordinator.
G. The Director may modify the standard agreement on a case-by-case
basis as noted above, to address the specifics of the group and the
situation.
H. Notwithstanding any provisions of the agreement, if, in the sole
judgment of the Director, it is determined that the group is not meeting
the terms and conditions of the agreement, upon 30 days' notice or
summarily if based upon unsafe activity, the Director may terminate the
agreement and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate.
I. As a material part of each agreement, a group or organization shall
agree to indemnify, save and hold harmless the City of Jamestown and
all its agents and employees from any and all claims, demands, actions
or cause of action of whatsoever nature or character arising out of or by
reason of the execution or performance of work and services provided
for by the City or the Department, and shall further agree to defend at
its own cost and expense any action or proceeding commenced for the
purpose of asserting any claim of whatsoever character arising
hereunder.
A. The Department will provide the participants with protective safety
gear and trash bags. Groups may provide their own Departmentapproved
gear. The Department will pick up the debris and will provide
a representative to present the first safety briefing. The organization's
representative will conduct all subsequent safety briefings.
B. The Department will publicize the execution of each adopt-a-street
agreement and will highlight it at various periods thereafter.
C. The Department will provide and install adopt-a-street signs stating the
name of the adopting organizations. The signs will be placed at the
beginning of each section of street adopted or at such other places as
the Director shall deem appropriate.
A. The adopting group will be required to obtain a street work permit. The
Department will waive the permit fee.
 253-6 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  253-8
253:453
Chapter 260
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission  See Ch. 61.
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 253-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  253-8
253:454
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 260-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION  The City Planning Commission.
STREET  A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane
or place or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVIDER  A person, group, firm or corporation proposing to subdivide
land within the City.
SUBDIVISION  The division of any parcel of land in two or more lots,
plots, blocks or sites in such a way as to create or extend one or more
streets for the purpose of developing or offering such land for sale to
the public. Resubdivision of land heretofore platted shall come under the
meaning of "subdivision" if there is a rearrangement of lots or streets or
both on property which originally formed the subject of a subdivision, as
above defined.
 260-2. Purpose.
The regulations herein contained are adopted for the purpose of providing
for the sound growth and development of the City and of affording adequate
sites and facilities for transportation and for the safety, health and welfare
of its population and for providing reasonable and equitable requirements in
the interest of developers, investors and homeowners so as to ensure stable
property values, all pursuant to Article 3 of the General City Law.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS  Those used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS  Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways.
B.
MINOR STREETS  Those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS  Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS and MINOR WAYS  Those which are used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
E.
 260-1 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-3
253:455
 260-3. Compliance required.
No subdivision of land shall be made, nor shall any contract be made for the
sale of any part thereof, and no permit for the erection of a structure in any
such proposed subdivision shall be granted and no street, sanitary sewer
or water main shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated except in
strict accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
 260-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  260-3
253:456
ARTICLE II
Preliminary and Final Plans
 260-4. Preapplication procedure.
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a subdivision layout, the
subdivider shall prepare a sketch of the proposed subdivision, indicating the
layout of proposed streets, subdivision lots, streams and existing streets,
which shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission with a request for
informal consideration and advice. At the informal hearing, the subdivider
shall be prepared to discuss with the Commission the following items:
 260-5. Preliminary layout.
A. The name of the proposed subdivision.
B. The name of the owner, owners or corporate entity, the address and the
telephone number.
C. The proposed zoning use or uses.
D. The location of the premises with respect to existing highways or
nearby streets.
E. The number of acres in the entire proposed subdivision.
F. The topography of the premises.
G. The proposed location of any free area or recreational site.
H. The anticipated method of marketing of the lots, whether the subdivider
intends to build and sell houses or sell lots singly or in multiples to
prospective builders.
I. A general statement as to the type of home to be erected and the value
of the same.
J. If the proposed layout covers only a portion of the entire parcel owned
or controlled by the subdivider, a plan for the street layout of the entire
parcel.
K. The name and the location of all adjoining parcels of property, including
those on the opposite side of existing streets or highways.
L. The source of water supply.
M. Provisions for stormwater and sanitary disposal.
N. Plans for the establishment of special improvement districts.
O. Nearby land uses and structures.
P. Contemplated and existing deed restrictions.
Q. All other matters pertinent to the proposed subdivision.
 260-4 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-5
253:457
 260-6. Final map.
A. Contents. The subdivider shall thereafter and within six months of the
informal hearing submit to the Commission a preliminary layout,
together with a topographical map, if the same has been required by
the Commission. Such preliminary layout shall be to scale of 200 or
fewer feet to one inch and shall show all proposed streets, subdivision
lots, recreation areas, other types of proposed uses, streams, drainage
ditches and the total acreage owned or controlled by the subdivider,
together with a key map locating the subdivision with regard to nearby
streets and farm lots, and shall embody the features agreed upon at the
informal hearing. Such preliminary layout shall be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor, landscape architect or engineer and shall bear
his seal or signature. In addition thereto, the statement of the Director
of Public Works shall be submitted, setting forth his opinion of the
feasibility of supplying sanitary sewers, storm sewers and waterlines
and connecting the same with public disposal or supply facilities,
together with his opinion of the feasibility of constructing and
maintaining streets and other utilities, public and private.
B. Hearing; approval or disapproval. Within 45 days after submission of
the preliminary layout and all other required maps or other documents,
the Commission shall hold a hearing concerning the proposed
subdivision. Based upon the maps and documents submitted and any
other pertinent matters discussed at such hearing, the Commission
shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the preliminary layout.
Written notice of the Commission's decision shall be sent to the
subdivider within 30 days after such hearing. If conditional approval is
given, the conditions shall be set forth in the written notice; if the
proposed subdivision is rejected, the reasons for such rejection shall be
set forth in the written notice. The hearing held pursuant hereto need
not be advertised, and no notice of the same need be given to any
person except the subdivider. The Commission shall have the authority
to give notice of such hearing to any other person or persons as it shall
deem to be interested therein or to have special knowledge of the
matters involved.
A. Contents. The subdivider shall submit to the Commission, in triplicate,
a final subdivision map embodying all the matters theretofore agreed
upon within six months after receipt of the written notice provided for
in  260-5B. Such map shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor,
landscape architect or engineer and shall bear his seal or signature.
Such map shall have a scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch,
preferably 100 or fewer feet to one inch. Such map shall delineate all
proposed water, storm sewer and sanitary sewer lines. All streets shall
be named, and the names must be approved by the City Planning
Commission.
B. Hearing; approval or disapproval. Within 45 days after submission of
the final subdivision map, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
 260-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  260-6
253:458
 260-7. Time limitations.
concerning the proposed subdivision, which shall be advertised at least
once in an official newspaper of general circulation in the City at
least five days before such hearing. The Commission may thereupon
approve, modify and approve or disapprove such plat. Written notice
of the Commission's decision shall be sent to the subdivider within
45 days after submission of the final subdivision map, which notice
shall contain the reasons for modification or disapproval if either such
action is taken. If modifications are required, such modifications shall
be completed within three months after such notice is sent to the
subdivider, or the application shall be considered to be disapproved.
If modifications are timely made and the subdivision map thereupon
presented to the Commission at a regular or special meeting and if
the Commission then determines that the subdivision map shall be
approved, it shall so indicate within five days after such meeting.
C. Required notations. The following notations must appear on all
subdivision maps before final approval by the Commission.
(1) "No building permit for construction on any lot in this subdivision
will be issued if the width of the lot area is less than that indicated
on this subdivision map unless a change in lot size is approved by
the City Planning Commission."
(2) "Approval of this subdivision map by the City Planning Commission
shall not be deemed to be acceptance of offer of cession or
dedication of public streets. No building permit will be issued until
such acceptance is made by the City of Jamestown."
A. Pursuant to  32 of the General City Law, any approval by the
Commission of a subdivision map shall expire unless within 90 days
after such approval such subdivision map shall have been duly filed or
recorded by the owner in the office of the County Clerk.
B. The time of submission of any map, plat or other document to the
Commission shall be deemed to be at the time of the regular meeting of
the Commission at which such map, plat or document is delivered to the
Commission or at the time of the next regular meeting of the
Commission following delivery of the map, plat or document to any
member of the Commission or to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk. In the event that no regular meeting is held within
30 days of such delivery, such submission shall be deemed to have been
made 30 days after such delivery. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
C. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Commission at any hearing
held pursuant hereto may adjourn such hearing for a period of time not
to exceed one week unless a longer period of time shall be agreed upon
by the subdivider and the Commission. In the event of an adjournment,
 260-6 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-7
253:459
any pertinent time period shall be tolled for the period between the
date of such hearing and the adjourned date.
 260-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  260-7
253:460
ARTICLE III
Design and Construction Standards
 260-8. Modification of zoning regulations.
In conformance with  37 of the General City Law and Section 5 of an
ordinance of the City adopted on August 9, 1926, establishing the City
Planning Commission,53 the Commission may modify the regulations of
Chapter 300, Zoning, in order to allow for original design in subdivision
development, whether the same is of residential development or otherwise.
 260-9. Dedication of lands for recreational purposes.
Pursuant to  33 of the General City Law, the Commission may require the
setting aside of land for a park or parks suitably located for playground or
other recreation purposes, or such requirement may be waived subject to
appropriate conditions.
 260-10. Dedication of streets and parks; building permit required.
 260-11. Improvements. [Amended 9-8-1975]
A. No action shall be taken by the Commission except to disapprove a
proposed subdivision on any application for final approval of such
subdivision unless there is submitted therewith an offer of cession of all
streets and parks and other recreation areas and any other required
easements or conveyances, such offer to remain binding on the
subdivider and owner of the premises, their heirs and assigns until
acceptance by the proper municipal authority or until application for a
resubdivision is approved.
B. The action of the Commission shall pertain only to approval or
disapproval of the physical layout of the proposed subdivision and shall
not be regarded as approving the actual construction or installation,
but such construction or installation shall be subject to the approval of
the proper branch or department of the City government.
C. No action taken by the Commission or any other officer or agency of the
City in accordance with these procedures shall be deemed to be an
agreement to accept or an acceptance of title or other interest in or to
any real or personal property.
A. The following minimum subdivision improvements shall be provided
and installed by the subdivider, provided that the City Planning
Commission may recommend to the City Council a waiver of the
provisions for installation of any portion of these improvements by the
subdivider on or in the various streets in the subdivision:
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Planning Commission.
 260-8 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-11
253:461
(1) Grading. All streets, crosswalks and alleys shall be graded to their
full width by the subdivider in accordance with city specifications.
Due to special topographical conditions, deviation from the above
will be allowed only with special approval of the Director of Public
Works.
(2) Storm drainage. Adequate drainage systems, including necessary
open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets,
bridges, etc., shall be provided by the subdivider for the proper
drainage of all surface water. In cases where a subdivision is
located at such a distance from waterways, main drains or drainage
canals that the Commission finds a complete storm drainage for the
subdivision to be impracticable and unreasonable, the Commission
may reduce this requirement.
(3) Paving. All streets of a subdivision shall be paved by the subdivider
in full accordance with the specifications of the City.
(4) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks shall be installed by the developer on both sides of
all streets in residential areas, except that the Planning
Commission may modify this requirement where it can be
shown that they are not needed for the protection of
pedestrians and school children.
(b) All sidewalks shall be at least four feet in width, constructed of
portland cement concrete and constructed to the specifications
of the City.
(5) Water supply system. Water mains properly connected with the City
water supply shall be provided by the subdivider in such a manner
as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plot for
both domestic use and fire protection. Water mains shall be
designed by or under the supervision of the Board of Public
Utilities.
(6) Sanitary sewers.
(a) Sanitary sewers shall be installed by the subdivider in areas
where a sanitary sewerage system is available. Such sanitary
sewers, mains and laterals shall be properly connected to a city
sewage disposal system and shall be designed by a registered
engineer subject to the approval of the Director of Public
Works.
(b) In addition to sewer mains, laterals shall be installed to each
platted plot and stubbed off at the property line for future
connection.
 260-11 JAMESTOWN CODE  260-11
253:462
 260-12. Bond. [Amended 9-8-1975]
Approval of the final plat of the subdivision may be withheld by the Planning
Commission or, in the event that approval is or has been given, building
permits for construction within the subdivision may be withheld, unless
the subdivider shall file with the City a surety bond executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned to secure the
construction of the improvements required in  260-11 in a satisfactory
manner and within a time period specified by the City Planning Commission.
Such period is not to exceed two years from the date of issue of the first
building permit. No such bond shall be accepted unless it is enforceable
by or payable to the City in a sum at least equal to 1 1/2 times the cost
of constructing the improvements as estimated by the Director of Public
Works in a form approved by the Corporation Counsel. In lieu of a bond, a
cash deposit may be made with the City. In case of forfeiture, the City may
proceed with the improvements utilizing any moneys realized as a result of
the forfeiture.
 260-13. Design standards.
The following standards shall guide the Director of Public Works and the
Commission in their determinations, but strict application thereof may be
waived by the Commission for good reason shown.
B. The City Council is hereby empowered to assume full or partial financial
responsibility for improvement requirements which the Council has by
specific resolution waived, under one of the following circumstances:
(1) Where the City Planning Commission finds that it would be
unreasonable and inequitable to require the subdivider to be
responsible for the entire cost of such improvements; or
(2) Where the Commission finds there is a reasonable probability that
the remaining portion of such improvements will be provided
through the subdividing of the contiguous property.
A. Street right-of-way and pavement widths shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Pavement Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 48
Collector 60 32
Minor 50 24
Marginal access 40 20
B. The arrangement, extent, width and grade and location shall conform to
the proposed development plan and official map.
C. Blocks.
 260-11 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-13
253:463
(1) Block lengths shall be not over 1,600 feet nor less than 400 feet.
(2) Widths shall be not less than 240 feet.
(3) Intersections with arterials shall be at least 1,000 feet apart.
D. Streets in subdivisions shall provide for continuation of existing streets
or conform to plans for adjacent areas where topographic or other
conditions make continuance impracticable.
E. Dead-end streets shall be not longer than 800 feet. Turnarounds must
have an outside roadway diameter of 120 feet. Dead-end streets shall
be graded to run to an intersection, or a utility easement shall be
provided.
F. Streets shall not intersect at less than 75. This requirement may be
waived if divisional islands are provided for traffic safety. Property lines
shall be rounded by a radius of 10 feet or greater when deemed
necessary. Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet.
G. Easements on rear lot lines shall be 12 feet wide. Provisions shall also
be made for drainage easements.
H. Vertical curves shall be not less than 200 feet in length. Other grades
shall be not less than 1/2% and not over 10%, as follows:
Type of Street
Grade
(percent)
Arterials 4
Collectors 6
Minor 8
Marginal access 8
I. Design shall be in conformance with Chapter 300, Zoning.
J. Minor streets shall be laid out so that through traffic is discouraged.
K. Where the subdivision abuts an arterial street, marginal access streets
may be required.
L. Where the subdivision contains railroad rights-of-way, parallel streets
on either side may be required.
M. Reserve strips shall be prohibited except where controlled by the City.
N. Tangents of 100 feet shall be required between reverse curves.
O. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
P. Half streets shall be prohibited with some exceptions.
 260-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  260-13
253:464
Q. Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residence.54
R. Each lot shall have access to an existing or proposed public street.
S. Double frontage and reverse lots shall be avoided.
T. All street line intersections shall be accurately monumented with oneand-
one-fourth-inch by three-foot iron stakes by a licensed land
surveyor, and a map of the same shall be filed with Department of
Public Works within 90 days of final approval of the subdivision map.
54.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 145, Flood Damage Prevention.
 260-13 STREET ADOPTION PROGRAM  260-13
253:465
Chapter 265
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards  See Ch. 131.
Fire prevention and building
construction  See Ch. 140.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Plumbing  See Ch. 210.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 265-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases pertaining
to outdoor swimming pools shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
CLUB SWIMMING POOL  A facility for swimming operated for members
and their guests.
COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOL  A facility for swimming operated for
gain or in conjunction with any commercial enterprise and open to the
public.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL  A facility for swimming which is an
accessory use to a residential building. Such pool shall be for the exclusive
use of the occupants of the principal residential building and their guests.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL  A facility for swimming operated by the City.
WADING POOL  An artificially constructed pool intended for use by
children, not designed or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 100
square feet and a maximum depth of 24 inches.[Added 8-10-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992]
 265-2. Building permit required; fee; plans and specifications.
 265-3. General building regulations. [Amended 6-13-1967]
A. A building permit shall be obtained for the construction of all outdoor
pools over 24 inches in depth, except for the public swimming pool. The
fee for said building permit shall be as provided in Chapter 175,
Licenses and Permits. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
B. The applicant shall provide the Department of Public Works with plans
and specifications in detail to be determined by such Department.
A. All outdoor in-ground pools shall be completely enclosed by a chain link
fence or approved substitute. Fence height shall be a minimum of five
feet and shall have a maximum clearance to the adjoining grade of two
inches, and openings, if provided, shall prohibit the passage of two-inch
diameter sphere. Such enclosure shall resist a horizontal force of 50
 260-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  265-3
265:466
 265-4. Aboveground pools. [Amended 6-28-1971; 7-14-1986]
 265-5. Commercial pools.
Commercial pools are a permitted principal use in a B-3 or less restricted
district and shall comply with the area, yard and other requirements of
Chapter 300, Zoning, as applicable to that district.
 265-6. Club pools.
Club swimming pools shall be permitted only as an accessory structure to a
membership club in the zoning district where such club is a permitted use
and shall be subject to the area and yard requirements of that district.
 265-7. Location of private pools.
Private pools shall not be located within a front yard in any residential
district.
pounds per foot applied to a height of five feet. Structural bracing shall
be within the enclosure. Gates or doors shall be self-closing and selflatching,
with the latch handle at least 40 inches above grade or located
within the enclosure. [Amended 6-28-1971; 7-14-1986]
B. Site, lighting and plumbing plans shall be submitted to the Department
of Public Works for approval for all outdoor in-ground pools and
commercial pools. Drainage shall be only into an approved storm sewer
or suitable substitute to be approved by said Department.
C. No pool wall, paved terrace, fence or related structure shall be located
within eight feet of an adjoining residentially zoned lot. [Amended
7-27-1998]
A. In addition to other applicable regulations contained in this chapter,
owners of outdoor aboveground swimming pools shall provide a fence
as required for outdoor in-ground pools pursuant to  265-3A of this
chapter unless such aboveground pool has at least 46 inches between
the pool decking or pool top and adjoining grade. Aboveground pools
with at least 46 inches between the pool decking or pool top and
adjoining grade shall, however, provide one of the following:
(1) A suitable covering on such pool so as to prevent accidental or
unauthorized entry.
(2) A self-closing and self-latching gate or door with a locking latch
handle at least 40 inches above the pool deck or top.
(3) Movable steps which shall be moved away from the pool or raised
and locked in place when such pool is not in use.
B. An aboveground pool less than 24 inches deep shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
 265-3 SWIMMING POOLS  265-8
265:467
 265-8. Wading pools.
No wading pool shall be constructed or made available for public use unless
it shall be provided with suitable facilities for the replacement of water and
for cleaning. Every such wading pool shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and the water used there shall be from a public water
supply or from a source approved by the Health Officer.
 265-9. Applicability of Uniform Code. [Amended 4-13-1987]
When any section of this chapter conflicts with provisions of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as from time to time
amended, the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code shall supersede the conflicting provisions of this chapter.
 265-10. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 270
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments  See Charter, Art. VI. Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk  See Charter,  C-36.
 265-8 JAMESTOWN CODE  265-10
265:468
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 11-29-1971]
 270-1. Exemption granted.
Real property located within the City of Jamestown and owned by one or
more persons who meet the qualifications of  467 of the Real Property Tax
Law shall be exempt from taxation in three annual steps to the extent of
30% of the assessed valuation of the property on the first assessment roll
prepared after the adoption of this article, 40% of the assessed valuation
on the second such assessment roll and 50% of the assessed valuation on
subsequent assessment rolls.
 270-2. Maximum income. [Amended 8-26-1974; 9-8-1975;
12-11-1978; 5-5-1980; 10-19-1981; 10-4-1982; 10-18-1982;
10-11-1983; 10-13-1987; 9-27-1993; 1-30-2006; 8-20-2007]
No exemption shall be granted if the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making
application for exemption exceeds the sum of $15,000 for the 2008 tax year,
$16,000 for the 2009 tax year, $17,000 for the 2010 tax year, $18,000 for
the 2011 tax year and $19,000 for the 2012 tax year.
 270-1 SWIMMING POOLS  270-2
265:469

ARTICLE II
Tax Anticipation Notes
[Adopted 11-15-1976]
 270-3. Power to issue delegated. [Amended 7-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The power to issue tax anticipation notes of the City of Jamestown pursuant
to the provisions of the Local Finance Law and the power to prescribe the
terms for and contents of such notes and all powers and duties pertaining
and incidental to the sale and issuance of said notes are hereby delegated to
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk of the City of Jamestown.
 270-4. Certificate of issuance. [Amended 7-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
No such note or any note issued in renewal thereof shall be issued pursuant
to the powers hereby delegated unless the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk shall have first made and filed with the Council of the
City a certificate authorizing the issuance of such note complying with the
requirements of  30.00 of the Local Finance Law of New York.
 270-5. Signing and sealing of note. [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L.
No. 1-1992; 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 7-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is hereby authorized to
sign any note authorized pursuant to the power conferred by this article,
and the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk is hereby directed to
affix to each such note the Corporate Seal of the City of Jamestown and to
attest to such Seal.
 270-3 SWIMMING POOLS  270-5
265:471

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-9-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
 270-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide that no exemption from real
property taxes shall be granted pursuant to  458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law of the State of New York.
 270-7. Exemption denied.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 4 of  458-a of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York, no exemption from real property taxes
shall be granted pursuant to  458-a of the Real Property Tax Law for
purposes of real property taxes levied for the City of Jamestown, New York.
 270-6 SWIMMING POOLS  270-7
265:473

ARTICLE IV
Additional Provisions Relating to Tax Anticipation Notes
[Adopted 12-23-1968]
 270-8. Maximum amount established.
The Comptroller shall not issue any note or notes aggregating in principal
amount more than $1,500,000 outstanding and unpaid at any time.
 270-9. Approval required for issuance. [Added 9-12-1988]
No tax anticipation note shall be issued by the Comptroller of the City of
Jamestown or any other fiscal officer of the City of Jamestown without the
prior approval of a majority of the entire Jamestown City Council concurring
therein.
 270-8 SWIMMING POOLS  270-9
265:475

ARTICLE V
City View Estates Subdivision Exemption
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
 270-10. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to the authority of  421-e of the Real Property Tax Law, new
housing construction within the subdivision commonly known as the "City
View Estates Subdivision" which received payments, grants or loans
pursuant to Article XIX of the Private Housing Finance Law shall be entitled
to a partial exemption from real property taxation of the real property
taxes imposed by all taxing jurisdiction, other than assessment for local
improvements, for a period not to exceed 10 years in the aggregate after
the taxable status date immediately following the completion thereof,
calculated not to exceed the following exemptions: five years of exemption
from 50% of such taxation, followed by one year of 40% of such taxation,
followed by one year of 30% of such taxation, followed by one year of 20%
of such taxation, followed by one year of 10% of such taxation. Thereafter
such taxation shall be at 100%.
 270-11. Termination.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event
that such new housing construction ceases to be eligible for payments,
grants or loans pursuant to Article XIX of the Private Housing Finance
Law during the period of eligibility referred to at  270-10 hereof, the
exemptions herein granted shall terminate on and after the taxable status
date following such loss of eligibility and shall not thereafter be restored.
 270-12. Applicability.
In no event shall the exemptions granted pursuant to  270-10 herein be
extended beyond a period of 10 years from the date the exemptions herein
granted first commenced nor shall the exemptions herein granted apply to
any new housing construction project not specifically referred to herein.
 270-10 SWIMMING POOLS  270-12
265:477

ARTICLE VI
Partial Exemption for Certain Capital Improvements to One- and
Two-Family Residential Buildings
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
 270-13. Applicability.
Residential buildings reconstructed, altered or improved subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies by the City of Jamestown as provided by Real Property Tax
Law  421-f and to the extent hereinafter provided.
 270-14. Computation of exemption.
A. Such buildings shall be exempt for a period of one year to the extent of
100% of the increase in assessed value thereof attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement and for an additional period
of seven years as follows: one year at 87.5% of the exemption base
followed by one year at 75% of the exemption base, followed by one
year at 62.5% of the exemption base, followed by one year at 50% of the
exemption base, followed by one year at 37.5% of the exemption base,
followed by one year at 25% of the exemption base, followed by one
year at 12.5% of the exemption base. The "exemption base" shall be the
increase in assessed value as determined in the initial year of the term
of the exemption, except as provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or more is
certified for a final assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the State
Board, the exemption base shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the total assessed value of the parcel on
such final assessment roll (after accounting for any physical or quantity
changes to the parcel since the immediately preceding assessment roll),
and the denominator of which shall be the total assessed value of the
parcel on the immediately preceding final assessment roll. The result
shall be the new exemption base. The exemption shall thereupon be
recomputed to take into account the new exemption base,
notwithstanding the fact that the Assessor receives certification of the
change in level of assessment after the completion, verification and
filing of the final assessment roll. In the event the Assessor does not
have custody of the roll when such certification is received, the
Assessor shall certify the recomputed exemption to the local officers
having custody and control of the roll, and such local officers are hereby
directed and authorized to enter the recomputed exemption certified by
the Assessor on the roll. The Assessor shall give written notice of such
recomputed exemption to the property owner who may, if he or she
believes that the exemption was recomputed incorrectly, apply for a
correction in the manner provided by the New York State Real Property
Tax Law for the correction of clerical errors.
 270-13 SWIMMING POOLS  270-14
265:479
 270-15. Application required; filing.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board, the original
of which shall be filed with the Assessor. Such original application shall be
filed on or before the taxable status date and within one year from the date
of completion of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement.
 270-16. Approval of exemption; assessment roll.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, the Assessor shall approve the application, and
such real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as herein provided commencing with the first assessment roll
prepared after the taxable status date referred to in  270-15 of this article.
The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall
be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property,
with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
C. Such exemption shall be limited to $80,000 in increased market value of
the property attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or
improvement and any increase in market value greater than such
amount shall not be eligible for the exemption granted herein. For the
purposes of this section, the market value of the reconstruction,
alteration or improvement shall be equal to the increased assessed
value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
divided by the most recently established state equalization, except
when the state equalization rate equals or exceeds 95%, in which case
the increase in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement shall equal the market value of such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement.
D. No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(1) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this article;
(2) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds $3,000; [Amended 12-22-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
(3) The greater portion, as so determined by square footage of the
building reconstructed, altered or improved, is at least five years
old; and
(4) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement requires the
issuance of a building permit and is completed as may be evidenced
by a certificate of occupancy or other appropriate documentation
provided by the owner.
E. For purposes of this article, the terms reconstruction, alteration and
improvement shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
 270-14 JAMESTOWN CODE  270-17
265:480
 270-17. Limitation of applicability.
The provision of this article shall only apply to one- or two-family owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for residential purposes.
 270-18. Cessation of exemption.
In the event that real property granted an exemption pursuant to this article
is sold or transferred other than to the heirs or distributees of the owner,
the exemption granted hereunder shall cease.
 270-17 SWIMMING POOLS  270-18
265:481

ARTICLE VII
Tax Exemption for Newly Constructed Single-Family Homes
[Adopted 6-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
 270-19. Exemption granted.
Effective July 1, 2003, in accordance with the terms of legislation passed
in 2002 by the New York State Assembly, Senate and the Governor adding
Section 485-h to the Real Property Tax Law, residential real property
constructed on or after January 1, 2003, in the City of Jamestown may be
exempt from City taxation and special ad valorem levies as follows:
Year of exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
 270-20. Terms and conditions.
This exemption shall be governed by the terms of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law.
 270-19 SWIMMING POOLS  270-20
265:483

ARTICLE VIII
Collection of Unpaid Taxes
[Adopted 9-15-2003]
 270-21. Power to collect delinquent taxes by civil action.
A. In addition to the remedies hereinbefore provided for the collection of
unpaid taxes and assessments, the City Council shall have the power to
collect by civil action in the name of the City of Jamestown any City tax
and state and county tax imposed under this article on property located
within the City limits of the City of Jamestown which shall be unpaid for
one year or more after the date of the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk's published notice of the delivery of the particular
tax rolls involved to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
and certified by the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk as
unpaid. The summons in such an action may be served on nonresidents
and other defendants in the same manner and under the same
conditions as if such action was brought to foreclose a mortgage on
New York real property. [Amended 8-28-2017]
B. If the City or other plaintiff in such an action shall file with the Director
of Administrative Services/City Clerk and the Chautauqua County Clerk
prior to the service of the summons in such civil action a copy of the
summons and complaint and a notice specifying that such action is
brought to recover a judgment on a tax lien, naming the owner of such
property and/or the persons to whom such tax was directed as
defendants therein and describing the property against which the tax
was assessed, then any judgment so recovered in such an action shall
have priority over all mortgages, judgments, liens and other
encumbrances involving the property against which the delinquent tax
was assessed the same as tax liens as provided in  C 42 of the City
Charter. The holder of such a judgment may enforce the same against
the real property covered by the tax involved in the judgment in the
same manner as to publication of notice of sale, posting of notices,
conduct of sale, confirmation, entry or deficiency and conveyance of
such title as if such judgment were one of foreclosure and sale. Prior to
such commencement of publication and posting of notice of sale, the
owner of such judgment shall apply to the Chautauqua County Court or
the Supreme Court for the appointment of a referee to make such sale
upon an affidavit showing the recovery of a judgment hereunder, that a
notice of pendency has been filed with the County Clerk and Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk as herein provided, that the
judgment remains unpaid and that the affiant is the owner thereof. The
defendants and other interested parties in such a proceeding shall have
the same right to repurchase and secure the possession and/or return
of such property within the same time and under the same conditions,
and only those, which are granted in a mortgage foreclosure action. If
no lis pendens is filed in the time and in the manner herein provided in
the action herein described, the holder of a judgment recovered in such
 270-21 SWIMMING POOLS  270-21
265:485
 270-22. Agreements for collection by county. [Amended
8-28-2017]
Pursuant to agreements which may be entered into by the City and county
from time to time, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may
also return to the county unpaid City taxes for collection and enforcement
by the county. Such agreements may include provisions regarding the
assignment, sale and other disposition of City tax liens, including but not
limited to an agreement by the City and county to share pro rata in the
surplus or deficiencies from any bulk sale or foreclosure sale of City and
county tax liens conducted by the county and an agreement of the City to
continue to act as agent of the county for the collection of City and county
taxes. Except as may be otherwise provided pursuant to the agreement
between the City and county, such City taxes returned to the county shall
thereafter be collected, administered and enforced in the same manner as
provided by law for county taxes, including but not limited to applicable
redemption periods, interest and penalties. Absent such an agreement with
the county, City tax liens shall be enforced in the manner otherwise
provided by law.
an action shall have the same remedies, and those only, granted on any
ordinary civil judgment. [Amended 8-28-2017]
C. All assessment rolls and certificates of special assessment filed with the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk or delivered to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, or certified copies
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence in all courts and places and in all
actions and proceedings that the taxes and assessments therein
contained have been regularly and duly assessed and imposed and of
the right of recovery thereof. The City may assign for a valuable
consideration to any person unpaid taxes contemplated by this section,
together with the authority and privilege to such person to bring and
enforce the action and judgment herein specified in the same manner as
the City might do. [Amended 8-28-2017]
D. Unpaid water and sanitation charges constituting liens on real property
pursuant to  C-53 of the City Charter shall be included in the annual
tax levy and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and at
the same time as provided by law for the collection and enforcement of
real property taxes. [Added 4-24-2006]
 270-21 JAMESTOWN CODE  270-22
265:486
ARTICLE IX
Coordinated Assessment Program
[Adopted 12-18-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
 270-23. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to  579 of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York.
 270-24. Purpose.
From and after the effective date of this article and by adoption of this
article, the Town of Busti, together with the Town of Chautauqua, hereby
established a coordinated assessment program pursuant to RPTL  579(2)
between said towns pursuant to  576 of the Real Property Tax Law and
Article 5-G of the General Municipal Law (Coordinated assessment
programs without direct county involvement).
 270-25. Filing.
A copy of this article and the agreement hereby approved shall be filed with
the New York State Office of Real Property Services within 30 days of the
adoption hereof.
 270-23 SWIMMING POOLS  270-25
265:487

ARTICLE X
Exemption for Owner-Occupied Residential Property Created,
Modernized, Rehabilitated, Expanded or Improved
[Adopted 9-25-2017]
 270-26. Exemption granted.
Effective upon filing with the Secretary of State of the State of New York,
in accordance with the terms of legislation passed in 2017 by the New
York State Assembly, Senate and the Governor adding  485-t to the Real
Property Tax Law, owner-occupied residential real property that has been
created, modernized, rehabilitated, expanded or improved in the City of
Jamestown may be exempt from City taxation and special ad valorem levies
as follows:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100
2 100
3 100
4 80
5 80
6 60
7 60
8 40
9 40
10 20
11 20
 270-27. Authority.
This exemption shall be governed by the terms of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law  485-t.
 270-26 SWIMMING POOLS  270-27
265:489
Chapter 274
TAXICABS; LIVERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic  See Ch. 290.
Unlicensed vehicles  See Ch. 292.
 274-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPATCHER  An individual or individuals who operate pursuant to
federal law governing communications on two-way radios and dispatch
various liveries and/or taxicabs to locations pursuant to requests by
potential passengers.
DRIVER  A person licensed to drive a taxicab or livery in the City of
Jamestown.
FLEET OPERATOR  A person, firm or corporation owning and operating
five or more taxicabs or liveries.
INDIVIDUAL OPERATOR  A person, firm or corporation owning and
operating fewer than five taxicabs or liveries.
LIVERY  A passenger automobile with an interior seating capacity for
seven or fewer passengers which transports fares for hire. However, a livery
service shall not secure business by cruising the streets or by soliciting
fares in public places. A "livery" may have the word "livery" and the name
of the owner or company on the vehicle. A "livery" shall not, however,
have placed upon it a dome light or other lights located on the roof of the
vehicle or the words "taxi," "taxicab" or words of similar import or any other
distinctive or unusual equipment, device, design, color, numbers or lettering
liable to deceive the public that such a vehicle is a taxicab.
OWNER  Includes any person, firm, corporation or association owning and
operating one or more taxicabs or liveries.
OWNER DRIVER  A person who owns a taxicab or livery and drives his
own vehicle exclusively.
PERSON  Includes individuals, firms and corporations.
TAXICAB  A passenger automobile with a seating capacity in the interior
thereof for seven or fewer passengers, operated for the purpose of
transporting persons for hire from points of origin within the City of
Jamestown which either cruises the streets of the City of Jamestown for the
purpose of securing passengers or receives calls from individuals or from
dispatchers for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire.
 270-27 JAMESTOWN CODE  274-2
265:490
 274-2. Display of rates.
Every taxicab shall have affixed in a conspicuous place inside the cab,
in such a manner as to be clearly visible, a detailed schedule of rates55
which, prior to becoming effective, shall be approved by the Public Safety
Committee of the City Council and such approval noted by the signature of
the Chairman thereof.
 274-3. Maximum rates not to be exceeded.
No taxicab shall charge more than the sum specified, and any charge or
collection in excess of the amounts specified by  274-2 shall be sufficient
grounds for a revocation of the licenses or permits issued under this
chapter.
 274-4. General rules of operation.
 274-5. Display of public taxicab sign.
Every taxicab exercising a permit granted under this chapter shall when
standing in an assigned space display a sign showing that it is a public
taxicab or for hire. Such sign may be removed or covered at the election of
the driver when the taxicab is under way.
 274-6. Taxicab/livery operator's license.
A. The operator of each taxicab shall carefully inspect the cab after the
discharge of each passenger and if articles are found therein shall
immediately deliver such articles either to the passenger or turn them
in to the cab company office. Any valuable articles will be reported to
the Police Department.
B. The operator of a taxicab shall not stop to pick up any additional
passengers while proceeding to the destination of any passenger then
occupying the taxicab, without the consent of all such passengers.
C. The operator of a taxicab shall not blow his horn, shout or use a loud
tone to solicit a fare.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not permit more persons to be carried in
his/her taxicab than the number for which he/she has seating facilities.
E. The operator of a taxicab shall proceed with passengers to the
destination by the shortest possible route, unless requested otherwise
by said passengers.
A. License required. No person shall drive a taxicab/livery and no person
shall permit another to drive a taxicab/livery within the City without
first having obtained and paid for a license from the Director of
55.Editor's Note: The current schedule of rates is on file and available for inspection in the
office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 274-2 SWIMMING POOLS  274-6
265:491
Administrative Services/City Clerk under the provisions of this section.
[Amended 8-28-2017]
B. Submission of and information required by application.
(1) Application for a license to drive a taxicab/livery within the City
shall be made to the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety upon a
blank form to be furnished by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk. The applicant for such license shall be at least
18 years of age, shall have obtained a New York State Class A
commercial driver license (CDL), Class B commercial driver license
(CDL), Class C commercial driver license (CDL), or Class E driver
license, shall be able to read and write the English language and
shall be of sound body and mind. He shall furnish such other
information relating to his character and fitness as the Chief of
Police/Director of Public Safety may require. Any change in the
information provided must be reported to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk within 10 days after the change
occurs. [Amended 8-28-2017]
(2) No application for a taxicab/livery operator's license shall be
approved by the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety where it is
determined that the applicant for such license has been convicted
of a sex offense as such is defined by  130 of the Penal Law or has
been convicted within the 10 years immediately preceding the date
of application for a taxicab operator's license of a felony or where
the applicant for a taxicab/livery operator's license has been
convicted within the five years immediately preceding the date of
application for a taxicab/livery operator's license of violation of
 1192, Subdivision 2, 3 or 4, of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, or has been convicted within five years
immediately preceding the date of application for any drug or
marijuana related misdemeanor.
C. Approval and filing of application; issuance; expiration. If the Chief of
Police/Director of Public Safety approves an application, such approval
must be in writing and filed with the Police Department. Upon the filing
of the application, together with the approval of the Chief of Police/
Director of Public Safety, the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall issue a taxicab/livery operator's license. Each license shall
be stamped by the Seal of the City and shall expire on December 31
after the date of issue, unless previously suspended or revoked, as
provided in this section. [Amended 8-28-2017]
D. Photographs required; display of license and photograph. Each
applicant, upon filing the application with the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, must file therewith two unmounted
unretouched photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days
preceding the filing of the application. One such photograph shall be
attached to the license issued by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk, and such license and photograph shall be displayed
 274-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  274-6
265:492
 274-7. Taxicab/livery license.
by the licensee at all times in a conspicuous place inside the cab when
engaged in operating such cab. [Amended 8-28-2017]
E. Renewal. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk may renew
a taxicab/livery operator's license or taxicab/livery license only after
application for renewal has been approved by the Chief of Police/
Director of Public Safety. No application of a taxicab/livery operator's
license shall be approved by the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety where it is determined that the applicant for such license has
been convicted of a sex offense as such is defined by  130.00 of the
Penal Law or has been convicted within the 10 years immediately
preceding the date of application for a taxicab/livery operator's license
of a felony or where the applicant for a taxicab/livery operator's license
has been convicted within the five years immediately preceding the
date of application for a taxicab/livery operator's license of violation of
 1192, Subdivision 2, 3 or 4, of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, or has been convicted within five years immediately
preceding the date of application for any drug or marijuana related
misdemeanor. [Amended 8-28-2017]
F. Suspension; revocation. A driver's license may at any time be
suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing by the Chief of Police/
Director of Public Safety. Any violations of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any law regulating traffic or the operation of motor vehicles
or the commission of any misdemeanor or felony or any conduct which
might tend to render the operation of any motor vehicle unsafe or
failure to provide reasonable service to the public shall be considered
cause for the revocation or suspension of a license under this
subsection.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own and operate
or permit the operation of a taxicab/livery upon the streets of the City
without first having obtained a taxicab/livery license therefor under the
provisions of this section.
B. Expiration. Such taxicab/livery license shall expire on December 31
after the issuance thereof.
C. Application. Application for a taxicab/livery license shall be made by the
owner of the taxicab to the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk. Such application shall contain the owner's name, age and
residence of the person applying for the license, the type of motorcar to
be used, the horsepower, the factory number, the state license number,
the number of years the vehicle has been driven, the seating capacity,
whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime, whether the
vehicle was previously licensed as a taxicab and, if so, where and
whether any license to operate a taxicab/livery has ever been revoked
or suspended and, if so, for what cause and shall be accompanied by
proof that the applicant has in force and effect workers' compensation
 274-6 SWIMMING POOLS  274-7
265:493
 274-8. Maintenance of service to public.
Holders of taxicab/livery licenses pursuant to this chapter shall not remove
such licensed taxicabs/liveries from service at any time without prior
approval of the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety. Failure to comply
with this section shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the license
pursuant to  274-7G.
insurance and disability benefits insurance or, if the applicant has no
employees, submission of Workers' Compensation Board Form, C.E.
200, together with such other information relating to the qualifications
and fitness of the applicant which the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety may deem necessary. [Amended 8-28-2017]
D. Approval of application; issuance. After an investigation and inspection
of the vehicle, if such application for a taxicab/livery license is approved
by the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety, such approval shall be
made, in writing, and the application, together with the approval, filed
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. The Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk shall thereupon issue a taxicab/
livery license and a decal to be placed upon such taxicab/livery by the
Police Department. [Amended 8-28-2017]
E. Display of license. Such taxicab/livery license shall be displayed at all
times in a conspicuous place on the inside of the vehicle. The decal shall
be displayed on the left lower corner of the left front window of the
taxicab/livery.
F. Transferability. The taxicab/livery license issued pursuant to this
section shall be transferable to another vehicle of the holder only upon
application approved by the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
Upon approval of such application, the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety shall remove the decal from the taxicab/livery from which the
license is being transferred and place a new decal upon the taxicab/
livery to which the license is being transferred.
G. Revocation; suspension. A taxicab/livery license may be revoked or
suspended at any time for cause after a hearing by the Chief of Police/
Director of Public Safety. The use of the vehicle licensed with
knowledge for immoral or illegal purposes or in violation of any section
or law governing the operation of motor vehicles or use of a taxicab/
livery which is not kept in proper repair or failure to provide adequate
service to the public are sufficient causes for the suspension or
revocation of such license.
H. Effective January 1, 2018, the maximum allowable vehicle age in order
to obtain a taxicab and/or livery vehicle license shall be a 10 model-year
age from the current licensing year.
 274-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  274-9
265:494
 274-9. Taxicabs/liveries to be clean and safe.
Every taxicab/livery and the equipment used in connection therewith shall
at all times be clean and sanitary and shall be kept in proper physical
condition to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety
so as to render safe, adequate and proper public service and so as not to be
a menace to the safety of passengers or of the general public.
 274-10. Inspections; correction of defects.
 274-11. License fees. [Amended 8-28-2017]
License fees to be paid to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
at the time of the issuance of licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 175,
Licenses and Permits.
 274-12. Compliance with state law.
No taxicab/livery license shall be issued to any person unless he has fully
complied with the provisions of  370 of the State Vehicle and Traffic Law
relating to posting of a bond, required insurance, notice in case of accident,
etc. Failure to comply with such section shall be sufficient cause for the
suspension or revocation of the license.
A. The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety may at any time compel a
taxicab/livery permit holder to submit any taxicab/livery owned by such
holder to an inspection of its mechanism and equipment by an official
inspection station designated by the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety. The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety shall compel such
inspection at least two times in each year of 12 consecutive months and
shall designate the station at which such inspections shall be made. The
taxicab/livery owner shall be responsible for the inspection fee charged
by the inspection station. No taxicab/livery shall be operated and driven
after each such inspection until all defects found in its mechanism or
equipment by such inspection have been corrected and the operator of
such station certifies, in writing, to the Chief of Police/Director of Public
Safety, that the taxicab/livery was inspected at such station and that all
defects in its mechanism and equipment have been corrected. A fee as
indicated in  175-3A(1) of this code, payable to the City of Jamestown,
shall be added to said inspection fee for each additional inspection
required to correct defects in mechanism or equipment following a
failed inspection.
B. The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety shall have the power at any
and all times to inspect any taxicab/livery or other equipment used in
connection therewith, and the permit holder shall make such repairs
and adjustments or cause such repairs or adjustments to be made when
ordered so to do by the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety.
 274-9 SWIMMING POOLS  274-13
265:495
 274-13. When licenses are not required.
A taxicab/livery owner or operator stationed outside of the City may
discharge passengers within the City without obtaining a license.
 274-14. Exemptions for certain common carriers. [Amended
8-28-2017]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to common carriers or other
vehicles displaying livery license plates which have previously filed with the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk satisfactory proof of current,
up-to-date New York State Department of Transportation inspections for
each vehicle for hire and current, up-to-date Article 19-A Vehicle and Traffic
Law certification for each operator of said vehicle for hire. In the event
that this documentation is not provided to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk a minimum of every six months, the provisions of this
chapter shall be applicable as otherwise stated.
 274-15. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 275
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
 275-1. Official towers appointed; license required; term.
A. The Chief of Police shall appoint persons, firms or corporations meeting
the criteria set forth in this chapter and engaged in the business of
offering the services of motor vehicle towing or wrecker service,
whereby damaged, abandoned, hazardous, disabled or illegally parked
motor vehicles are towed or otherwise moved from the place where
they are damaged, abandoned, hazardous, disabled or illegally parked,
by use of a tow vehicle as defined in this chapter. Such persons, firms or
corporations shall be known as "official towers."
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license that shall be
used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. All applicants for a tower's license shall submit their applications at
least 60 days prior to the commencement date for each one-year license
period, and such application shall be reviewed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter. The award of a license to an
 274-13 JAMESTOWN CODE  275-1
265:496
 275-2. Services to be furnished; subcontracting requirements.
 275-3. Application process; information required. [Amended
10-16-2000; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Applications for inclusion on the official towers' list shall be made to the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk upon a form prepared by the
Chief of Police and approved by the Corporation Counsel and shall contain
the following information:
applicant shall be subject to compliance with the licensing
requirements of this chapter.
D. For the purposes of the licenses awarded pursuant to this chapter, in
the year which it is adopted, the initial term of the license shall be from
the date the license is issued until December 31, 1999. Licenses issued
thereafter shall be for a one-year period commencing on January 1 of
the year in which it is issued and terminating on December 31 in the
year in which it was issued.
A. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair service to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled within the limits of the City of Jamestown when requested to
do so by the Chief of Police or his authorized designee.
B. No official tower shall subcontract any towing to be performed
pursuant to this chapter without having first obtained prior written
approval from the Chief of Police. Any official tower to whom approval
to subcontract work has been given shall be responsible for the services
performed by the subcontractor and shall remain liable for any violation
of the provisions of this chapter by the subcontractor. Under no
circumstances shall an official tower subcontract any towing without
the subcontractor having first obtained the liability insurance required
by this chapter.
A. The name, date of birth, residence and business address and business
telephone number of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a
corporation, the application shall contain the name, residence and
business address and telephone number of every stockholder owning
more than 25% of the issued stock. The name, date of birth and
residence of any operator of the towing vehicle or vehicles.
B. Such information as may be required by the Chief of Police concerning
the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage facilities of such
applicant, as hereinafter provided, demonstrating that the applicant
meets the minimum standards of performance required by this chapter.
C. A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate insurance
coverage as hereinafter provided.
D. The names and addresses of two business references who have known
the applicant for at least two years.
 275-1 SWIMMING POOLS  275-3
265:497
 275-4. Licenses; fees; transfer requirements.
E. Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing services
anywhere within the City of Jamestown with a maximum response time
of 20 minutes following requests for service, except when extraordinary
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant occur.
F. Certification that the applicant will be available for service on business
premises 24 hours a day and that the applicant will abide by the fees
contained in or referred to in this section.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided and payment of the
required fees, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall
issue the applicant an official towers' license for each tow vehicle or
flatbed vehicle to be used in providing services pursuant to this section.
The licenses, which shall be in a form approved by the Chief of Police,
shall be displayed on the tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle at all times.
[Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. The licenses shall be valid for a one-year period as set forth in this
chapter, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Chief of Police for any of the following reasons:
(1) In the event that it is subsequently determined that the applicant
knowingly and with the intent to deceive made false, misleading or
fraudulent statements of material fact in the application or in any
other document required pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Any violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(3) Any violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
(5) Failure to pay the annual license fee.
C. The annual license fee for each license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be $250 plus $50 for each additional vehicle above one which is
covered by the license issued. [Amended 11-23-2009; 8-26-2013]
D. Licenses shall not be transferable from one vehicle to another without
the consent of the Chief of Police or his designee. Consent may be
granted at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee if the
licensee demonstrates that a vehicle for which a license has been
obtained is out of service, has been sold or has otherwise been disposed
of and that the transferee vehicle complies with all of the requirements
of this chapter.
E. No application for an official tower's license shall be approved by the
Chief of Police where it is determined that the applicant for such license
 275-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  275-4
265:498
 275-5. Minimum vehicle, equipment and storage requirements.
Qualifications for inclusion on the list of official towers shall require that
applicants for the license required herein meet the following minimum
performance standards:
or any operator of the towing vehicle or vehicles has been convicted
of a sex offense as such is defined by  130.00 of the Penal Law or
has been convicted within the 10 years immediately preceding the date
of application for an official tower's license of a felony or where the
applicant for an official tower's license or any operator of the towing
vehicle or vehicles has been convicted within the five years immediately
preceding the date of application for an official tower's license of a
violation of  1192, Subdivision 2, 3 or 4, of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York. [Added 10-16-2000]
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this chapter a minimum of one regular tow
vehicle or wrecker.
(2) Vehicle classes.
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a tow sling
or wheel-lift assembly and possess at least 100 feet of either
three-eighths-inch or seven-sixteenths-inch cable attached to a
motor driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(3) All equipment shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations as such pertain to the vehicles utilized by the applicant
for the business of providing towing or wrecker services.
(4) Each applicant shall submit, with his, her or its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be used to provide the
services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicle, visible from 360
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
 275-4 SWIMMING POOLS  275-5
265:499
(c) Amber colored safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for
towing vehicles at night.
(d) Extra chains for pulling or securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or prybar, a
set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound or larger fire
extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or similar
illuminated warning devices for placement at the scene of an
accident or behind a disabled vehicle and 10 pounds of dry
sand or a drying compound for gasoline and oils spilled onto
the roadway.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with all state,
federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to
safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be
subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or his designee at any
time. No changes may be made to said vehicles or equipment
unless prior written approval is obtained from the City of
Jamestown.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display an official tower's
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle.
C. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain inside or outside storage areas
meeting the following requirements:
(a) The storage area shall be capable of storing a minimum of four
passenger vehicles.
(b) The location of the storage area shall be within the limits of the
City of Jamestown or at such location outside the City of
Jamestown as to facilitate reasonable towing distance.
(c) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use.
(d) The storage facility shall be made available 24 hours per day,
365 days per year for vehicle recovery by the owner thereof
upon payment of towing charges, storage fees and other
charges constituting a garagemen's lien.
(e) The official tower shall not charge a release fee or other charge
for releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business
hours or on weekends.
(2) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter and shall
be liable for any damage incurred by such vehicles while being
prepared for towing or removal, while in transit or while stored in
storage areas. By acceptance of a license and designation as an
 275-5 JAMESTOWN CODE  275-5
265:500
 275-6. Utilization of official towers' list.
official tower, the tower agrees to all terms and provisions of this
chapter, acknowledges comprehension of the terms and provisions
of this chapter and assumes sole liability for any and all damages
incurred by motor vehicles in the course of being prepared for
towing or removal or being towed or stored by the official tower,
and the official tower, accordingly, shall indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Jamestown, its employees, officers and agents
from any and all property damage liability resulting from the
official towers' removal, towing or storage of a motor vehicle,
including, but not limited to, the costs of reasonable attorneys' fees
and other such expenses.
A. Official towers shall be placed on the official towers' list at the
beginning of each one-year period in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this chapter. The official tower shall rotate on the list per
call.
B. The City of Jamestown shall request wrecking, towing and storage
services from each official tower in rotation from a list maintained by
the Chief of Police or his authorized designee. When called, the official
tower shall advise the dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the
estimated time of arrival. If no tow vehicle is available or, if in the
discretion of the designated person making the request, the response
time is insufficient under the circumstances to properly protect the
public health, safety or welfare, the next official tower on the list shall
be called for that particular towing event.
C. All requests for towing service on property owned by the City of
Jamestown shall be made by the Chief of Police or his official designee.
[Amended 1-30-2017]
D. The City of Jamestown shall request service only from official towers,
provided, however, that if no emergency or road hazard exists, the City
shall request such service from such other person as the owner of the
motor vehicle in need of such services may so request, and provided,
further, that if none of the official towers is available or able to provide
such services as are requested by the City of Jamestown, or if an
emergency exists, the City may request such services from any other
available source.
E. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, the official tower shall give priority to requests
from the City of Jamestown over any other requests which may be
received by the official towers.
F. The City of Jamestown shall bear no liability or responsibility
whatsoever to any official tower occasioned by the City of Jamestown's
failure to call an official tower for a City of Jamestown requested towaway.
 275-5 SWIMMING POOLS  275-6
265:501
 275-7. Towing and storage fees.
 275-8. Dispute resolution and license revocation.
G. The towing of vehicles from private property will be the responsibility of
the owner of the property. No vehicle shall be towed by a tow operator
from private property without express written authorization by the
owner of the private property or the person in control of the private
property, or his or her agent. The towing company which tows a vehicle
from private property shall, within 30 minutes of the vehicle뭩 arrival at
a facility for storage, notify the Jamestown Police Department,
identifying the storage facility, the location of the storage facility, the
time the vehicle was towed, the location from which the vehicle was
towed, the make, model, color and license plate number of the vehicle
towed, the name of the person who authorized the towing and the fact
that the towing was pursuant to a contract/written authorization with
the owner/operator/agent of the private property. The person who tows
the vehicle and the person authorizing the tow shall maintain a copy of
the written authorization provided for in this subsection for a period of
not less than one year. Owners/operators/agents of private property
shall utilize the list of official towers and may contract with one or more
of the City뭩 official towing companies for the removal of unauthorized
vehicles. [Added 1-30-2017]
A. The City of Jamestown shall have no liability or responsibility for the
payment of towing fees or storage fees incurred by an official tow
operator in providing towing and storage services requested by the
Chief of Police or his designee. Such charges shall be the sole and
exclusive responsibility of the owner of the vehicle who is the subject of
the service.
B. Each official tower shall maintain a detailed schedule of towing charges
and storage charges which, prior to becoming effective, shall be
approved by the Public Safety Committee of the Jamestown City
Council, and such approval noted by the signature of the chairman
thereof. No tow operator or such operator's subcontractor shall charge
a towing rate or storage fee in excess of the rate last approved, and any
charge or collection in excess of the towing rate charged by a tow
operator or subcontractor of a tow operator shall be sufficient grounds
for revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter. Such
charges for removal or towing or storage shall apply only to tows or
removals authorized by the Chief of Police or his designee or other
public official and shall not have application to tow or removal requests
from private individuals, firms or corporations.
A. In the event that a complaint is received by the City of Jamestown
involving the improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an
official tower, excessive charges or damage to a motor vehicle while in
the custody of a tower, written notice of the same shall be provided by
the Chief of Police by certified mail to the official tower involved. The
 275-6 JAMESTOWN CODE  275-8
265:502
 275-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOW TRUCK, WRECKER or FLATBED TRUCK  A commercial motor
vehicle capable of removing from a location any damaged, disabled,
hazardous or illegally parked motor vehicle by means of pulling, carrying or
towing such motor vehicle to another location.
 275-10. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions Article I, Penalties.
Chapter 280
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission  See Ch. 57.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
 280-1. Findings and intent.
The City Council of the City of Jamestown hereby finds it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the planting,
protection, maintenance and removal of trees in the public parkways, public
terraces and other municipally owned property within the City of
Jamestown and further finds that the proper maintenance of trees and
tower shall have an opportunity to respond, in writing, within five
business days of the official tower's receipt of said written notice.
B. Within 14 business days of receipt of the tower's written response or
within 21 days of the tower's receipt of the written notice, if no
response is received, the matter shall be determined by the Chief of
Police.
C. If, after considering the matter, the Chief of Police shall determine that
one of the causes for revocation of the official tower's license, as set
forth in this chapter, exists, the license shall be revoked and the tower
shall surrender the same, together with licenses issued for all of the
tower's vehicles, to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
within 24 hours of the Chief of Police's determination and notification to
the official tower, either personally or by certified mail. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 275-8 SWIMMING POOLS  280-1
265:503
woody shrubs enhances real property values and preserves the quality and
character of neighborhoods. It is, therefor, the intention of this chapter to
provide for the proper planting, protection, maintenance and removal of
trees in the public parkways, public terraces and other municipally owned
property within the City of Jamestown.
 280-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the
sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to
them, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by context:
DAMAGE  The altering any part of a tree or its immediate environment,
whether externally or otherwise evident, which disturbs the healthy
functioning of the tree or any of its parts.
DIRECTOR  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation or such
person designated by the Director.
PUBLIC PARKWAY and PUBLIC TERRACE  All of that City-owned real
property located between the curbline and the private property line along
each street and highway within the City of Jamestown.[Added 8-10-1992
by L.L. No. 2-1992]
PUBLIC TREE  A tree or shrub located on a public parkway, public terrace
or any other municipally owned property.
REMOVE  The elimination of a public tree, whether by deliberate or
negligent act or omission.
STREET  The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for
purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREE or SHRUB  Any woody plant.
URBAN FOREST  Public trees located on City-owned or -controlled
property.
URBAN FOREST RULES AND REGULATIONS  Rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation for
implementation of this chapter.
 280-3. Authority; control and regulation.
The Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation shall have the authority
and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, protection, maintenance and
removal of trees and shrubs planted or hereafter planted in the public
parkways, public terraces and other municipally owned property within the
City of Jamestown. The control and regulation of such trees and shrubs shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations
as the Director deems necessary.
 280-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  280-4
265:504
 280-4. Permit required.
No person shall commence or proceed with any operation involving the
removal, partial removal, damage or destruction or the potential for the
removal, partial removal, damage or destruction of a public tree or shrub
without first obtaining an urban forestry permit from the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation.
 280-5. Application for permit.
Application for an urban forestry permit shall be made in the form
prescribed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation by the
following:
 280-6. Permit fees.
 280-7. Issuance of permit; conduct of work; revocation.
A. The owner of the property on which the proposed work is to be
performed or the owner's authorized agent, architect or contractor.
B. The public utility company, government agency or its authorized agent
if the work is to be done by a public utility company or government
agency pursuant to its regular operations.
C. The abutting property owner or the owner's authorized agent if the
work is to be performed within a public parkway or public terrace.
A. Fees for permits for any operation involving a public tree shall be based
on the estimated cost of the work to be performed at the rate of $25 for
work estimated between $1,000 and $10,000 and $50 for work
estimated to exceed $10,000. Annual permits shall be based on the
same formula. No fee shall be required for permits for work estimated
to cost less than $1,000. No fee shall be required for permits obtained
by City departments. [Amended 11-23-2009]
B. Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit fee.
C. Fees shall be deposited in a separate City account dedicated solely to
urban forestry programs.
A. Each application for a permit shall be approved or disapproved within
15 days after filing. If the application is disapproved, the applicant shall
be notified, in writing, of the reason for rejection. If no action is taken
within 15 days on an application, it shall be deemed to have been
approved.
B. Permits may be issued on an individual project basis or in the case of
public utilities doing routine work on an annual fee basis.
C. The person receiving such permit shall conduct such work as required
in accordance with such generally accepted arboricultural methods as
may be necessary to protect the vitality of such trees and abide by the
 280-4 SWIMMING POOLS  280-7
265:505
 280-8. Compensatory payments.
 280-9. Required pruning.
Any person being the owner of real property abutting a street shall prune
any tree or shrub on the owner's property so that no tree or shrub shall
obstruct or interfere with the free and safe passage of pedestrians on any
sidewalk or the free and safe passage of vehicles on the paved portion of
any street or the view of traffic signals or signs. Acceptable clearances shall
be determined by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
 280-10. Nuisance trees.
specifications of this chapter and any rules and regulations as adopted
by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation and shall as a
condition of such permit agree to hold the City of Jamestown harmless
from any and all liability which might result from the work or activity
authorized. In addition, the Director may require the person receiving
such permit to provide such insurance coverage and in such amounts
as he deems necessary to protect the interest of the City of Jamestown.
D. The Director may revoke for cause any permit previously approved, and
no refund of the permit fee shall be made.
A. No person shall remove any public trees without replacing such trees
with trees of equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed trees.
The value shall be determined by the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation in accordance with standards adopted by the
International Society of Arboriculture. If no suitable location exists in
the vicinity of the tree removed or if the replacement is of lesser value,
the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory
payment to the City of Jamestown equal to the difference in value
between the tree removed and any replacement tree. Any public tree
that is determined by the Director to be damaged, but not sufficiently to
justify its removal, shall be considered devalued. The amount of
devaluation shall be paid to the City by the person causing the damage.
B. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Director shall be
authorized to waive the requirement of a compensatory payment when
the removal or damage of any public tree is necessary to permit repairs
to a public utility, reasonable access to property or similar alterations as
deemed by the Director to be in the best interests of public health,
safety and welfare, provided that a reasonable alternative to the
removal or damage of the public tree is not available. Any public tree
thus removed shall be replaced by a tree determined suitable by the
Director at the expense of the person requiring said removal.
C. Should a public tree be unnecessarily or excessively damaged under
such circumstances, compensatory payment shall be required.
 280-7 JAMESTOWN CODE  280-10
265:506
 280-11. Appeals.
 280-12. Prohibited activities.
A. Any tree or shrub located on private or public property which obstructs
a street, sidewalk or sewer or which suffers from a communicable
disease or insect infestation, as determined by the Director, which
threatens the public welfare or the health of public trees is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. When such a public nuisance exists involving a tree on private property,
the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation shall cause a notice
to be mailed, by certified mail, to the owner of the property on which
the tree or shrub is located specifying what corrective work is
necessary and directing the owner to perform such corrective work to
eliminate the nuisance.
C. Should any ordered correction not be made within 15 days of the date
such notice is received, the Director shall cause such tree or shrub to be
pruned, treated or removed as necessary to eliminate the public
nuisance. All expenses involved in such work shall be recorded, and the
Director shall be authorized to collect such expenses from the owner of
the property on which the tree or shrub is located.
A. Any person affected by an order, grant or denial of a permit or other
decision of the Director, when such decision is based upon the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal such order, grant, denial or
revocation of a permit or other decision to the Parks, Recreation and
Conservation Commission.
B. Such appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation within 14 days of the date of notification
of the ruling.
C. Unless continued at the request of the applicant, any appeal shall be
heard and decided by the Parks, Recreation and Conservation
Commission no later than the second regularly scheduled meeting of
the Commission following the filing of the notice of appeal. Action by
the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation shall be stayed until
the decision is rendered and the applicant notified.
D. The Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission may, in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm of modify, wholly or
partly, the order, grant, denial or revocation of any permit or other
decision of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
E. The decision of the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commission
shall be final.
F. The right to appeal shall be clearly stated on all permits.
 280-10 SWIMMING POOLS  280-12
265:507
 280-13. Developments and subdivisions.
A. No person shall make any excavation, place any fill, compact the soil or
construct any building, structure, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, curb
or public utility within 15 feet in any direction of any public tree without
first obtaining a permit for such work from the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation and conducting such work in accordance
with such permit.
B. No person shall remove, damage, cut, carve, prune or otherwise disturb
above or below ground any public trees or compact, amend or drive on
the soil or otherwise disturb the immediate environment around any
public tree or attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising poster or other
artifact to any public tree or allow any toxic substance to harm or
damage any public tree or set fire to or otherwise injure any public tree,
except as authorized by permit.
C. No person shall plant or transplant any public tree, except as
authorized by permit.
D. No person shall spray, inject or otherwise apply any fertilizer or
pesticide, including but not limited to dormant oil, insecticide,
fungicide, herbicide, growth regulator or biological control, to any
public tree, except as authorized by permit.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a person
from performing ordinary improvement or maintenance activities on
private property, including but not limited to lawn care and gardening;
provided, however, that activities such as excavations of more than two
inches in depth or the tilling of soil to a depth of more than six inches or
the addition of more than four inches of soil or other fill material above
previous grade within 15 feet in any direction of a public tree shall
require a permit.
A. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation shall require trees
and shrubs to be planted by the property owner or developer on the
public parkways, public terraces and other municipally owned property
abutting such lands henceforth developed where deemed suitable and
proper for the protection and enhancement of the urban forest. In such
event, a proposed planting plan and permit application shall be
submitted by the property owner or developer to the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation for approval and issuance of an urban
forestry permit prior to final approval by the City of Jamestown. The
authority to require such planting shall include but is not limited to
residential, commercial and industrial development, including parking
lots.
B. Where the Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation determines
that planting on the municipally owned or controlled property would be
ineffective or unsuitable for the protection and enhancement of the
urban forest, he may require plantings to be performed on the
 280-12 JAMESTOWN CODE  280-13
265:508
 280-14. Disposal of urban forest products.
The Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation may sell without
competitive bidding wood and other forest products generated during urban
forestry operations which are not needed by the City of Jamestown pursuant
to urban forestry rules and regulations. Moneys generated from
compensatory payments, permit fees, donations, gifts, planting fees and
insurance claims as each involves public trees and the sale of forest
products shall be deposited in a special account dedicated solely to the
urban forestry program.
 280-15. Interference prohibited.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Conservation or any of his assistants in the execution of the
enforcement of this chapter or the activity required to conduct the urban
forestry program. However, this shall not be construed as an attempt to
prohibit a public hearing or any remedy, legal or equitable, to protect the
property rights of any property owner within the City of Jamestown.
 280-16. Emergency work.
 280-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties,
plus the costs of rectifying damage to any tree or shrub on City-owned
property.
developed site outside of the public parkway, public terrace or other
municipally owned property under the conditions as set forth in this
section.
A. This chapter shall not govern any emergency activity immediately
necessary to protect life, safety or property or to maintain access to any
property. Any such activity shall incorporate reasonable efforts to
protect trees and shrubs on City property from unnecessary damage.
B. Any person or City agency engaged in any action specified by
Subsection A of this section shall make a reasonable effort to notify the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Conservation prior to commencing
that action and shall, in any event, provide written notice of the
emergency and the work done to the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation within three calendar days of commencing that work.
 280-13 SWIMMING POOLS  280-17
265:509
Chapter 288
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards  See Ch. 235. Unlicensed vehicles  See Ch. 292.
 288-1. Legislative purpose.
 288-2. Definitions.
A. The City of Jamestown hereby finds that the storage or presence of
abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled (in whole or in part), or
inoperative motor vehicles or the repair of motor vehicles on private
property in residential neighborhoods creates a public and private
nuisance and is harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. Such
vehicles present a source of serious injury, particularly to children who
are attracted to play in, upon and about the same when they are able to
go near the same; seriously harm the aesthetic qualities of the City and
tend to depreciate the value of property upon which they are located as
well as the property of other persons in the neighborhoods of the City
and provide nesting places for rats, mice and other rodents. Gasoline
tanks on such vehicles often contain some quantity of combustible
gasoline; the engines and other parts are frequently covered with
flammable grease and oil; the tires, plastic seats, tops and other
elements of the same contain acids and other matters potentially
harmful to humans; such motor vehicles frequently contain sharp metal
or glass edges or points upon which a human could receive serious cuts
and abrasions. The control of the outdoor storage of abandoned and
unlicensed vehicles, other than within licensed junkyards, within the
City is, therefore, regulated for the preservation of health, safety and
general welfare of the community. The City finds that the problem can
be diminished by permitting the storage and/or repair of such vehicles
only within a garage of suitable dimensions and only under the
restrictions as set forth in this chapter.
B. Such abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled (in whole or in part), or
inoperable motor vehicles are hereby declared a "public nuisance"
which annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of
a considerable number of persons, as set forth in  240.45(1) of the
Penal Law. The outdoor storage of abandoned vehicles within the City,
other than within licensed junkyards, is detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of the community.
A. With respect to any motor vehicle not required to be licensed or not
used on public highways, the fact that such motor vehicle has remained
unused for more than three months and is not in condition to be
 280-17 JAMESTOWN CODE  288-2
288:510
removed under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such
motor vehicle is an abandoned, junked, or inoperative motor vehicle.
B. The fact that a motor vehicle does not display a current motor vehicle
registration or license plate in the name of a homeowner or tenant or in
the name of a member of his/her immediate family shall be presumptive
evidence that such motor vehicle is not in any condition for legal use
upon the highways or is being repaired in violation of this chapter.
C. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED  Includes any vehicle that is unlicensed, wrecked,
stored, discarded or motor vehicle under repair, dismantled or partly
dismantled, abandoned, discarded and junked and/or in such condition
as to cost more to repair and place in operating condition than the
reasonable market value of the vehicle prior to such repair and which is
not intended or in any condition for legal use upon the public highway.
CITY  The area within the City of Jamestown.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER  Any person charged with the
enforcement of the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code
or this Code.
NUISANCE VEHICLE  A vehicle on public or private property that is
a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a
vehicle found to be: a harbor for insects or pests; has weeds over eight
inches in height; pond water; contains excessive or odorous gasoline,
oil or other flammable or explosive materials; one which has areas of
confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks,
hoods, etc.; dangerous; has waste matter of any kind; has sharp parts,
metal or glass; or any other vehicle declared in writing to be a nuisance
by the City of Jamestown.
OWNER OF THE PRIVATE PROPERTY  Includes the legal owner,
contract purchaser in possession, tenant, lessee, occupant, under
tenant, receiver, assignee or trustee of premises or property located
within the City of Jamestown.
OWNER OF VEHICLE  Person having the property in or title to
a vehicle, including a person entitled to the use and possession of
a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person and also
including any lessee or bailee of a vehicle having the use thereof under
lease or otherwise.
PERSON  Includes a natural person, partnership or corporation.
VEHICLE  Every vehicle operated, driven or capable of being
operated or driven upon a public highway by any power other than
muscular power. All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power, originally intended for use on public highway; this
would include stock cars, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and snowmobiles.
 288-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  288-3
288:511
 288-3. Abandoning vehicles prohibited; penalties for offenses.
 288-4. Notice of violation. [Amended 6-20-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any highway or any other public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any private property for which he/she is not the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner of private property to cause or allow
any vehicle to be abandoned or stored or kept without valid numbered
registration plates affixed thereon on his/her private property. The
provisions of the foregoing shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles on private property licensed as junkyards;
(2) Vehicles kept or stored in a completely enclosed building;
(3) Vehicles kept or stored for sale without dismantling on private
property occupied pursuant to the City of Jamestown Zoning
Ordinance for the sale of new or used vehicles;
(4) A motor home or other vehicle designed and used primarily for
recreation purposes. This exception shall not apply to more that
one such vehicle per parcel of property.
D. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in accordance
with  215-59.
A. Any abandoned, junked or inoperative vehicle found within the City in
violation of  288-3 may be removed from the premises on which it is
located after the Code Enforcement Officer serves written notice to the
owner of the private property on which the vehicle is located in
accordance with the provisions of New York State CPL  150.40
ordering the owner of the property to remove the vehicle or cause the
vehicle to be removed from the property within seven days. Such notice
shall specify the alleged violation and shall provide for compliance
within seven days. Such notice shall inform the person or persons to
whom it is directed of his/her right to apply within such time as may be
designated in such notice for a hearing before the Director of
Development or his/her designated representative, or he/she may
appeal in such time designated to the Property Rehabilitation and
Conservation Board of Appeals. Such notice may contain an outline of
remedial action which will effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Removal. In the event that the abandoned, junked or inoperative motor
vehicle is not removed from the premises within seven days, the
Director of Development and the Chief of Police shall have the right to
abate the direct hazard, and they shall have the right to enter upon the
premises and to remove and dispose of the public nuisance vehicle.
 288-3 JAMESTOWN CODE  288-4
288:512
Chapter 290
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles  See Ch. 107.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Taxicabs  See Ch. 274.
Unlicensed vehicles  See Ch. 292.
Removal shall occur only after such notice has been given pursuant to
 288-4A. All of the costs of such removal and disposal shall be a lawful
charge against the owner of the private property and may be collected
in a civil action instituted in the name of the City or levied and charged
against said property.
 288-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  288-4
288:513

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 290-1. Definitions.
 290-2. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police is hereby charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
 290-3. Applicability of statutes to Bradmar Village.
The provisions of ㎣ 1140, 1141, 1142, 1143, 1144, 1145, 1172 and 1173
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall hereby apply
to the private streets or highways on private property in Jamestown, New
York, owned by Bradmar Village Realty and being known as "Bradmar
Village."
A. As used in this chapter, all words and phrases defined in Article 1 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law are included and made a part of this chapter.
B. In addition to the terms defined in Article 1 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law, for the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CONGESTED DISTRICT  Includes the public streets and places
bounded as follows:
North by the north side of Sixth Street from the east side of
Lafayette Street to the east side of Prendergast Avenue.
[Amended 5-23-1994]
(1)
South by the south side of Steele Street, Washington Street Bridge
Arterial and Allen Street from the west side of Sprague Street to
the east side of Foote Avenue.
(2)
East from the northeast corner of Prendergast Avenue and East
Sixth Street to the south side of East Fifth Street to the east side
of Church Street to the north side of East Fourth Street to East
Second Street, then crossing to the south side of East Second
Street and going west to the intersection of the extension of the
east side of Foote Avenue and the south leg of Allen Street.
(3)
West from the northeast corner of Lafayette Street and West Sixth
Street to the north side of West Fifth Street to the east side of
Jefferson Street to the north side of West Third Street to the
northeast corner of West Third Street and Andrews Avenue to the
southeast corner of West Third Street and Andrews Avenue to the
east end of the Third Street Bridge to the western side of the
intersection of Sprague Street and Steele Street.
(4)
 290-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-4
288:515
 290-4. Readings from electronic radar devices as evidence upon
trial.
Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to
have been committed in violation of this chapter or the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the state, the City Court may admit evidence of speed readings
shown on the speed indicator of an electronic radar device upon proof that
the accuracy of such device was tested against a calibrated speedometer
within a twenty-four-hour period immediately preceding the taking of such
readings.
 290-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or of any local law, ordinance, order, rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter unless such violation is, by this
chapter or other law of this state, declared to be a misdemeanor or
felony.
B. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, for which another penalty is not provided,
shall: [Amended 11-23-2009]
(1) For a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than
$50 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(2) For a conviction of a second violation, both of which were
committed within a period of 18 months, such person shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(3) Upon a conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all of which
were committed within a period of 18 months, be punished by a fine
of not less than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of ㎣ 290-14 through 290-17
of this chapter pertaining to traffic signal lights shall:
(1) Upon a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $150 or by imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
(2) For a conviction of a second violation, both of which were
committed within a period of 18 months, such person shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $250 or by
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. [Amended
11-23-2009]
(3) For a conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all of which
occurred within a period of 18 months, such person shall be
 290-4 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-5
288:516
punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $450 or
by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. [Amended
11-23-2009]
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of  290-12 of this chapter
relating to speed of motor vehicles, upon conviction of a first violation,
shall be punished as follows:
(1) Where the court or tribunal records or enters that the speed upon
which the conviction was based exceeded the applicable speed
limit by not more than 10 miles per hour, by a fine of not less than
$30 nor more than $100.
(2) Where the court or tribunal records or enters that the speed upon
which the conviction was based exceeded the applicable speed
limit by more than 10 miles per hour but not more than 30 miles per
hour, by a fine of not less than $60 nor more than $200 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(3) Where the court or tribunal records or enters that the speed upon
which the conviction was based exceeded the applicable speed
limit by more than 30 miles per hour, by a fine of not less than $120
nor more than $400 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 11-23-2009]
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, the
maximum fine provided herein for the violation for which the
person is sentenced may be increased by an additional $100 if the
conviction is for a second violation of any subsection of this section
and both violations were committed within an eighteen-month
period, and the maximum fine provided herein for the violation for
which the person is sentenced may be increased by an additional
$250 if the conviction is for a third or subsequent violation of any
subdivision of this section where all such violations were
committed within an eighteen-month period. Where an additional
fine is provided by this subsection, a sentence of imprisonment for
not more than 15 days may be imposed in place of or in addition to
any fine imposed. [Amended 11-23-2009]
 290-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-5
288:517

ARTICLE II
Traffic Violations
[Amended 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 290-6. Offenses and fines.
The Judge of the City Court shall designate the specified offenses under
the traffic ordinances of this City and the state traffic laws in respect to
which payments of fines may be accepted by the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk in satisfaction thereof and shall specify by suitable
schedules the amount of such fines.
 290-7. Election to appear in Court; payment of fines.
 290-8. Powers and duties of Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk.
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk in reference to traffic offenses:
A. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be
made to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall have
the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of
arrest at the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk's office
upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court or
may have the option of depositing required lawful bail and upon a plea
of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law.
B. The payment of a fine to the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk shall be deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged
offense, and the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk, upon
accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator
acknowledging payment thereof.
A. He or she shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in
Court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive
Court appearance and give power of attorney.
B. He or she shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who must or wish to be heard in Court and, in coordination with the
Clerk of the City Court and office of the Corporation Counsel, enter the
time of their appearance on the Court docket and notify the arresting
officer and witnesses, if any are present. He or she shall keep an easily
accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty
during the preceding 12 months, whether such guilt was established in
Court or by payment of the fine at the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk's office.
 290-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-9
288:519
 290-9. Records and reports.
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall keep records of
all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and
ordinances in this City and of all the fines collected and of the final
disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of
such laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show
all types of violations and the totals of each. Such records shall be public
record.
 290-10. Procedure.
The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall follow such
procedure as may be prescribed by the traffic ordinances of this City or as
may be required by any laws of this state.
 290-9 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-10
288:520
ARTICLE III
Speed Limits
 290-11. Speed limits within City parks.
When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate
a motor vehicle upon the roadways or highways located within the
boundaries of the City parks of the City of Jamestown at a rate of speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
 290-12. School speed limits.
Pursuant to the authority granted cities by ㎣ 1643 and 1180(c) of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, no person shall drive a
vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., while school is in session, on any portion of a highway passing
a school building for not more than 300 feet in either direction from the
building line of the school abutting on a highway. For purposes of this
section, the term "school building" shall include all public elementary, junior
high and high schools, parochial schools, Jamestown Community College,
Jamestown Business College and such other educational institutions so
designated from time to time by the Director of Public Works.
 290-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-12
288:521

ARTICLE IV
U-Turns
 290-13. Prohibited in congested district.
No person shall make a U-turn upon any street or at any intersection within
the congested district as defined in this chapter.
 290-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-13
288:523

ARTICLE V
Traffic Signal Lights
 290-14. General provisions.
 290-15. Responsibility for speed.
The driver of a vehicle, moving under the authorization of a traffic signal
light, shall not thereby be authorized to operate such vehicle at such a
speed as to threaten the safety of pedestrians at street intersections or on
crossings.
 290-16. Responsibility for reckless driving.
The driver of a vehicle, moving under the authorization of a traffic signal
light, shall not thereby be relieved of responsibility for reckless driving at
street crossings, corners or intersections.
 290-17. Moving past traffic signal.
No person shall cause a vehicle to move past a traffic signal light in violation
of this article.
A. Traffic signal lights are hereby established at such points, corner or
street intersections as may be designated by the Director of Public
Works for the purpose of controlling all traffic.
B. The traffic signal lights are placed to promote the safety of moving
vehicles at the points of location and not otherwise.
 290-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-17
288:525

ARTICLE VI
Pedestrian Crosswalks and Crossings
 290-18. Crossing between adjacent intersections.
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. An
alley is not an intersection within the meaning of this section.
 290-19. Crossing at traffic control signals.
When crossing at an intersection at which traffic control signals are
provided and in operation, pedestrians shall cross only when the green light
shall show in the direction from which they are proceeding and shall have
the right of way during such crossing over all motor vehicles until they shall
have reached the opposite curb.
 290-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-19
288:527

ARTICLE VII
Parking
 290-20. Parking on highways prohibited; exceptions; penalties for
offenses.
 290-21. Alternate-side parking required; exceptions.
Except as provided in  290-35, parking outside of the congested area as
defined in this chapter, except as posted otherwise, shall be on alternate
sides of the street as follows.
 290-22. Parking from April through September.
Between the first day of April and the 30th day of September for monthly
periods on all streets in the City, all cars shall be parked only on the oddnumbered
side of the street during odd-numbered months and only on
the even-numbered side of the street during even-numbered months. The
number of the month on the first day of said month at 10:00 a.m. determines
the side of the street upon which parking is allowed.
 290-23. Parking from October through March.
Between the first day of October and the 31st day of March for twenty-fourhour
periods on all streets in the City, all cars shall be parked only on the
odd-numbered side of the street on odd-numbered days of the month and
only on the even-numbered side of the street on even-numbered days of the
month. The date of the day at 10:00 a.m. determines the side of the street
upon which parking is allowed.
 290-24. Exceptions.
A. Except as authorized in ㎣ 290-21 through 290-47 of this chapter, no
person shall park or cause to be parked, any motor vehicle on any
public highway of the City of Jamestown.
B. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $300.
A. When signs have been posted giving notice thereof, cars shall be parked
only on the odd-numbered side of the street on odd-numbered days and
on the even-numbered side of the street on even-numbered days
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Cherry Street [Added
6-19-2006; repealed
2-23-2009]
Clinton Street From West Third Street to West Fifth Street
East Second Street From east City line to East Fourth Street
 290-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-24
288:529
Name of Street Location
Fairmount Avenue From West Third Street to Hamilton Street
Fourth Street From Jefferson Street to Fairmount Avenue
Jefferson Street From West Third Street to West Fifth Street
Monroe Street
[Repealed
10-24-2011]
North Main Street From Sixth Street to Eighth Street
B. In those streets or public places on which parking is restricted, as
herein provided, and which are within the congested district, the
restrictions as to parking meters shall apply Monday through Friday
from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted. No person
shall park any vehicle on any street or public place, other than
designated off-street parking lots, within the congested district
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. When signs have been posted giving notice thereof, all cars shall be
parked only on the east side of the street on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Allen Street [Added
6-22-2009]
From Pullman Street to English Street
Allen Street Between Willard Street and English Street
Barrett Avenue Between Harrison Street and Prather
Avenue
Beechview Avenue
[Added 3-20-2000]
Between Buffalo Street and Clyde Avenue
Fairview Avenue Between Fairmount Avenue and West Sixth
Street
Hickory Street Between Shaw Avenue and Ahrens Avenue
Hillside Terrace Between Irvine Place and Kingsbury Street
Langford Street Entire length
Maple Street Between Garfield Street and Allen Street
North Main Street From Richmond Place to Eighth Street
South Main Street Between Allen Street and Prather Avenue
Stewart Avenue Between Harding Avenue and Fairmount
Avenue
Tower Street Between Pullman Street and English
Street
Water Street Between King Street and Winsor Street
Whitehill Avenue [Added
4-25-2005]
Between Cole Avenue and Smith Avenue
 290-24 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-24
288:530
D. When signs have been posted giving notice thereof, all cars shall be
parked only on the west side of the street on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Barrows Street Between Pullman Street and King Street
Buffalo Street [Added
10-12-1999]
Between East Second Street and Falconer
Street
Elm Street Between Pullman Street and Ahrens
Avenue
Grant Street Between Sixth Street and Seventh Street
Highland Avenue Between Front Street and Palmer Street
Liberty Street [Added
10-12-1999]
Between East Fifth Street and East Sixth
Street
Monroe Street Between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
Monroe Street [Added
11-28-2011]
Between Hamilton Street and West Third
Street
Myrtle Street Between Brown Street and Cole Street
Myrtle Street [Added
4-25-2005]
Between Cole Avenue and Smith Avenue
Porter Avenue [Added
12-17-2007]
Entire length
Thayer Street Between Second Street and Crescent
Street
E. When signs have been posted giving notice thereof, all cars shall be
parked only on the north side of the street on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Blake Street [Added
5-15-2000]
Between Mason Street and the dead end
Camp Street From Maple Street to Foote Avenue
Fairmount Avenue From Geneva Street to Livingston Avenue
Falconer Street Between Stowe Street and Weeks Street
Irvine Place From North Main Street to Hillside
Terrace
Orchard Street Entire length
Sixth Street From Lafayette Street to Fairmount
Avenue
Sixth Street [Repealed
5-23-1994]
Water Street [Added
12-17-2007]
Between Foote Avenue and the Gateway
Center
 290-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-24
288:531
 290-25. No-parking areas for snow and ice removal; removal of
vehicles.
Name of Street Location
Wilson Place Between North Main Street and
Prendergast Avenue
F. When signs have been posted giving notice thereof, all cars shall be
parked only on the south side of the street on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Axtel Street [Added
5-22-1995]
Between South Main Street and Hazzard
Street
Baker Street Between Chautauqua Avenue and
Delaware Avenue
Blackstone Avenue Between Minsker Street and Angove
Avenue
Buffalo Street [Added
10-12-1999]
Between North Main Street and
Prendergast Avenue
Chandler Street From Cross Street to Elk Street
Crescent Street Between Cheney Street and Bishop
Street
Crescent Street [Repealed 1-27-1997]
Dearing Avenue [Added
3-22-1999]
From Hotchkiss Street to Frink Avenue
Fifth Street From Jefferson Street to Fairmount
Avenue
Forest Park Entire length
Garfield Street From Sherman Street to Maple Street
Grandin Street Between Colfax Street and Sampson
Street
Hopkins Avenue (200
block)
Between Tiffany Avenue and the Hopkins
Avenue manufacturing facility of the
Chautauqua Hardware Corporation
Morton Street Entire length
Myers Avenue Entire length
Warner Place Entire length
A. Anything contained in  290-24 of this article notwithstanding and in
order to provide for snow removal, ice control, street cleaning and
maintenance, when signs have been posted giving notice thereof, there
shall be no parking between the hours and on the days of the week
specified by said signs on the streets enumerated by  290-24C, D, E
and F, of this article.
 290-24 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-25
288:532
 290-26. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle as follows:
 290-27. Removal and storage of vehicles. [Amended 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 12-17-2007]
B. In order to provide for snow removal, ice control, parking lot cleaning
and maintenance when signs have been posted giving notice thereof,
there shall be no parking between the hours and on the days of the
weeks specified by such signs in any off-street parking lot owned or
operated by the City of Jamestown.
C. When any vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, such vehicle may be ordered removed by the Chief of Police or
authorized personnel under his command.
A. Within any public alley for a longer period than is required to load or
unload merchandise or to take on or discharge passengers. The
foregoing notwithstanding, parking shall be permitted on the westerly
side of School Alley between Prather Avenue and the Foote Avenue
Arterial Highway.
B. Within 10 feet of any pump used for the sale of gasoline, when such
pump is situated on the sidewalk or near the curb.
C. Within any space designated and set apart as a cab stand or bus
terminal.
D. In front of a main entrance of any school, hotel or theater.
E. Within any area designated as a fire lane on private property in
Jamestown, New York, owned by Victor Management Corporation and
being known as the "Holiday Inn of Jamestown."
F. Within the area designated as Bradmar Circle on private property in
Jamestown, New York, owned by Bradmar Village Realty and known as
"Bradmar Village."
G. Within any area where parking is designated as prohibited on private
property in Jamestown, New York, owned by Bradmar Village Realty
and known as "Bradmar Village."
H. Within any area designated as a fire lane on private property and
located at 23 through 41 South Main Street, Jamestown, New York, and
owned by Cosima Corporation.
I. On Shirley Lane within 75 feet of its intersection with Fairmount
Avenue. [Added 12-20-2004]
A. Removal and storage of certain parked or abandoned vehicles shall be
as provided in Subsection A(1) through (13):
 290-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-27
288:533
(1) When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within
the City during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency
which affects that portion of the public highway upon which said
vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be ordered
removed by order of the Police Chief or authorized personnel under
his command.
(2) When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within the
City where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such
vehicle may be ordered removed by the Police Chief or authorized
personnel under his command.
(3) When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within
the City where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited,
blocking any driveway or yellow curbline, such vehicle may be
ordered removed by the Police Chief or authorized personnel under
his command.
(4) When any vehicle is found parked on any highway or other public
property in the City and such vehicle is unregistered or without
number plates, such vehicle may be ordered removed by the Police
Chief or authorized personnel under his command.
(5) When any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this  290-26, such vehicle may be ordered removed
by the Police Chief or authorized personnel under his command.
(6) When any vehicle is found parked on any industrial or commercial
property or property of the Jamestown Public Schools, Jamestown
Community College or property owned by any religious, charitable
or not-for-profit organization without the actual or implied consent
of the owner or authorized agent of the owner thereof, such vehicle
may be ordered removed by the Chief of Police or authorized
personnel under his command, provided that such removal is
requested in writing by the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of such property and further provided that legible signs shall have
first been erected on such property by such owner or authorized
agent giving notice that an unauthorized vehicle parked on such
property shall be removed at the expense of the owner of such
vehicle.
(7) When any vehicle is found parked on any residential property
without the consent of the owner thereof, such vehicle may be
ordered removed by the Chief of Police or authorized personnel
under his command upon the written request of such owner or
authorized agent.
(8) When it is determined by the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk, any police officer or parking enforcement officer that
any vehicle has $100 or more of delinquent parking tickets that
have been issued to the vehicle for violation of the parking
regulations of the City of Jamestown and that such tickets have not
 290-27 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-27
288:534
been paid, satisfied or disposed of, the vehicle shall be removed
to a place of safety within the City of Jamestown either by towing
or otherwise be removed or conveyed to and impounded in any
place designated by the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety, or
immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation, except
that no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than
by use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage
to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism
is in place. When towed, the vehicle so removed shall be retained
under the custody of the City of Jamestown Police Department
or its designated representative until such time that said parking
violations have been paid, satisfied or disposed of. Once taken into
custody, the last registered owner of said vehicle shall be liable.
[Amended 8-28-2017]
(9) It shall be the duty of the police officer with the assistance of the
parking enforcement officer removing or immobilizing such motor
vehicle or under whose direction such motor vehicle is removed or
immobilized to inform, as soon as practicable, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk, who shall in turn inform by
telephone (if possible) and by first-class mail the owner of the
impounded or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances
of the prior unsettled parking violations summonses for which or on
account of which such vehicle was impounded or immobilized. In
any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this
subsection, such police officer or parking enforcement officer shall
cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a
notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such
vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such
vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle. [Amended
8-28-2017]
(10) The owner or person entitled to possession of such vehicle shall pay
a towing charge and storage charge for each day or fraction thereof
after the first 24 hours that such vehicle is in the custody of the City
of Jamestown as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits.56
(11) These charges shall be in addition to the fines and penalties, if any,
hereinafter provided within this article for vehicles that are left
standing, stopped or parked illegally.
(12) Such towing charges shall be paid to the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk뭩 office during the hours such office is open,
weekends and legal holidays excepted. [Amended 8-28-2017]
(13) Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be
permitted to remove the same from the custody of the City of
Jamestown, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership
or right to possession of such vehicle and shall sign a receipt and
56.Editor's Note: See  175-6.
 290-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-27
288:535
 290-28. Modification to alternate-side parking.
release in such form as the Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk뭩 office and Jamestown Police Department shall prescribe;
provided, further, that such owner or person entitled to possession
of such vehicle may not obtain the release of such vehicle before
paying the towing, storage, outstanding parking summonses and
related penalties and other fees hereinabove mentioned.
[Amended 8-28-2017]
B. Whenever any vehicle is ordered removed by the Chief of Police/
Director of Public Safety or authorized personnel under his command
as provided by Subsection A(1) through (13) above, the expense of
vehicle removal and storage shall be the responsibility of the owner of
such vehicle, and the City of Jamestown shall have no liability for such
expenses, nor shall the City of Jamestown have any liability for any
damages whatsoever which may result from the authorized removal of
any vehicle pursuant to any of the provisions of Subsection A(1) through
(13) above.
C. Removal and storage of certain parked or abandoned vehicles shall be
of a last resort after proper notification to the recorded owner of the
vehicle of delinquent parking tickets that have been issued to the
vehicle for violation of the parking regulations of the City of Jamestown
and that such tickets have not been paid, satisfied or disposed of and
after proper publication in the City's designated newspaper.
A. Anyone seeking modification of the application of the provisions of
㎣ 290-21 through 290-25, referred to in this section as the "Alternate
Parking Ordinance," on a certain designated street shall do so by
submitting a request either individually or by petition to the
Department of Public Works Committee and the Public Safety
Committee of the City of Jamestown.
B. Upon receipt of a request for modification of the provisions of the
Alternate Parking Ordinance on a designated street, the Department of
Public Works Committee and Public Safety Committee shall
automatically table the request until the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Department of Public Works Committee.
C. During the period that a request is tabled as aforesaid, the request shall
be investigated by the Director of Public Works, who shall obtain from
the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety and the Deputy Fire Chief
recommendations on the request and the reasons therefor. [Amended
2-24-2003]
D. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Department of Public
Works Committee following the request for the modification of the
provision of the Alternate Parking Ordinance on a designated street, the
Department of Public Works Committee shall make its recommendation
based upon the recommendations of the Director of Public Works, the
 290-27 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-28
288:536
 290-29. Special or reserved parking permits.
Upon recommendation of the Department of Public Works Committee and
the approval of the Director of Public Works, a special reserved parking
space permit may be issued to a person engaged in mercantile business
which requires the loading and unloading of bulky parcels and has no other
means of access to his place of business except through the space covered
by such permit.
 290-30. Regulation of special or reserved parking spaces.
The Director of Public Works shall determine the size and location of such
reserved parking spaces, designated pursuant to  290-29. No vehicle shall
occupy such space for more than 30 minutes, nor shall any vehicle occupy
such space except when actually engaged in loading or unloading.
 290-31. Positioning of parked vehicle relative to curb.
All vehicles shall be parked parallel with the curb and not more than 12
inches from the curb, except on such streets where the Chief of Police has
properly marked parking spaces diagonally or at right angles to the curb,
where a vehicle shall be parked by heading into the curb and within the
lines established by the Chief of Police.
Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety and the Deputy Fire Chief and
shall forward its recommendation together with the reasons therefore
to the Chairperson of the Public Safety Committee. [Amended
2-24-2003]
E. The Chairperson of the Public Safety Committee shall, at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Public Safety Committee after
receipt of the recommendations of the Department of Public Works
Committee, bring the matter before the Public Safety Committee, which
Committee shall in turn make its recommendations, together with its
reasons therefor, to the City Council as a whole.
F. The City Council as a whole may then act upon the request for
modification of the provisions of the Alternate Parking Ordinance on a
designated street or may refuse to act upon such request at its
pleasure.
G. In the event that the recommendation of the Department of Public
Works Committee or the Public Safety Committee is to deny the request
for modification of the application of the Alternate Parking Ordinance
on a certain designated street, there shall be no requirement that the
request be considered by the City Council as a whole.
 290-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-32
288:537
 290-32. Parking of trailer or trailer trucks in residential or
mercantile areas.
No person shall park a trailer or trailer truck or any other vehicle with
dual wheels in the residential or mercantile areas of the City, as defined by
Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Jamestown, for more than
two hours on any day. "Dual wheels" are hereby construed to mean four
wheels mounted on the rear axle of a vehicle.
 290-33. Time limitation in congested area. [Amended 10-16-1995]
 290-34. Parking between curbline and sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle wholly or partially between the curbline
and the sidewalk of any street except where special provision has been
expressly made therefor.
A. Parking in the congested area shall be limited to the time stated on the
instruction plate on the parking meter or on the sign within the
specified parking zone.
B. There is hereby established within the Central Business District a twohour
free parking zone, which zone shall include Third Street between
Washington Street and Spring Street and Pine Street, Main Street, and
Cherry Street between Second Street and Fourth Street. Between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. each weekday, no person shall park a
motor vehicle within the aforesaid free parking zone for a period of time
in excess of a cumulative time of two hours per day within the zone.
[Added 7-15-1996; amended 6-9-1997; 8-20-2007]
 290-32 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-34
288:538
ARTICLE VIII
Parking Meters
 290-35. Installation and operation authorized.
The installation and operation of parking meters on such City streets and
off-street parking areas as may hereafter be designated from time to time by
the City Council is hereby authorized, and authorization for parking meter
installations on City streets and areas heretofore approved or existing as of
the date of this article is continued.
 290-36. Placement; information to be indicated.
 290-37. Position of parked vehicle in relation to parking meter.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall
be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle or the rearmost part
of such vehicle, as the case may be, shall be nearest to the parking meter.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or
sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the
foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such meter.
 290-38. Deposit of coin required; overtime parking.
A. Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones shall be placed
upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places
described in this chapter. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in
such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space
adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use.
B. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal
parking time established and, when operated, shall indicate on its dial
and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking. On the
expiration of such period, the meter shall indicate illegal or over
parking.
A. When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a
parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this
article, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking
space, deposit immediately or cause to be deposited a coin of the
United States in such meter. Failure to deposit such coin shall
constitute a breach of this chapter and shall subject such person to the
penalty described in this article.
B. Upon the deposit of such coin and placing such meter in operation, the
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the
period of parking time which has been prescribed for the part of the
street in which such parking space is located. If such vehicle shall
remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking limit fixed
for such parking space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and pointer,
 290-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-38
288:539
 290-39. Deposit of coin to extend allowed parking time.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the
purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond
the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space
adjacent to which such meter is placed.
 290-40. Parking or remaining after meter indicates overtime.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for
any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking
space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been
parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space.
 290-41. Deposit of slugs unlawful.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter to
deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or
metallic substitute for a coin of the United States.
 290-42. Tampering with meter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
 290-43. Duty of officers to report violations; required information.
[Amended 11-27-1995; 7-17-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000; 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
indicate such illegal parking; and in that event, such vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking
time in any such part of a street where any such meter is located and
shall be a violation of this article and punished as set out in this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
name of or driven by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the
period of legal parking established for any parking meter zone as
described in this article.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City, acting in accordance
with the instructions issued by the Chief of Police, and the parking
meter attendants of the City, acting in accordance with the instructions
issued by the Chief of Police or Director of Administrative Services/City
Clerk, to report the following information in regard to violations of this
article:
 290-38 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-43
288:540
 290-44. Penalty for violation of certain sections. [Amended
11-23-2009]
Every person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
㎣ 290-35 through 290-43 of this article shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the Judge of the City Court.
 290-45. Disposition of coins deposited in meters.
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this
article are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper
regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and also the cost
of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter
zones created by this article and to cover the cost of the purchase,
supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance,
control and use of the parking meters described in this article.
 290-46. Certain sections declared emergency measure.
Sections 290-35 through 290-45 are hereby declared to be an emergency
measure on the grounds of urgent public need for the preservation of peace,
health, safety and property.
 290-47. Exemption of certain vehicles; parking meter permits and
temporary parking meter permits; zone parking permits; loading or
unloading during certain hours. [Amended 4-27-1998; 8-17-1998]
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer and each such parking meter attendant shall
attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle
has been parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other
law and that the owner should report to the office of the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk in regard to such violation. The
owner may pay to the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk the
respective amount for the violation as indicated on said summons
attached to such vehicle.
C. The failure of such owner to make such payment to the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk within the time prescribed as
indicated on said summons shall render such owner subject to the
penalties provided by this chapter for violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
 290-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-47
288:541
A. Vehicles owned by the United States government, the state or any
political subdivision thereof are hereby authorized to use the spaces
designated as parking meter spaces without any payment for the use
thereof. The provisions of ㎣ 290-33 through 290-44 as to such vehicles
shall have no application.
B. Vehicles owned by public utility companies, cable television and other
similar service vehicles while making temporary installation, repair or
maintenance calls to customers, which calls are not routinely
scheduled, may display on the vehicle driver's side sun visor or
rearview mirror a permit exempting such vehicles from the provisions
of ㎣ 290-30 through 290-44 of this Code. Such permit or permits, as
the case may be, shall be obtained by applying, in writing, to the office
of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and by paying an
annual fee of $200 per vehicle. Each permit shall contain the dates valid
and the license plate number of the designated vehicle. Any vehicle
owned by a public utility company, cable television or other similar
service vehicle not displaying the permit aforesaid shall not be exempt
from ㎣ 290-30 through 290-44 of this chapter. [Amended
12-21-2005; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 3-23-2009;
11-27-2012; 8-28-2017]
C. Any licensed contractor requiring use of a metered space for a full day
or days due to construction, renovation or similar work at one location
may, on a temporary basis, receive a permit issued by the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk for exemption from ㎣ 290-30
through 290-44 of this Code. Said permit shall be issued upon
completion of a written application and the payment of a fee of $4 per
day for the duration of the permit. Each permit shall contain the dates
valid, the license plate number of the designated vehicle and a general
area for which the permit is valid. Issued permits shall be prominently
displayed above the registration/inspection stickers on the lower left
windshield of the vehicle or rearview mirror. Any vehicle of a licensed
contractor not displaying the permit required by this subsection shall
not be exempt from the provisions of ㎣ 290-30 through 290-44 of this
chapter. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 3-23-2009;
8-28-2017]
D. Vehicles owned by any person, firm or corporation, which person, firm
or corporation has a place of business physically located within the twohour
free parking zones in the Central Business District as defined by
 290-33 of this chapter, which person, firm or corporation utilizes a
vehicle or vehicles while making service calls, deliveries or pickups
within said two-hour free parking zones in the Central Business District
shall display on the vehicle driver's side sun visor or rearview mirror of
such vehicle a permit exempting such vehicle from the provisions of
 290-33 of this chapter. Such permit or permits, as the case may be,
shall be obtained by applying, in writing, to the office of the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk and by paying an annual fee of $300
per vehicle. Each permit shall contain the dates valid and the license
 290-47 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-47
288:542
plate number of the designated vehicle. Permits so issued shall be
applicable only to the vehicle for which application is made and shall
not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle. Any vehicle not displaying
the permit aforesaid shall not be exempt from the provisions of  290-33
of this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt
any vehicle displaying the permits authorized herein from the
provisions of ㎣ 290-35 through 290-44 of this chapter. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 11-27-2012; 8-28-2017]
E. For the sole purpose of loading and unloading, owners and operators of
vehicles bearing commercial licenses are hereby authorized, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon to use the spaces designated as
parking meter spaces without payment by them for the use thereof and
the provisions of  290-35 through 290-44 as to them shall have no
application.
 290-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-47
288:543

ARTICLE IX
Main Thoroughfares
 290-48. Designation of streets.
A. The following streets are hereby designated and set aside as main
thoroughfares, boulevards or main arteries of travel:
(1) North Main Street.
(2) South Main Street.
(3) West Second Street from Jefferson Street easterly to North Main
Street.
(4) East Second Street from North Main Street easterly to the City
line.
(5) East Third Street.
(6) West Third Street.
(7) East Fourth Street.
(8) West Fourth Street.
(9) East Fifth Street from North Main Street to Prendergast Avenue.
(10)West Fifth Street.
(11) East Sixth Street from North Main Street to Lakeview Avenue.
(12)West Sixth Street, Foote Avenue, Cole Avenue from Forest Avenue
to Foote Avenue.
(13) McDaniel Avenue from Harding Avenue to Fairmount Avenue.
(14) Falconer Street.
(15)Washington Street.
(16) Newland Avenue from Hallock Street to Foote Avenue.
(17) Buffalo Street.
(18) Fairmount Avenue from the City line to Hall Avenue.
(19) Livingston Avenue.
(20) Forest Avenue from New York State Arterial Highway south to the
City line.
(21) Baker Street.
(22) Hazeltine Avenue from Baker Street to Forest Avenue.
(23) Martin Road.
 290-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-48
288:545
(24) Camp Street.
(25)Willard Street.
(26) Harrison Street.
(27) Allen Street.
(28)Winsor Street from Second Street to Allen Street.
(29) Fluvanna Avenue.
(30) Jones & Gifford Avenue.
(31) Hallock Street from West Third Street to Newland Avenue.
 290-48 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-48
288:546
ARTICLE X
One-Way Streets
 290-49. One-way streets enumerated.
When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, traffic upon the streets
or portions of streets set out in this section shall move only in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Alfred Street
[Repealed 8-25-2014]
Carroll Street East From West Sixth Street to
Murray Avenue
Church Street South From East Fifth Street to East
Fourth Street
East Second Street East From Main Street to Third
Street
East Fourth Street West From Prendergast Avenue to
Main Street
East Fifth Street East From Main Street to
Prendergast Avenue
East Sixth Street West From Prendergast Avenue to
Main Street
Elk Street South From Chandler Street to
Franklin Street
Fairmount Avenue North From West Third Street to
Hamilton Street (easterly)
First Street [Added
9-17-2001]
East North Main Street to Institute
Street
Flagg Avenue East Entire length
Isabella Avenue West From Washington Street to
Lafayette Street
Jefferson Street [Repealed 11-17-2003]
Mechanics Alley North From West Fifth Street to West
Sixth Street
Monroe Street North From West Third Street to West
Fourth Street
Murray Avenue South From West Fifth Street to
Monroe Street
Prospect Street South From Allen Street to Prather
Avenue
 290-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-49
288:547
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Taylor Street East From South Main Street to
Harrison Street
Twenty-First Street
[Added 8-11-1997]
West North Main Street to Twenty-
Second Street
West Fifth Street East From West Sixth Street to Main
Street
West Fourth Street West From Main Street to West
Third Street
West Second Street
[Amended
11-17-2003]
East From Lafayette Street to Main
Street
West Sixth Street West From Main Street to West Fifth
Street
 290-49 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-49
288:548
ARTICLE XI
Truck Route System
 290-50. Applicability.
 290-51. Signs.
All streets forming part of such truck route system shall be marked by
conspicuous signs bearing the words "truck route" in letters not less than
five inches in height, such signs to be spaced not more than 1,500 feet
apart. In addition, conspicuous signs bearing lettering not less than five
inches in height, adequately illuminated between sunset and sunrise or to
be constructed of a reflecting material so as to be easily readable at night
when lights from vehicle headlights fall upon such signs, shall be placed
on each main highway entering the City, at or near the point where such
highway crosses or meets the boundary line of the City, indicating that
trucks having a weight in excess of five tons, including load, are excluded
from all streets within the City, except those streets designated as part of
the authorized truck route system.
 290-52. Compliance required. [Amended 10-26-2009]
No person, firm or corporation shall drive or operate or cause to be driven
or operated any excluded truck into, upon, along or through the streets
of the City in violation of the provisions of this article unless it has first
obtained a special hauling permit for over dimensional and overweight
A. Any truck having a total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of five tons shall be excluded from all streets in the City, except
from those streets or parts of streets hereinafter listed or described
which form a part of the system of truck routes upon which trucks are
permitted to travel and operate.
B. The total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load shall be
ascertained by computing the entire weight of the truck or vehicle plus
load or, in the event that such vehicle is a tractor-trailer combination,
then by computing the entire weight of a tractor and trailer plus load.
C. Such exclusions shall not prevent the necessary delivery of
merchandise or other property along the streets from which trucks are
excluded, provided that the vehicle from which any such delivery is
made shall enter and leave any such designated truck route by the
nearest accessible street to the place where such delivery is made, and
provided that such delivery vehicles shall remain on such prohibited
streets for a period of time no longer than necessary and reasonable to
make such delivery or to complete a loading of such vehicle; nor shall
such exclusions prevent the necessary operation of trucks while in use
by the United States Postal Service or military services or by fire,
police, sanitation or street maintenance services, or by public
transportation corporations on franchised routes or by public service
corporations while on emergency repair work.
 290-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-52
288:549
vehicles from the Director of Public Works and paid the applicable fees in
accordance with  175-3B, Licenses and Permits.
 290-53. Truck routes established. [Amended 12-21-2005]
 290-54. Unrestricted area. [Amended 12-21-2005]
In addition to the above-designated system of truck routes, the following
described and bounded unrestricted area of the City and the streets
enclosed therein shall also constitute and be a part of the City's system of
truck routes:
A. The following listed streets or parts of streets as herein designated
shall constitute the system of truck routes in the City:
(1) New York State touring routes (posted route number signs).
(a) Route 60.
(b) Route 394.
(c) Route 430.
(2) New York State owned reference routes (no route number signs
posted).
(a) Washington Street from Fluvanna Avenue to West 6th Street
(reference route #951C).
(b) Forest Avenue from Washington Street to City line (reference
route #952P).
(c) McDaniel - Third Street Arterial from Fairmount Avenue to
Monroe Street (reference route #954K).
(3) City streets.
(a) Livingston Avenue (from Fairmount Avenue to the City line).
A. East Second Street from Tiffany Avenue at easterly City line to East
Fourth Street; to Prendergast Avenue; to East Sixth Street; to North
Main Street; to Eighth Street; to Fairmount Avenue; to Jones & Gifford
Avenue; to westerly City line; along westerly City line to railroad tracks,
along railroad tracks to West Sixth Street; to Whitley Avenue; to Steele
Street; to West Harrison Street, to Washington Street (Bridge); along
Washington Street to Arterial, to Institute Street; to Allen Street; to
Tiffany Avenue at easterly City line; and to the point of beginning,
namely: East Second Street at Tiffany Avenue at easterly City line.
 290-52 JAMESTOWN CODE  290-55
288:550
 290-55. Map. [Amended 11-27-1995; 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
An accurate map setting out the truck route system shall be kept on file in
the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and shall be
available to the public.
 290-56. Enforcement of article.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this
article. In enforcing this article, the Chief of Police shall have the authority
to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle
proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is prohibited
to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of
weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with.
 290-57. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished pursuant to  1800 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
state.
 290-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED  290-57
288:551
Chapter 292
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
Vehicles and traffic  See Ch. 290.
Zoning  See Ch. 300.
 292-1. Storage restricted. [Amended 8-16-2004; 9-26-2005]
It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any unregistered motor vehicle of
any kind upon public property, or for the owner or occupant of any property
to allow, permit or suffer the same to be left upon any privately owned
property within the City of Jamestown unless the vehicle is stored in a
garage of suitable dimensions or the property owner is a junk dealer duly
licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 235, Secondhand Dealers
and Junkyards, hereof or the owner of the vehicle is registered by the State
of New York to engage in a business requiring limited operation of motor
vehicles.
 292-2. Notice of violation. [Amended 5-10-1999]
No violation of this chapter shall be found except upon proof that seven
days' notice thereof was given, by personal service or registered mail, to
the last known address of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is
located or the owner of the vehicle.
 292-3. Immediate removal of hazard.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Chief of Police or another police
officer from removing from private property without notice any unattended
motor vehicle, the presence of which constitutes a danger or hazard to
others; provided, however, that the Chief of Police shall, within 48 hours of
such removal, mail a notice of such removal to the last known registrant of
the vehicle.
 292-4. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties.
 290-57 JAMESTOWN CODE  292-4
292:552
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Economic development zones  See Ch. 18.
Planning Commission  See Ch. 61.
Dogs and other animals  See Ch. 125.
Environmental quality review  See Ch. 135.
Flood damage prevention  See Ch. 145.
Freshwater wetlands  See Ch. 149.
Gasoline sales  See Ch. 165.
Licenses and permits  See Ch. 175.
Parks and public lands  See Ch. 193.
Property rehabilitation and
conservation  See Ch. 215.
Secondhand dealers and junkyards  See Ch.
235.
Sewers  See Ch. 240.
Signs and encroachments  See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks  See Ch. 252.
Subdivision of land  See Ch. 260.
Swimming pools  See Ch. 265.
Trees and shrubs  See Ch. 280.
 292-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  292-4
292:553

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 300-0101. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority and power granted under  20 of the General City
Law and  10 of the Municipal Home Rule law of the State of New York, and
all amendments thereto, the City Council of the City of Jamestown, County
of Chautauqua, State of New York, hereby ordains, enacts and publishes the
following law which establishes a Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the
City of Jamestown by dividing the territory thereof into certain zoning use
districts and prescribing regulations and standards for buildings and other
structures and the use of land therein.
 300-0102. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Jamestown, New York."
 300-0103. Purpose and applicability.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to require that all future
public and private development within the City of Jamestown be
required to conform to the regulations of this chapter for the purpose of
promoting public health, safety and general welfare and prescribing the
most desirable use for the land in each district while conserving the
value of land throughout the City. The following are hereby restricted
and regulated as hereinafter provided: the height, bulk and location of
buildings and other structures; the area of yards, courts, setbacks and
other open spaces; the density of population and intensity of use of
buildings and land; the use, conservation and development of unique
waterfront areas; the use of structures and land for residential,
recreational, industrial, commercial, institutional or other purposes.
B. Such regulations have been designed to preserve open space; lessen
congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire, flood and other
dangers; provide adequate light, air and convenience of access; and
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks and other public services. Such regulations have been
made with reasonable regard, among other things, to the character of
each district and its suitability for particular uses as well as the value of
buildings, land and uses to promote the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City of Jamestown.
C. The regulations contained in this chapter have been made in
accordance with the City of Jamestown Comprehensive Plan as adopted
and certified as being the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City by
resolution of the Jamestown City Council dated April 13, 1998.
 300-0101 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0104
292:555
 300-0104. Severability.
If any section, subsection, phrase, sentence or other portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
 300-0105. Rules of language construction.
The following rules of language construction shall apply to the text of this
chapter:
 300-0106. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE  A use or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and (except as
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
C. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, firm or corporation.
E. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
G. Any reference to an "R District" shall be interpreted to mean any
district with the prefix letter "R."
H. A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
I. Any reference to a "C District" shall be interpreted to mean any district
with the prefix letter "C."
J. Any reference to an "M District" shall be interpreted to mean the "L-M"
and "M" Districts.
K. "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply.
L. "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
M. "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly but not in any combination.
 300-0104 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0106
292:556
otherwise provided) located on the same lot with such principal use or
building.
ADULT USES  Any establishment or use which meets any of the following
definitions:
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION  A use which has as its primary function the
cultivation and harvesting of crops, the grazing of livestock or other farm
animals and/or the breeding of undomesticated animals.
ALTERATION  Any change, rearrangement or addition to or any relocation
of a building or structure.
ATTIC  Any area under a roof, with or without a finished floor, which does
not meet other requirements for livable floor area.
AUTOMOTIVE USE AREA  Any area which facilitates vehicular traffic
by means of parking, ingress, egress, access, loading space, driveways,
maneuvering space or drive-through areas.
BACK-TO-BACK SIGN  A billboard consisting of two sign facings oriented
in opposite directions.[Added 2-28-2005]
BANNER  A temporary sign intended to be hung either with or without
a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations
applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind.[Added 2-28-2005]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT  An owner-occupied, singlefamily
dwelling used for providing overnight accommodations and a
morning meal to not more than 10 transient lodgers, containing at least
three but not more than five bedrooms for such lodgers. The maximum
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS  An establishment
which presents topless or bottomless performers or similar types of
entertainment which excludes any minor by reason of age.
A.
ADULT BOOK OR VIDEO STORES  An establishment which as its
primary function includes the sale or rental of materials which can not
be viewed, purchased or rented by any minor by reason of age.
B.
ADULT THEATER OR PEEP SHOW  An establishment which presents
material in the form of films, videotapes or live shows which cannot be
viewed by any minor by reason of age.
C.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR  An establishment where massages are
administered for pay. This definition shall not be construed to include
any licensed physical therapist, duly licensed massage therapist,
hospital, physician, medical clinic, chiropractor, nursing homes or
barber shops or beauty salons of which massages are administered only
to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders. This definition shall also exclude
health clubs which have facilities for physical exercise as their primary
function.
D.
ADULT MOTEL  A hotel or motel which excludes minors by reason of
age.
E.
 300-0106 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0106
292:557
length of stay for the transient lodgers is 14 days. All requirements of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code must be
complied with.[Added 12-16-2002]
BILLBOARD (off-premises advertising sign)  A sign which advertises a
business, product or service which is not located on premises. Also referred
to as an "off-premises outdoor advertising sign."[Amended 2-28-2005;
12-23-2008]
BUILDING  A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof to form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals or
property, but not a trailer.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED  A building separated on all sides
from the adjacent open area or from other buildings or other structures by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls pierced only by windows
or normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING HEIGHT  The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs and to the mean height between the leaves and
the ridge of gable, hip, mansard, pitch or gambrel roofs. For the purpose
of determining the maximum permitted height for principal buildings, such
measurement shall be made from the average finished grade at the front
setback. For the purpose of side yard or rear yard determination, such
measurement shall be made from the average finished grade of the wall
extending along said side yard or rear yard.
CELLULAR PHONE TOWER  Any tower which serves as a conduit for
transmitting cellular phone signals.
COMMUNITY GARDEN  Privately or publicly owned land used for the
cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users.
Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by
one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of
the group and may include common areas maintained or used by group
members. A source of water must be provided. A community garden must
have liability insurance by the property owner or community garden
operator. [Added 6-24-2013]
COPY CENTER  A business of photocopying and duplication. Such
business shall not include, as its primary means of reproduction, the
utilization of industrial printing presses.
DAY-CARE CENTER  Any use which has as its primary function the
temporary daytime care of persons.
DECORATIVE BANNER  Banners designed for long-term use that are not
intended to act as signage to advertise a specific business or the sale of a
specific product. Decorative banners may, however, contain sponsor tags, if
they are part of a formally approved program by the City Council.[Added
2-28-2005]
 300-0106 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0106
292:558
DOUBLE FACED SIGN  A billboard with two adjacent faces oriented in the
same direction and not more than 10 feet apart at the nearest point between
the two faces.[Added 2-28-2005]
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY  An external customer service area which
can be attached or standing alone in any commercial or manufacturing
zone. A drive-through facility is composed of two parts: the stacking lane
and the service area. The stacking lane is the space occupied by vehicles
queuing for service to be provided. The service area is the space where the
service is provided.
DRIVEWAY  An automotive use area which serves as a means of ingress
or egress to any use.
DWELLING  A building used as the living quarters for one or more
families, but not including a building of mixed occupancy. (See definition of
"mixed occupancy" below.)
DWELLING GROUP  A group of two or more dwellings located on the
same lot and having any yard or open space in common.
DWELLING UNIT  One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one
family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.
EARTH STATION OR DISH ANTENNA  Any antenna the purpose of which
is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites or
other extraterrestrial sources, or from other earth stations or dish antennas,
along with associated equipment to receive, magnify, interpret and transfer
such signals.
ENLARGEMENT  An increase in floor area of an existing building or an
increase in the area of land used for an existing open use.
EXTENSION  An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use in an existing building.
FACADE, FRONT  The principle face of a building fronting the street(s) of
direct access, not including the roofline or roof area.
FAMILY  One or more persons living together in one dwelling unit and
maintaining a common household, including domestic servants and
gratuitous guests, together with boarders, roomers or lodgers not in excess
of the number allowed by this Code as an accessory use.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING  A building containing one dwelling unit
and designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING  A building containing two dwelling units
and designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other, or two one-family dwellings having a party
wall in common.
B.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING  A building containing three or more
dwelling units and designed or used for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other.
C.
 300-0106 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0106
292:559
FRONTAGE  That portion of a lot extending between the side property
lines and situated on the front yard property line.
GARAGE, ATTACHED  A private garage which is structurally attached to
a principal building and which has livable floor area adjoining one or more
walls thereof.
GARAGE, PRIVATE  An accessory building or portion of a main building
used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles used by the occupants of the
premises and which may include space for not more than one passenger
vehicle used by others.
GARAGE, REPAIR  Any garage, other than a private garage or gasoline
service station, which is used for the storage, repair, rental, greasing,
washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor
vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION  Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used primarily for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle
fuel. Accessory uses may include the sale of oil, other lubricating substances
or motor vehicle accessories or facilities for lubricating, for washing, the
incidental replacement of parts or for motor service to passenger
automobiles or trucks not exceeding 1 1/2 tons' rated capacity, but shall not
include general repair, the rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor
vehicles or trailers or collision service, body repair, frame straightening,
painting, undercoating, vehicle steam cleaning or upholstering.
HOME GARDEN  The property of a single-family or multifamily residence
used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by
the residents of the property, or a gardening business hired by the property
owner.[Added 6-24-2013]
HOME OCCUPATION  Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on only by the residents thereof and which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and
does not change the character thereof, provided that:
HOTEL  A building containing sleeping rooms, which lodging is provided
primarily for transient guests for compensation and which may include
public dining facilities.
A. Only customary home appliances are used;
There is no exterior evidence of such home occupation other than a
permitted identification sign;
B.
Said home occupation shall not have customer clientele visiting the
premises on a regular basis;
C.
No article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced by
members of the family residing on the premises; and
D.
Any use first permitted in the C District or M District shall not be
interpreted as being a home occupation.
E.
 300-0106 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0106
292:560
JUNK BUSINESS  The maintenance of a place where junk, waste or
discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, sorted,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, handled or abandoned, but not
including pawnshops, antique shops or establishments for the sale,
purchase or storage of used furniture, household equipment, clothing, used
motor vehicles capable of being registered or machinery to be reused for
the purpose for which originally manufactured.
KENNEL  The keeping of more than two dogs that are more than six
months old for the purpose of grooming, breeding, boarding, training or
sales.
LOT  A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a principal
building or use or a group of principal buildings or uses that are united by
a common interest or customary accessory buildings or uses, and including
such open spaces to be used in connection with such buildings or uses. A
"lot" may or may not be a lot of record.
LOT, CORNER  A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
LOT DEPTH  The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, INTERIOR  A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT  Where a lot abuts upon only one street, the lot
line along such street shall be the front lot line. Where a lot line abuts
upon more than one street, the assessment roll of the municipality shall
determine the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR  Any lot line which is opposite and more or less parallel
with the front lot line. In the case of a lot which comes to a point at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line, 10 feet in length, entirely within
the lot, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINES  The property lines bounding the lot. Where a lot abuts a
street or is partly contained in a street, the lot line shall be deemed to be
a line drawn parallel to the center line of the street and 30 feet distance
therefrom measured at right angles thereto.
LOT LINE, SIDE  Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH  A lot in which the front lot line and rear lot line abut a
street.
LOT WIDTH  The least horizontal distance across the lot between side
lot lines, measured at the front setback of a main building erected or to
be erected on such lot or at a distance from the front lot line equal to the
required depth of the front yard.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT OR CLEAN  Any manufacturing use which is
wholly contained within an enclosed building and will not produce odors,
chemicals, dust, smoke, gases, noises or vibrations beyond the limits of the
walls of an enclosed building. Such use shall not have an adverse impact on
 300-0106 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0106
292:561
the surrounding area or environment nor be a menace to public health or
safety.
MIXED OCCUPANCY  Occupancy of a building in part as the living
quarters for one or more families and in part for some other use not
accessory thereto. For the purpose of determining off-street parking
requirements, that part of such building used as living quarters shall be
considered as dwellings.
MOTEL  A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed
primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing accessory offstreet
parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as
motor lodges, auto courts and similar appellations.
MURAL  A picture, design or decorative treatment painted on or
otherwise adhered to and covering a large portion of a wall surface,
including sculpture and sculptural treatments of solid elements for the
purpose of this definition.[Added 2-28-2005]
MUSEUM  A building having public significance by reason of its
architecture or former use or occupancy and/or a building serving as a
repository for natural, scientific, historical, artistic, cultural or literary
collections or objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged, intended
and designed to be used by members of the public for viewing which may
include as accessory uses, theaters, restaurants and/or the sale of goods to
the public as gifts or for their own use.[Added 4-27-2015]
NONCONFORMING USE  Any lawful building or structure or any lawful
use of land, premises, buildings or structures which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter for the district in which such building, structure
or use is located either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments hereto.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME  Any building where persons are
housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN  An off-premises advertising sign
is an identification, description or illustration which directs attention to a
product, person, business, or service not offered or sold as the primary
use, business, or activity on the premises where it is located.[Added
12-23-2008]
PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT  A business of commercial printing, where
the primary instrument of printing is an industrial printing press.
PROPERTY LINE, EXTERIOR  Any property line which abuts a street,
private drive or cul-de-sac.
PROPERTY LINE, INTERIOR  Any property line which does not abut a
street, private drive or cul-de-sac.
REPAIR  The replacement or renewal, excluding additions, of any part of
a building, structure, device or equipment with like or similar materials or
 300-0106 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0106
292:562
parts for the purpose of maintenance of such building, structure, device or
equipment.
RESERVOIR SPACE  A temporary storage space, exclusive of street area
or required parking spaces, for a vehicle waiting for service or admission.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN  An eating establishment whose customers are
normally provided with quick food and drink service and may retire outside
of the principal building to consume their purchase.
RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE  An eating establishment where the
products sold are consumed within a completely enclosed building, the
taking out of food or drink from said building is purely incidental and the
consumption of food and/or drink in vehicles on the premises on which said
building is located is prohibited.
SETBACK  The least distance from any existing or proposed building or
structure to the nearest point in an indicated property line.
SIGN  Any structure or part thereof, or any device which is attached to,
painted on or represented on a building or other structure which includes
any representation used for the purpose of announcing, directing,
advertising or directing attention to any business, product, service or
opinion. However, a "sign" shall not include any flag, pennant or insignia
representing noncommercial copy.
SIGN, FLASHING  A moving or animated sign or any illuminated sign
on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and
constant in intensity or color at all times when in use. Any revolving
illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED  Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light
or designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT  An authorization of a particular land use which is
permitted by specific reference in this chapter subject to requirements or
conditions which assure that the proposed use is in harmony with the intent
of this chapter and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood.
STORY  That portion of a building between the surface of any finished
floor and the surface of the finished floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET  Any road, avenue, land, alley or other way which is an existing
public way or which is shown on an approved plat, or any private right-ofway
or easement approved by the City Council.
STREET, ACCESS  Any street from which a property can be accessed by
vehicular traffic.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION  Any change in the supporting members of
a building or other structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
 300-0106 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0106
292:563
STRUCTURE  Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having such location,
but not including a trailer.
TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME  A vehicle used for living or sleeping
purposes, standing on wheels or on rigid supports.
USE  The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE, AREA  The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
VARIANCE, USE  The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited
by the applicable zoning regulations.
V-TYPE SIGN  A billboard, which consists of two separate facings placed
at angles to each other oriented in different directions at an angle not to
exceed 45.[Added 2-28-2005]
YARD  That portion of a lot extending open and unobstructed from the
ground upward.
YARD, FRONT  A yard extending between the side lot lines and situated
between the property line and the front line of the principal building or use
projected to the side line of the lot.
YARD, FRONT EQUIVALENT  That portion of a rear yard of a through lot
extending along an exterior property line for a depth equal to a required
front yard. Any front yard equivalent shall be subject to the regulations of
this chapter which apply to front yards.
YARD, REAR  A yard extending between the side lot lines and situated
between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building or use
projected to the side lot lines; on a corner lot, a yard extending between
the interior side lot line and the exterior side yard and situated between the
rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building or use projected to
such interior side lot line and exterior side yard.
YARD, REQUIRED  A yard having a depth or width set forth in the
applicable district regulations. Such width or depth shall be measured
perpendicular to lot lines.
YARD, SIDE  A yard extending between the front yard and the rear yard
and situated between the side lot line and the adjacent side line of the
principal building or use; on a corner lot where a side lot line abuts a street,
a yard extending between the front yard and the rear lot line and situated
between the side lot line and the side line of the principal building or use
projected to the rear lot line.
A. EXTERIOR SIDE YARD  A side yard abutting a street.
INTERIOR SIDE YARD  A side yard abutting on a lot line of an
adjoining lot.
B.
 300-0106 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0106
292:564
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
 300-0201. Applicability.
 300-0202. Effect on prior construction.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the construction of a
building or other structure which is made nonconforming by this chapter
or subsequent amendment hereto for which a building permit has been
lawfully issued, provided that either construction of the foundation shall
have commenced prior to the nonconforming date, and construction
thereafter is diligently prosecuted; or the Board of Appeals makes a finding
that substantial expenditures have been made or substantial financial
obligations have been incurred for such nonconforming building or
structure prior to the nonconforming date.
 300-0203. Conflicts with other regulations.
Whenever any provision of this chapter is at variance or conflicts with any
other provision of this chapter or of any other statute, local ordinance,
local law or regulation covering any of the same subject matter, the most
restrictive provision or the one imposing the higher standard shall govern.
A. Except as herein provided, the regulations of this chapter shall not be
so construed as to limit or interfere with the dedication, development or
use of any land or building for public parks, playgrounds or public
schools required for compulsory education or with the use of land or
buildings owned by the United States government, the State of New
York or any agency or municipality thereof, the County of Chautauqua
or the City of Jamestown and used for governmental purposes or with
the construction, installation, operation and maintenance for public
utility purposes of water or gas mains or conduits, electric light or
electric power transmission lines or distribution lines, or distribution
facilities, telephone or telegraph lines, cable television lines, steam or
district heating transmission lines, sewers, sewer mains or railroad
rights-of-way existing or hereafter authorized by the City of Jamestown.
B. These exemptions, however, shall not be interpreted to permit yards,
garages or other buildings for the storage of materials or equipment
which are otherwise permitted by this chapter as specific permitted
uses in appropriate districts.
C. These exemptions, however, shall not be interpreted to exclude or
exempt any public school or governmental entity or agency from the
site plan review regulations of this chapter.
D. These exemptions, however, shall not be interpreted to exclude any
public school or governmental entity or agency from the regulations of
this chapter in the performance of a proprietary function.
 300-0201 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0204
292:565
 300-0204. Interpretation of permitted uses.
If any use could be construed to be incorporated within a more general
use listing, the more specific listing, if any, shall control. Where a use is
first listed in a less restricted district, such use shall not be construed to
be permitted in a more restricted district. No use shall be permitted in
any zoning district unless stated to be permitted in a specific or general
permitted use listing for such zoning district.
 300-0205. Visibility at intersections.
For every corner lot, no sign, fence, wall, shrub planting or tree foliage
which obstructs vision or is three to seven feet above the street level
shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting property lines and a straight line joining such property line at
points which are 30 feet distant from the point of intersection measured
along such property line. Authority to enforce this regulation shall lie with
the Department of Public Works.
 300-0206. Fences in residential districts.
 300-0207. Removal of topsoil.
No person shall strip, evacuate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or for
use other than on the premises from which the same shall be taken, except
in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises or evacuation or grading incidental thereto. In the manufacturing
districts, removal of topsoil and surface dirt shall be permitted insofar as
adjoining street grades are adhered to.
 300-0208. Excavation and sale of sand, gravel and other deposits.
Provided that said excavation complies with all State of New York
regulations for mining, there may be permitted in any noncommercial
district, on approval by the Board of Appeals as provided for in this chapter,
the excavation and sale of sand, gravel, clay, shale or other natural mineral
A. Except as otherwise regulated under corner visibility provisions and
required screening, ornamental fences not over 3.5 feet may be located
in any required open space, and a fence not over six feet in height may
be located in any rear or side yard except an exterior side yard. The
installation or maintenance, however, of any wire fence with exposed
sharp points, barbs or electric charges in any R District is hereby
prohibited.
B. No fence, wall, shrub planting, tree foliage or other permanent
structure within five feet of the side of any driveway, which obstructs
vision or is three feet or higher above sidewalk level, shall be placed or
maintained within eight feet of the point at which said driveway
intersects a sidewalk.
 300-0204 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0208
292:566
deposit, except topsoil, and there may be permitted the quarrying of any
kind of rock formation subject to the following conditions:
 300-0209. Flood-prone areas.
Within all flood-prone areas (as defined by Flood Insurance Rate Maps and
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, Community Panel Numbers 360141
0001-0006), the following guidelines shall apply:
A. In the case of any open excavation, there shall be a substantial fence
with suitable gates completely enclosing the portion of the property in
which the excavation is located, and such fence shall be located at all
points 40 feet or more distance from the edge of such excavation.
B. The slope of the material and such sand, gravel or other pit shall not
exceed the normal angle of repose of such material, and the plane of
such angle or repose shall not come closer than 40 feet to any property
line.
C. In the case of a quarry or other excavation in rock, there shall be a
substantial fence with suitable gates at all points a distance of 40 feet
or more from the base of any quarry wall.
D. No rockcrusher, cement plant or other crushing, grinding, polishing or
cutting machinery or other physical or chemical processes for treating
the product of such a quarry shall be permitted.
E. No such quarry wall shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line.
F. The product of such quarry shall be removed in the form in which it is
quarried.
A. Any development within a floodplain shall comply with all pertinent
state and federal regulations and with chapter 145 of the City Code.
B. This law prohibits any person, firm or corporation from erecting,
constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, improving, moving or
demolishing any building or structure without first obtaining a separate
building permit for each building or structure from the Building
Inspector. A floodplain development permit shall also be required.
C. The Building Inspector shall examine all plans and specifications for
proposed construction when application is made for a building permit.
D. The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for
new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that has a flooding hazard, any
proposed new construction or substantial improvement shall:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent floatation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
 300-0208 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0209
292:567
 300-0210. Temporary structures or uses.
The following temporary structures shall be deemed to be permitted uses in
all zoning districts:
 300-0211. Street frontage required.
In all districts, with respect to all uses, every lot shall have at least 50 feet
of frontage on a public or private street or cul-de-sac.
 300-0212. Gasoline service stations and repair garages.
(2) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage; and
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
E. The Department of Public Works shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
F. The Department of Public Works shall require new or replacement
water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and require on-site
waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them
or contamination from them during flooding.
G. The Building Inspector shall require the issuance of a permit for any
development (as defined in  145-5 of the City Code) in the flood hazard
area.
A. Temporary structures or uses incidental to construction work shall be
permitted for the duration required for the completion of said work.
Any such structure shall be removed forthwith upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. The temporary use of a dwelling as a model home for a period of time
not to exceed three months.
A. No part of any building used as a gasoline service station and no filling
pump, lift or other service appliance shall be erected within 25 feet of
an R District boundary.
 300-0209 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0212
292:568
 300-0213. Uniform code provisions.
The Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as amended from time
to time, shall form part of this chapter. Where there is a conflict between
the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and this chapter, the more
restrictive shall prevail. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed.
 300-0214. Keeping of dogs in residential districts. [Amended
2-23-2009]
B. No gasoline or oil pump, no oiling or greasing mechanism and no other
service appliance shall be installed in connection with any gasoline
service station within 20 feet of any property line.
C. Storage of gasoline shall be in underground tanks approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department, in accordance with the standards
specified by the National Fire Protection Association.
D. Storage of gasoline shall be in underground tanks approved by the Fire
Inspector in accordance with the standards specified by the National
Fire Protection Association. [Amended 2-24-2003]
E. Gasoline service stations and repair garages are prohibited from
locating these facilities within 200 feet (from the top of bank) of the
Chadakoin River. [Added 6-24-2013]
A. The keeping and maintenance of a large number of dogs on residential
premises is detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to the good order,
health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Jamestown.
B. The keeping of a large number of dogs on residential property has an
adverse impact on the value of neighboring properties.
C. The maximum allowable number of dogs on a premises that is classified
as a one- or two-family residence or any commercial property shall be
three for the entire premises.
D. For premises that are classified as multiple dwellings, those properties
containing three or more units, the maximum allowable number of dogs
on the premises shall be one per household.
E. No owner of a dog shall keep or harbor a dog in an unclean or
unsanitary manner.
F. No owner of a dog shall fail to provide adequate food, water or space for
such dog. "Adequate" shall mean sufficient for the age and size of each
dog on the premises per veterinary standards.
G. It shall be the duty of every dog owner or person having possession,
custody or control of a dog to remove any feces left by said dog on any
property within the corporate boundaries of the City of Jamestown and
 300-0212 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0214
292:569
 300-0215. Earth stations and dish antennas.
Earth stations and dish antennas are permitted in any district, provided
that:
deposit the feces in a sealed container lawfully used for the disposal of
refuse.
H. Individuals who currently 1) own more than three dogs in a one- or twofamily
residence or commercial property or 2) own more than one dog
per household in a multiple dwelling (three or more units) shall have
180 days to comply with the provisions of this section. If, after 180 days,
individuals continue to be in violation of this section, they may be
subject to the penalties outlined in  1-1 of the Jamestown City Code.
A. A building permit shall be obtained from the Department of Public
Works with plans and specifications.
B. There shall be no more than one antenna or station per structure in any
L-C or residential district; nor shall there be more than four antennas or
stations in any commercial or manufacturing district.
C. Said antenna or station shall not be located in any front yard.
D. Said antenna or station shall not exceed the following:
(1) Four feet in diameter when located in any side yard or on any
rooftop.
(2) Ten feet in diameter when located in any rear yard.
E. Said antenna or station shall not stand at a height greater than the
highest point of the principal structure on the same lot or parcel.
F. Should the station or antenna be situated on the ground, it shall be
sufficiently screened through the use of landscaping or architectural
features which harmonize with the elements and the characteristics of
the property and adjacent properties per the approval of the
Department of Public Works.
G. Should the station or antenna be situated on the ground, it shall be set
back at least 10 feet from the adjacent property lines.
H. The owner of an earth station or dish antenna shall assume complete
liability in case of personal injury, death or property damage which may
result from the installation, maintenance, use or operation of such earth
station or dish antenna, and the City of Jamestown shall in no event
have any liability therefor.
I. Earth stations and dish antennas shall meet all manufacturers'
specifications and shall be capable of withstanding a maximum wind
load of 100 miles per hour.
 300-0214 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0215
292:570
 300-0216. Cellular phone towers.
Cellular phone towers shall only be permitted in C and M Districts, provided
that:
 300-0217. Community and home gardens. [Added 6-24-2013]
Community and home gardens shall only be permitted in an R-1, R-2 and
R-C Districts provided that:
J. All earth stations and dish antennas shall be maintained in good
condition and in accordance with the requirements of this section. No
additions, changes or modifications shall be made to an earth station or
dish antenna unless the addition, change or modification is in
conformity with the provisions of this section and such addition, change
or modification is approved by the Building Inspector by the issuance of
an amended building permit.
K. No earth station or dish antenna shall bear any commercial or
noncommercial copy other than that of the manufacturer of said
antenna or station.
A. A building permit shall be obtained from the Department of Public
Works with plans and specifications;
B. Said tower shall not exceed 60 feet in height from the ground;
C. An effort shall be made to blend the tower with the existing architecture
or infrastructure in the area;
D. Said tower shall be capable of withstanding a maximum wind load of
100 miles per hour;
E. Said tower shall be maintained in good condition and in accordance
with the requirements of this section. No additions, changes or
modifications shall be made to a tower unless the addition, change or
modification is in conformity with the provisions of this section and
such addition, change or modification is approved by the Building
Inspector by the issuance of an amended building permit;
F. No tower shall bear any commercial or noncommercial copy; and
G. A special use permit is obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. Community gardens shall be less than one acre in size. Cultivated space
shall occupy no more than 60% of the lot.
B. Home gardens are a permitted use in all residential districts.
C. All community gardens and their uses must comply with all federal,
state, and local laws and regulations relating to the operation, use, and
enjoyment of the garden premises. Site users may not introduce heavy
 300-0215 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0217
292:571
metals or other harmful contaminants to garden or farm sites. Site
users may NOT use pesticides.
D. Prior to establishment, site users shall inquire into historical use of the
property and undertake soil testing to measure nutrients, heavy metals,
and any other harmful contaminants that may be present. The soil
testing results and proposed remediation methodology (if needed) shall
be provided to and kept on file with the City. Construction of raised
bed(s), which are then filled with clean soil, will obviate the need to test
soil.
E. Site users must have an established set of operating rules addressing
the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation,
maintenance, and security requirements; must have a gardening
coordinator to perform the coordinating role for the management of the
community gardens and to liaise with the City; and must assign garden
plots in a fair and impartial manner according to the operating rules
established for that garden. The name and telephone number of the
garden coordinator (or those of the leadership team members) and a
copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file with the City
Department of Development (or the lead community garden nonprofit
organization, as appropriate).
(1) The land shall be served by a water supply sufficient to support the
cultivation practices used on the site
(2) The site must be designed and maintained so that water will not
drain into adjacent property
(3) All seed shall be stored in a sealed, rodent-proof container and
housed within an enclosed structure.
(4) To the extent permitted under federal and state law, site users must
use organic and sustainable growing practices.
F. In a community garden, compost materials from the garden or
gardeners shall be stored at least 10 feet from adjacent property and in
a manner that is not visible from adjacent property (shielded from view
by shrubbery or an enclosure), controls odor, prevents infestation, and
minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. Waste
shall be collected regularly by the municipality. Gardeners shall ensure
that containers are placed in specified location to assist municipality in
waste removal.
G. Setbacks in community gardens and urban farms shall be consistent
with setback standards of the underlying zoning districts. Grass shall be
maintained in a manner consistent with the City's Housing
Maintenance Code.
H. Fences are permitted as regulated in the underlying zoning district.
 300-0217 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0217
292:572
I. Fences shall not exceed four feet in height, and shall be constructed of
wood, chain link or ornamental metal. For any garden that is 15,000
square feet in area or greater and is in a location that is subject to a
staff-level site plan review and approval by City staff, on behalf of the
Planning Commission, best efforts shall be taken to ensure that the
fence is compatible in appearance and placement with the character of
nearby properties.
J. Any signs shall comply with applicable City ordinances.
K. At community gardens, produce shall be grown primarily for personal
or shared use or donation.
 300-0217 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0217
292:573

ARTICLE III
Zoning District Regulations
 300-0301. Establishment of zoning districts.
 300-0302. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of districts set forth in this article are hereby established
as shown on the Zoning Map, which with all explanatory matter thereon is
hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.57
 300-0303. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Jamestown,
the following rules shall apply:
A. The City of Jamestown is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
L-C Land Conservation
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Two-Family Residential
R-C Multiple-Family Residential and Professional Office
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 Community Commercial
C-3 Central Business - Downtown
C-4 Central Commercial
C-M Service and Highway Commercial
L-M Light Manufacturing
M Manufacturing
B. Wherever districts are referred to as "more restrictive" or "less
restrictive," the designation shall refer to the order in which the
districts are named above with the first being the most restrictive.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center line of streets, such center lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets, such boundaries shall be construed as
57.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 300-0301 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0303
292:575
 300-0304. L-C Land Conservation District.
The purpose of the Land Conservation District is to preserve and protect
those areas where the substantial development of land in the form of
buildings or structures is not desirable because of special or unique
conditions of the topography and/or the environment. Use regulations are
as follows:
 300-0305. R-1 Single-family residential district.
Use regulations in the R-1 District are as follows:
being parallel thereto and at such distance as indicated on the Zoning
Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on said Zoning Map.
A. Permitted principal uses or structures:
(1) Noncommercial agricultural operations, including farms, gardens,
nurseries and greenhouses (excluding dwellings).
(2) Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, marinas, game preserves and
other similar uses (including associated accessory buildings).
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Police substations.
B. Permitted accessory uses: Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
L-C: Land Conservation District
Description
Use Regulation
(feet)
Minimum lot area None
Minimum lot width 200
Minimum front yard 40
Minimum side yards 20 for each side yard
Minimum rear yard 50
Maximum height of
building
35
A. Permitted principal uses or structures:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
 300-0303 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0305
292:576
(3) Public or private nonprofit, elementary or secondary schools
accredited by the New York State Department of Education.
(4) Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, marinas, game preserves and
other similar uses (including usual accessory buildings).
(5) Any educational and/or charitable not-for-profit institute or
corporation chartered or otherwise accredited by the University of
the State of New York Education Department for the purpose of
research, teaching or study of natural history, wildlife, ecology and
related subject areas.
(6) Continuation of agricultural operations in existence at the time of
the passage of this chapter, provided that no odor or dustproducing
operations be conducted within 100 feet of any adjacent
property line. New agricultural operations other than the
cultivation of crops shall be prohibited as shall the housing of barn
animals, including but not limited to cows, horses, pigs, goats,
sheep, chickens, ostriches and other similar livestock.
(7) Planned unit residential developments, as regulated in Article VIII.
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) Private garages for the use of residents of the premises, including
the leasing of space to a nonresident of the premises for not more
than one noncommercial vehicle.
(2) Off-street parking area (not including driveways) for
noncommercial vehicles, provided that:
(a) Said area is not located in a front or side yard; and
(b) Said area is surfaced with a durable and dustless material.
(3) One commercial vehicle driven by the residents may be stored on
the premises only within a completely enclosed building.
(4) Private family swimming pools pursuant to the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(5) Home occupations as defined in Article I.
(6) Storage of one camp trailer (not including mobile homes); or one
utility trailer; or one boat owned by the occupant of the premises
for personal use, provided that:
(a) Said trailer or boat is not located in a front yard or side yard;
and
(b) Said trailer or boat is under a roof if its registration is not
current.
(7) Dog runs, provided that they are not located in a front yard.
 300-0305 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0305
292:577
 300-0306. R-2 Two-Family Residential District.
Use regulations in the R-2 District shall be as follows:
(8) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family
dwellings
8,000 square feet
All other buildings 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 70 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 30 feet for each side yard
Minimum rear yard 25% of the lot depth, but no less than 25
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
35 feet
A. Permitted principal uses or structures:
(1) As permitted and regulated in R-1 Districts.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Single-chair, owner-occupied beauty parlors or barber shops, only
after obtaining a special use permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted and regulated in R-1 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 10,000 square feet
 300-0305 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0306
292:578
 300-0307. R-C: Multiple-Family Residential and Professional
Office District.
Use regulations in the R-C District shall be as follows:
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
Description Use Regulation
All other buildings 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 70 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 30 feet for each side yard
Minimum rear yard 25% of the lot depth, but no less than 25
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
35 feet
A. Permitted principal uses and structures:
(1) As permitted and regulated in R-2 Districts.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(3) Boardinghouses or rooming houses, only after obtaining a special
use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Nursing or convalescent homes, only after obtaining a special use
permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(5) Mortuaries.
(6) Medical or professional office buildings.
(7) Barbers and beauty salons.
(8) Telephone exchanges.
(9) Art, dance, music, photography and health studios.
(10) Opticians and optometrists.
(11) Travel bureau.
(12) Day-care center.
(13) Nonretail computer information business.
(14) Meeting rooms for private clubs and fraternal organizations.
 300-0306 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0307
292:579
 300-0308. C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
(15) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, cultural or community social
purposes.
(16) Hospitals, provided that the minimum lot area is at least one acre
and that no such use is conducted within 50 feet of any street or lot
line.
(17) New York State licensed massage therapist.
(18) Public parking lots.
(19) Bed-and-breakfast establishments, by special use permit and site
plan approval, provided that all required off-street parking (per
㎣ 300-0506 and 300-0507) are provided on site, that all setback
requirements are met and that signage requirements (per
 300-0709A) are met. [Added 12-16-2002]
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted and regulated in R-2 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
R-C Multifamily Residential District and Professional Office
District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
Multifamily dwellings 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling
units and 1,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit
All other buildings 8,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 15 feet for each side yard
Minimum rear yard 25% of the lot depth, but no less than 25
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
35 feet
 300-0307 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0308
292:580
A. Permitted principal uses and structures:
(1) As permitted and regulated in the R-C District.
(2) General business offices.
(3) Personal service establishments, including but not limited to shoe
repair, laundromats and dry-cleaning.
(4) Retail uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building,
but not included by general reference uses specifically listed in C-2,
C-3, C-4 and C-M Districts.
(5) Computer, radio or television sales or repair shops.
(6) Banks or credit unions.
(7) Copy centers.
(8) Commercial swimming pools pursuant to Chapter 265 of the City
Code and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
(9) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Added-12-16-2002]
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted and regulated in R-C Districts.
(2) Coffee or snack bars in conjunction with retail sales.
(3) Manufacturing and processing of articles incidental to the conduct
of retail businesses lawfully conducted on the premises, provided
that:
(a) All such articles are sold on the premises;
(b) Not more than four persons are engaged in such
manufacturing or processing at any one time in any one
establishment; and
(c) Such activity shall not produce offensive fumes, odors, noise,
vibration, heat, glare or dust outside the walls of the building.
(4) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
 300-0308 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0308
292:581
 300-0309. C-2 Community Commercial District.
Use regulations in the C-2 District shall be as follows:
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
Description Use Regulation
Multifamily dwellings 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling
units and 1,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit
All other buildings As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 6 feet for each side yard
Minimum rear yard
Dwellings and
accessory structures
25 feet
All other buildings 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, it shall be at least 30
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
40 feet
A. Permitted principal uses or structures:
(1) Uses as permitted and regulated in C-1 Districts.
(2) Gasoline service stations and repair garages, subject to the
limitations of  300-0212.
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Printing establishments.
(5) Hotels and motels.
(6) Nonpublic schools operated for a profit.
(7) Bowling alleys.
(8) Theaters.
(9) Unrestricted retail sales, but not including by general reference
use specifically listed in the C-M District.
 300-0308 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0309
292:582
 300-0310. C-3 Central Business District - Downtown.
Use regulations in the C-3 District shall be as follows:
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted and regulated in C-1 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
C-2 Community Commercial District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
Multifamily dwellings 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling
units and 1,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit
All other buildings As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 15 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 6 feet for each side yard except that where
a side yard abuts a lot in an R District, it
shall be at least 30 feet
Minimum rear yard
Dwellings and
accessory structures
25 feet
All other buildings 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, it shall be at least 30
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
40 feet
A. Permitted principal uses and structures:
(1) As permitted and regulated in C-2 Districts.
(2) Computer and data processing establishments.
(3) Television and radio stations.
 300-0309 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0310
292:583
 300-0311. C-4 Central Commercial District.
Use regulations in the C-4 District shall be as follows:
(4) Bus or railroad passenger terminals.
(5) Newspaper plants.
(6) Sports arenas.
(7) Auditoriums.
(8) Convention centers.
(9) Museums.
(10) Art galleries.
(11) Libraries.
(12) All other public assembly places.
(13) Light manufacturing and warehousing only after obtaining a
special use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(14) Residential uses shall not be permitted on the first floor of any
mixed occupancy structure. [Added 1-30-2017]
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted in C-2 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
C-3 Central Business District - Downtown
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area None
Minimum lot width None
Minimum front yard None
Minimum side yards None, except that where there is one it
shall be six feet, and where a side yard
abuts a lot in an R District, it shall be 30
feet for each side yard
Minimum rear yard None
Maximum height of
buildings
100 feet
A. Permitted principal uses and structures:
(1) As permitted and regulated in C-3 Districts.
 300-0310 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0311
292:584
 300-0312. C-M Service and Highway Commercial District.
(2) Light manufacturing and warehousing only after obtaining a
special use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Residential uses shall not be permitted on the first floor of any
mixed occupancy structure. [Added 1-30-2017]
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317):
(1) As permitted in C-3 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
C-4 Central Commercial District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
Multifamily dwellings 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling
units and 1,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit
All other buildings 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 15 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 6 feet for each side yard except that where
a side yard abuts a lot in an R District, it
shall be at least 30 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, it shall be at least 30
feet
Maximum height of
buildings
None, except that buildings over 50 feet in
height shall include a front yard, groundlevel
open space of 10% of the lot area.
Such space may be paved or landscaped
and contain decorative structures such as
benches, fountains, etc.
A. Permitted principal uses or structures:
 300-0311 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0312
292:585
(1) Uses as permitted and regulated in C-4 Districts, provided that all
nonresidential uses have their primary orientation toward a major
street or highway, and in no case shall such uses have their
orientation solely on a side street. Furthermore, light
manufacturing and warehousing uses are permitted only after
obtaining a special use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) The following principal uses, provided that their primary
orientation is toward a major street or highway, and in no case shall
such principal uses have their orientation solely on a side street:
(a) Motor vehicle sales and service.
(b) Boat and marine sales and service.
(c) Custom shops for electrical, heating, plumbing and
woodworking.
(d) Amusement enterprises not conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
(e) Commercial greenhouses or nurseries.
(f) Bottling works for milk or soft drinks.
(g) Wholesale bakery plants.
(h) Dry-cleaning plants.
(i) Laundry plants, as distinguished from pickup stations.
(j) Car washes, provided that a minimum of five usable reservoir
spaces are furnished for each rack or lane.
(k) Implement and tool rental, sales, storage and service;
provided, however, that abandoned, wrecked or unusable
implements or tools shall be considered junk and shall be
stored in a completely enclosed building or come under
junkyard regulations in the M Manufacturing District.
(l) Small animal hospitals and boarding kennels within a
completely enclosed building and located at least 100 feet from
any residential district.
(m) Tattoo parlors.
B. Permitted accessory uses and structures (except as noted in
 300-0317):
(1) As permitted in C-4 Districts.
(2) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
(3) Normal accessory uses, provided that such uses are not of a type
listed as permitted uses in M Districts.
 300-0312 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0312
292:586
 300-0313. L-M Light Manufacturing District.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
C-M Service and Highway Commercial District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area
Single-family dwellings 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwellings 8,000 square feet
Multifamily dwellings 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling
units and 1,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit
All other buildings As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 6 feet
Minimum side yards
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10% of the lot width (but no less than 5
feet) for each side yard
All other buildings 10 feet for each side yard except that
where a side yard abuts a lot in an R
District, it shall be at least 30 feet
Minimum rear yard
Dwellings and
accessory structures
10 feet
All other buildings: 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, its width shall be at
least 30 feet
Maximum height of
buildings
40 feet
A. Permitted principal uses or structures are as follows, provided that the
Planning Commission conducts a site plan review pursuant to Article IX
of this chapter and an environmental review pursuant to 6 NYCRR 617
(State Environmental Quality Review Act) for all light manufacturing
uses:
(1) Principal uses or structures, except dwellings, as permitted in CM
Districts.
(2) Research and development facilities.
(3) Warehouse for enclosed storage of goods and materials.
(4) Laboratories.
 300-0312 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0313
292:587
 300-0314. M Manufacturing District.
(5) Electronic assembly plants.
(6) Distribution plants.
(7) All publicly and privately owned storage facilities and vehicle
garages, except as provided in  300-0305.
(8) All other light manufacturing or clean industrial operations,
provided that the Planning Commission reviews and approves such
light manufacturing use pursuant to  300-0909.
B. Permitted accessory uses (except as noted in  300-0317) shall be as
follows:
(1) As permitted in C-M Districts.
(2) Normal accessory uses, as long as such uses are not of a type listed
as permitted uses in M Districts.
(3) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
L-M Light Manufacturing District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet for each side yard except that
where a side yard abuts a lot in an R
District, it shall be at least 50 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, its width shall be at
least 50 feet
Maximum height of
buildings
None
A. Permitted principal uses or structures are as follows, provided that the
Planning Commission conducts a site plan review pursuant to Article IX
of this chapter and an environmental review pursuant to 6 NYCRR 617
(State Environmental Quality Review Act) for all light manufacturing
and manufacturing uses:
(1) Principle uses or structures as permitted in L-M Districts.
(2) Concrete products manufacturing or batching plants.
 300-0313 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0314
292:588
(3) Incinerators (public or privately operated).
(4) Open storage of lumber, asphalt, coal or contractors' equipment
and materials.
(5) Railroad freight and classification yards.
(6) Welding shops.
(7) Foundries.
(8) Truck terminals, including any premises where any vehicles used in
long-distance freight hauling or where any tractor-trailer
combinations or automobile conveyors are parked, loaded or
unloaded.
(9) Storage, sorting or baling wastepaper or rags.
(10) Boilermaking.
(11) Metal-plating works, electrolytic or hot-dip processes.
(12) Adult uses as defined in Article XIII and provided that:
(a) Said use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any school,
park, playground or place of worship;
(b) Said use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any other
existing adult use;
(c) Said use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any
residential district; and
(d) Said use shall be required to obtain a special use permit
pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(13) Auto wrecking yards, salvage yards or junkyards, provided that:
(a) An environmental review is conducted pursuant to Chapter
135 of the City Code;
(b) The operation will not involve the burning of automobiles or
other burning which creates noxious odors or smoke;
(c) The operation or any part thereof is not located in a regulated
wetland as such is defined by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation nor within 500 feet of a church,
school, hospital, public building, Chadakoin River, public park
or place of public assembly nor within any one-hundred-year
floodplain boundary as such is defined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal
Insurance Administration; and
(d) A special use permit is obtained from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
 300-0314 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0314
292:589
 300-0315. Exceptions to bulk regulations.
(14) All other manufacturing or industrial operations.
B. Permitted accessory uses or structures (except as noted in  300-0317)
shall be as follows:
(1) As permitted in L-M Districts.
(2) Any normal accessory uses, in accordance with  300-0909.
(3) Signs pursuant to Article VII.
C. Bulk and setback regulations (except as noted in  300-0315):
M Manufacturing District
Description Use Regulation
Minimum lot area As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum lot width As regulated by setback, open space and
off-street parking requirements
Minimum front yard 10 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet for each side yard except that
where a side yard abuts a lot in an R
District, it shall be at least 50 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet except that where a rear yard abuts
a lot in an R District, its width shall be at
least 50 feet
Maximum height of
buildings
None
A. Lot area and lot width exceptions. The lot width or area requirements of
this chapter shall be automatically waived to permit the erection of a
single-family dwelling or the restoration, enlargement (but not the
creation of additional dwelling units), moving, repair or alteration of an
existing dwelling on any lot of record which was owned separately and
individually from all other contiguous tracts of land on the effective
date of this chapter or on the effective date of any subsequent
amendment increasing area or width requirements, provided that
dwellings are a permitted use in the district in which such lot is located.
This provision shall immediately apply to all subdivisions for which
maps have been filed in the County Clerk's office.
B. Front yard exceptions. A proposed building may have a front yard
setback equal to the average front yard setback of the existing
buildings within 150 feet of the proposed building.
C. Side yard exceptions. For corner lots where a rear lot line coincides
with a side lot line of an adjoining lot, the required width of the exterior
 300-0314 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0315
292:590
 300-0316. Determination of district.
If in any instance a lot is determined to lie in more than one different
zoning district, the district which has street frontage shall govern. Should
a lot have street frontage within two separate zoning districts, the district
which comprises the most gross feet of street frontage shall govern. Should
the amount of street frontage be equally split between districts, the most
restrictive zoning district shall apply.
 300-0317. Accessory structures.
 300-0318. Open space.
side yard shall be the same as the front yard requirement along the
street on which the exterior side yard abuts.
D. Rear yard exceptions. For through lots, where the rear lot line abuts a
street, a front yard equivalent shall be provided. The rear yard depth
requirements in the district regulations shall not apply on that portion
of a through lot where a front yard equivalent is required.
A. No accessory structure in an R District shall be located in a front yard
or a required side yard.
B. In a C or M District, no processing, storage or accessory structure shall
be permitted in any required yard except for gasoline pumps. However,
dwellings shall be governed by R District regulations.
C. In any R District, no roofline or projection off of an accessory structure
shall encroach more than two feet into any required yard.
D. In any R District, a detached accessory building shall not be located so
that any part thereof is closer than 10 feet to any other building.
E. In any R District, no part of an accessory structure shall be nearer than
five feet to a side lot line or a rear lot line. [Added 6-14-1999]
F. In any R District, no accessory building shall exceed 720 square feet in
area and have a dimension that exceeds 36 feet. [Added 8-27-2012]
G. In any R District, no accessory building shall exceed 18 feet in height,
nor shall it be taller in height than the height of the principal use
building of the property. [Added 8-27-2012]
A. In any district with more than one principal building on a single lot,
there shall be 30 feet of open space between the buildings.
B. In the case of a building of mixed occupancy, 400 square feet of open
space for each dwelling unit contained in such building shall be
provided on the lot exclusively for recreation activities.
C. Except for corner visibility provisions in  300-0205, access drives or
walks and unenclosed steps or terraces not extending more than one
 300-0315 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0318
292:591
foot above the adjoining finished grade may be located in any required
open area, notwithstanding any of the above provisions.
 300-0318 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0318
292:592
ARTICLE IV
Historic Overlay District
 300-0401. H-O Historic Overlay District.
The Historic Overlay District shall serve as a supplement to the underlying
zoning districts and shall not supplant the regulations of the underlying
zoning districts. Permitted uses or structures within the overlay district
shall be the same as those within the underlying district. The intent of
this district is to promote and enhance the architectural heritage of the
historically significant sectors of the City; and to encourage the
preservation and enhancement of facades, signage and aesthetics of the
existing buildings; and to permit new construction in a manner which
complements the existing urban form of the district.
A. Applicability. All projects within this overlay district which require a
building permit for exterior work shall be subject to preservation and
enhancement review to be performed by the staff at the Department of
Development and the Department of Public Works. However, should a
project within this overlay district require Planning Commission review
(pursuant to Article IX), then the Planning Commission shall perform
the preservation and enhancement review.
B. Procedure for review. All projects within this district shall be reviewed
within 45 days of submitting the building or site plan. All plans for
exterior work within this district shall require the following:
(1) Elevation drawings to include the existing and proposed facade
design;
(2) Building plan showing location and dimensions of all existing
structure(s) and proposed improvements on site; and
(3) Description of color, style and construction materials in place on all
existing structure(s) and proposed improvements on site.
C. Review criteria. In accordance with the preservation and enhancement
review, the following components shall be examined and a
determination shall be made as to whether the project complies with
the intent of this chapter:
(1) The project shall be in harmony with all historically significant
use(s) within the district;
(2) The project shall be in harmony with the general character of the
neighborhood; and
(3) The project shall be in harmony with the architectural integrity and
style of any effected structure(s).
D. Exception to review. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or
 300-0401 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0401
292:593
demolition of any unsafe or dangerous feature which is determined to
be a threat to public safety by the Building Inspector.
E. Appeal procedure. Should the applicant choose to appeal the
determinations of staff, the Planning Commission shall review the
proposed work at its next scheduled meeting. In the event that the
applicant chooses to appeal the decision of the Planning Commission,
said applicant shall have 30 days from the date of filing said decision
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk in which to
commence special proceedings pursuant to the provisions of Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
 300-0401 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0401
292:594
ARTICLE V
Automotive Use Areas and Off-Street Parking Regulations
 300-0501. General regulations.
 300-0502. Design and layout standards.
New automotive use areas or enlargements of existing automotive use areas
shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. After the effective date of this chapter, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided at the time a building or structure is erected or at the time a
new use of open land is established. In the case of an enlargement of
any existing building, structure or use after the effective date of this
chapter, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the enlarged
portion of such building, structure or use.
B. No existing off-street parking area shall be reduced in capacity so as to
be less than required by this chapter.
C. Any alteration, enlargement or change in use to an existing building,
structure or parcel of land which increases the demand for off-street
parking per the requirements of this article shall meet that requirement
accordingly.
D. Within any C-3 District, there shall be no minimum number of off-street
parking spaces required, regardless of use.
E. All required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot
with the building or use they serve, except as provided in  300-0504.
A. Surfacing. Every automotive use area and access driveway shall be
surfaced with a durable and dustless material and shall be so graded
and drained as to efficiently dispose of surface water accumulation into
the City storm sewer network. All parking spaces shall be clearly
marked.
B. Lighting. Any fixture used to illuminate any automotive use area shall
be so arranged as to direct the light away from the street and any
adjoining premises.
C. Screening. Every automotive use area, except off-street parking areas
for fewer than five vehicles, shall be screened from an adjoining lot in
any R District along a rear lot line or an interior side lot line by a
compact evergreen hedge which has a height of five feet or by a solid
fence or masonry wall five feet in height. Such hedge, fence or wall
shall not extend along the front yard or exterior side yard of an
adjoining lot in any R District and shall be maintained in good condition
at all times.
D. Access. No entrance or exit to any automotive use area shall be
permitted within 30 feet of any intersecting exterior property lines. No
 300-0501 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0502
292:595
entrance or exit shall be permitted within 10 feet of a lot in any R
District, except for off-street parking areas for uses permitted in any R
District requiring fewer than 10 parking spaces. Access to automotive
use areas, except for off-street parking areas for residential uses in R
Districts for fewer than five vehicles, shall be approved by the Building
Inspector and shall be so arranged that vehicles shall not back into a
street.
E. Location. In all L-C or R Districts, no automotive use area shall be
located in any front yard or exterior side yard.
F. Setback.
(1) In all L-C or R Districts, all automotive use areas (not including
driveways) shall be set back at least 10 feet from all property lines.
(2) In all C and L-M Districts, all automotive use areas (not including
driveways) shall be set back from front property line, rear property
line and side yard property lines as outlined below (not to be less
than 10 feet): [Amended 6-24-2013]
(a) If the dimension of the property is less than 200 feet, setback
shall be 15 feet;
(b) If the dimension of the property is 200 feet and up to 350 feet,
setback shall be 20 feet;
(c) If the dimension of the property is 350 feet and up to 500 feet,
setback shall be 30 feet;
(d) If the dimension of the property is 500 feet or greater, setback
shall be 40 feet.
(3) In all M Districts, all automotive use areas shall be set back at least
five feet from all property lines, except that where said area abuts
any R District, it shall be set back at least 10 feet from all property
lines.
G. Parking space size requirements.
(1) All perpendicular parking spaces shall be at least 18 feet long and
nine feet wide.
(2) All parallel parking spaces shall be at least 24 feet long and nine
feet wide.
H. Maneuvering and access space requirements. Between each row of
parking, there shall be at least 24 feet of maneuvering space (unless as
otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works).
I. Driveways. One-way driveways serving nonresidential uses shall be at
least 15 feet but not more than 20 feet in width. Two-way driveways
serving nonresidential uses shall be at least 20 feet but not more than
 300-0502 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0502
292:596
 300-0503. Methods of computation.
 300-0504. Off-site parking requirements.
 300-0505. Loading and unloading space.
Except in a C-3 District, adequate off-street loading and unloading space
shall be provided for all commercial and manufacturing uses as follows:
30 feet in width. No more than two such driveways shall be provided
for each 200 feet of frontage on a public street.
J. Trash, refuse and waste disposal. Facilities for the storage and
collection of trash, refuse, waste and recyclable materials shall be
concealed and not be visible from any street, sidewalk or abutting
parcel.
K. Signage. All signs shall meet the specifications set forth in Article VII.
A. Gross floor area. Gross floor area shall include all areas of a building
used or occupied by any traffic generator mentioned in this article.
Basement or cellar floor areas not used for processing, servicing or
selling goods or merchandise shall not be considered as gross floor
area.
B. Seats. For places of assembly where bench-type seats are provided or
where standing patrons are served at a counter or bar, each 22 linear
inches of such seating or standing space shall be considered as one seat
for the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements.
C. Fractional units. When application of the units of measurement to
determine required off-street parking spaces results in a fractional
parking space of 1/2 or more, one parking space shall be required.
A. Auxiliary parking shall be permitted within 300 feet of the principal use,
provided that 50% of all required spaces are located on site.
B. In any case where required off-street parking spaces are not provided
on the same lot with the building or use they serve, such off-street
parking spaces shall be subject to deed, lease or contract restrictions
acceptable to the Corporation Counsel binding the owner, his heirs or
assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout
the life of such use.
A. Each use shall provide one space with minimum horizontal dimensions
of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet in height for the parking of commercial
vehicles while they are being loaded or unloaded. Such space shall have
convenient access to a public street, shall not be used for customer or
employee parking and shall not be considered as part of any required
off-street parking area.
 300-0502 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0505
292:597
 300-0506. Required spaces.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Type of Use Required Number of Parking Spaces
Dwellings
Single-family dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
All other dwellings 1.5 for each dwelling unit
Accessory uses to dwellings
Offices for the treatment of
humans
5 for each office
Other offices 2 for each office
Bed-and-breakfast
establishment [Added
12-16-2002]
2 for primary dwelling, plus 1 for each
guest room
Institutional uses
Hospitals 1.5 for each bed
All other institutional uses 1 for each 5 beds
Places of assembly
Elementary and middle
schools
2 for each classroom, plus 1 for every 5
auditorium seats
High schools 5 for each classroom, plus 1 for every 5
auditorium seats
Colleges or universities 10 for each classroom, plus 1 for every 5
auditorium seats
Churches 1 for each 5 seats
Auditoriums, theaters,
stadiums or arenas
1 for each 5 seats
Libraries, museums or art
galleries
1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Bowling alleys 8 per alley
Dance halls or studios 1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
B. Industrial buildings, shopping plazas, storage warehouses, furniture,
appliance and department stores and hospitals shall provide one
additional space, as described above, for each 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
C. Office buildings, apartment buildings or hotels over three stories in
height shall provide one additional space for each 40,000 square feet of
gross floor area (not including the area of unfinished basements or
cellars).
 300-0505 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0506
292:598
Type of Use Required Number of Parking Spaces
Skating rinks 1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
All other places of public
assembly
1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Eating and drinking
establishments
Restaurants 1 for each 3 seats, except where no seats
are provided, 3 for each 50 square feet of
gross floor area
Night clubs, bars or 1 for each 200 square
Taverns feet of gross floor area
Clubs or lodges 1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Other business uses
Mortuaries or funeral
parlors
15 for each parlor
Beauty salon or barber
shop
1.5 for each chair or work station
Furniture, floor covering or
appliance stores
1 for each 700 square feet of gross floor
area
Custom shops or wholesale
businesses
1 for each 700 square feet of gross floor
area
New or used car sales 1 for each 700 square feet of sales area
within a building, but not fewer than 5 for
customer parking and 1 for each 2
employees. Such spaces shall be clearly
marked shall not be used for the parking of
unregistered motor vehicles
Gasoline stations or repair
garages
3 for each service bay
Food stores, shopping
centers
1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Individual retail stores or
service establishments
1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Doctor, dentist or real
estate offices
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor
area plus 3 for each office
Other businesses,
professional offices or
banks
1 for each 350 square feet of gross floor
area
Hotels, motels or lodging
houses
1 for each unit of accommodation
 300-0506 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0506
292:599
Type of Use Required Number of Parking Spaces
Manufacturing or industrial
uses
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Warehousing 1 for each 2,500 square feet of gross floor
area
All other principal uses 1 for each 350 square feet of gross floor
area
 300-0507. Parking in residential districts.
 300-0508. Restrictions.
 300-0509. Modifications to regulations.
A. All automotive use areas shall be surfaced with a durable and dustless
material.
B. For all structures with a residential use, off-street parking areas (not
including driveways) for noncommercial vehicles shall be restricted to
rear yards.
C. For all structures with a residential use, parking in any front yard shall
be restricted to a driveway, provided that no such driveway shall be
located in the area which extends from the primary residential
structure to the exterior property line. Should the primary residential
structure include an attached garage, such driveway shall be restricted
to the area which extends from the garage to the exterior property line.
D. All driveways shall be perpendicular to the street of access.
A. No automotive use area shall be used for auto wrecking or the storage
of wrecked, partially dismantled or junked vehicles or equipment or for
the storage of motor vehicles which do not qualify for New York State
motor vehicle registration.
B. All required off-street parking areas shall be unobstructed and free of
other uses.
A. No off-street parking shall be required for uses accessory to any
institutional use specified in  300-0506 or for accessory restaurants
used primarily for students, patients, tenants or employees occupying
principal buildings.
B. In the case of accessory retail sales, boat berths or restaurants, the
parking requirement for either the accessory use or the principal use,
whichever requirement is less, may be reduced by 50%.
C. Except as otherwise provided, where any building or lot is occupied by
two or more uses having different parking requirements, the parking
requirement for each use shall be computed separately to determine
the total off-street parking requirement.
 300-0506 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0509
292:600
 300-0510. Drive-through facilities.
All drive-through facilities shall provide adequate on-site maneuvering and
circulation areas so as to ensure that stacking of vehicles does not impede
traffic on abutting streets. All proposed drive-through facilities shall meet
the following minimum standards:
D. In the case of a church and school on the same lot, the lesser parking
requirement shall be waived.
A. Gasoline pumps. A minimum of 36 feet of stacking lane is required
between a curb cut and the nearest gasoline pump.
B. Other drive-through facilities.
(1) Primary facilities. A minimum of 60 feet for a single stacking lane
or 40 feet per lane when there is more than one stacking lane is
required for all other drive-through facilities.
(2) Accessory facilities. A stacking lane is not required for accessory
facilities where vehicles do not routinely stack up while waiting for
service. Examples are window washing, air compressor, and
vacuum-cleaning stations.
C. Stacking lane design and layout. A stacking lane is measured from the
property line behind the curb cut to the services area. Stacking lanes do
not have to be linear. Stacking lanes shall be designed so that they do
not interfere with parking and vehicle circulation.
D. Stacking lanes identified. All stacking lanes shall be clearly identified
through the use of means such as striping, landscaping, signs and
bollards.
 300-0509 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0510
292:601

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Use Regulations
 300-0601. Continuation of use.
Any use which is made nonconforming by any use regulation, lot size,
open space, height or building size regulations of this chapter or by any
subsequent amendments may be continued except as hereinafter provided.
 300-0602. Changes in use.
Any proposed change to a use deemed nonconforming by this chapter, or
any proposed change to a previously approved use variance, shall not be
permitted unless said change is to a permitted use or as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
 300-0603. Repair or alterations.
 300-0604. Restoration.
Such nonconforming building or structure (not including signs) which has
been damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 80% or more
of its full value, as determined by the City Assessor, or which has been
condemned by the Building Inspector and ordered to be demolished shall
not be rebuilt or repaired except in conformance with the regulations of
this chapter. In the case of a permitted restoration of a nonconforming
use, neither the floor area nor the cubical content shall be increased from
the original nonconforming building or other structure. Full value shall be
determined by dividing the latest assessment of such improvement by the
latest state equalization rate, expressed as a percentage.
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance of a
building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, including
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not enlarge,
increase or intensify the nonconforming use.
B. Such nonconforming building, other structure or use of land may be
repaired or altered, provided that any such repair or alteration
complies with the regulations of this chapter.
C. No structural alterations shall be made to a building or structure
containing a nonconforming use except when:
(1) Required by law;
(2) Required to restore to a safe condition any building or structure
declared unsafe by the Building Inspector; or
(3) Required to accomplish a change to a conforming use.
 300-0601 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0605
292:603
 300-0605. Discontinuance.
In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, building or structure
(not including signs) or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued
for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished and all future use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and continuous operation
of such nonconforming use or a part or portion thereof for such period
of one year is hereby construed and considered to be an abandonment
of such nonconforming use, regardless of any reservation of an intent
not to abandon the same or of an intent to resume active operations. If
actual abandonment, in fact, is evidenced by the removal of buildings,
other structures, machinery, equipment or other evidences of such
nonconforming use of the premises, the abandonment shall be construed
and considered to be completed upon such abandonment, and all rights to
reestablish or continue such nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate.
 300-0606. Cessation.
In any district, nonconforming buildings or structures (not including signs)
with an assessed value under $1,500 may be continued for a period of three
years after adoption of this chapter, provided that after the expiration of
such period, any such nonconforming use shall become an unlawful use and
shall be terminated.
 300-0607. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to prepare and maintain a list
of nonconforming uses of lands and buildings. Such record shall contain
the names and addresses of the owners of such nonconforming use, any
occupant other than the owner, a legal description of the land and the
nature and extent of the use. The Inspector shall also note in this record
the date at which the presence of the nonconforming use was first officially
recognized.
 300-0605 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0607
292:604
ARTICLE VII
Sign Regulations
 300-0701. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor signs of all
types. It is intended to protect property values; create a more attractive
economic and business climate; enhance and protect the physical
appearance of the community; and preserve the architectural, scenic and
natural beauty of the community by promoting signs which are in harmony
with buildings and surroundings. It is also intended to increase the legibility
and effectiveness of signage by reducing the visual clutter which may hide
competing signs from view. It is further intended to reduce distractions
or obstructions which may contribute to traffic accidents; reduce hazards
that may be caused by signs obstructing the views of drivers entering or
exiting streets; provide more visual open space; and contribute to efforts to
revitalize residential, commercial and industrial neighborhoods.
 300-0702. Applicability. [Amended 12-23-2008]
Any off-premises advertising signage (including but limited to billboards)
which is erected, altered or relocated after the adoption of this article
shall comply with the regulations of this article. On-premises advertising,
site, facility, and business identification are regulated under Article VII. In
addition, prior to the erection, alteration or relocation of any nonexempt
sign, a permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector. All signs
shall be regulated by their size, height, setback, number, type and design
pursuant to this article. The regulations of this article shall not apply to the
erection or placement of any state, county or City traffic control device or
sign.
 300-0703. Location.
No sign shall impair or cause confusion of vehicular traffic in its design,
color or placement. No sign shall be located within the triangular area as
depicted in  300-0205. Nor shall any sign be attached to trees, public utility
poles, rocks or other parts of the natural landscape (except the ground), nor
be placed in a position that will obstruct or impair traffic or create a hazard
or disturbance to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. No
sign shall be located on public property without written consent from the
controlling jurisdiction.
 300-0704. Application procedure.
Applications for sign permits shall be made, in writing, to the Building
Inspector on forms prescribed and provided by the City of Jamestown and
shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
 300-0701 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0704
292:605
 300-0705. Review procedure.
B. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property.
C. Location of the building, structure and land upon which the sign now
exists or is to be erected.
D. Elevation and plan drawings to scale shall be included. In addition, a
full description of the placement and appearance of the proposed sign
shall be included with the following information:
(1) Location on the premises, specifically its position in relation to
adjacent buildings, structures and property lines;
(2) Area of the building facade;
(3) The method of illumination, if any, and the position of lighting or
other extraneous devices and a copy of the electrical permit related
to the electrical connections;
(4) Graphic design (sketch to scale), including symbols, letters,
materials and colors; and
(5) The visual message, text, copy or content of the sign.
A. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sign permit and the
payment of the required fee, the Building Inspector shall examine the
plans, specifications and the premises on which the sign is to be
erected. A permit shall be granted, provided that:
(1) Any proposed sign which replaces an existing conforming sign and
does not significantly differ from the existing, conforming sign in
size, placement, area, color or construction shall be approved by
the Building Inspector.
(2) Any proposed sign which is temporary and conforms to the
regulations of this chapter shall be approved by the Building
Inspector.
(3) Applications for new signs or new signs which replace existing,
nonconforming signs associated with existing buildings shall be
forwarded to the Building Inspector who will prepare a report on
the compliance of the proposed sign(s) with regard to the formula
components of this article. Within 30 days of filing a complete
application, said proposal shall be approved, approved with
modifications or denied by the Building Inspector.
(4) The issuance of a permit shall not excuse the applicant from
conforming to the other laws and ordinances of the municipality. If
the erection of any approved sign has not commenced within one
year from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and
void. Said permit may be renewed within 30 days prior to the
expiration, for good cause shown, for an additional six months.
 300-0704 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0705
292:606
 300-0706. Permanent exempt signs.
The following types of signs may be erected and maintained without permits
or fees as an accessory use to the principal use on the premises, provided
that the standards in  300-0711 are met. In each instance, unless otherwise
noted, exempt signs shall be at least 10 feet from all property lines.
B. The applicant and the Building Inspector shall consider the following
guidelines:
(1) The sign design, colors, materials and scale shall be compatible
with the character of the area in which it is proposed.
(2) Signs mounted on buildings should not cover openings or
significant architectural details and should be located within areas
designed for the display of signs, if such exist.
(3) Signs should be located no higher above the ground than is
necessary for viewing from adjacent streets.
(4) Signs should be designed with respect to the shape and proportion
of the space within which they will be located and the facade to
which they will be applied.
(5) The size of signs should relate to the vantage point of the intended
observer and the length of time available for viewing; signs
intended for pedestrians on the sidewalk need not be as large as
those to be seen from passing vehicles.
(6) Signs should include the minimum information necessary to convey
the message so as to avoid clutter and confusion.
(7) Multiple signs should be avoided.
(8) A sign should not obstruct or impair the visual effectiveness of
neighboring signs.
(9) Signs should be integrated with fences, walls or buildings rather
than freestanding if possible.
(10) Signs for businesses in plazas or groups of zero lot line store fronts
should be of complementary design but not necessarily uniform.
(11) Signs for businesses contained in the same building should be of
concordant design.
(12) Sign material should be durable and require little maintenance.
A. Historical markers, tablets and statues, memorial signs and plaques;
names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze, stainless steel or similar
material; emblems installed by governmental agencies, religious or
nonprofit organizations, not to exceed six square feet.
 300-0705 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0706
292:607
 300-0707. Temporary exempt signs.
All signs of a temporary nature are exempt from the permit process.
However, such signs shall not violate or exceed any of the standards or
controls outlined below. Failure to meet these standards shall cause such
sign to be removed by the Building Inspector pursuant to  300-0712.
B. On-premise directional signs identifying public parking areas and fire
zones which do not exceed five square feet per face. Such signs shall
not contain any commercial copy other than business identification.
C. Nonilluminated warning, private drive, posted or no trespassing signs,
not exceeding two square feet per face.
D. Number and name plates identifying residents and/or name of structure
mounted on house, apartment or mailbox not exceeding two square feet
in area. If constructed as a lawn sign, it may not be more than four feet
in height. Such signs are not to be internally illuminated nor contain
any advertising message.
E. Signs permitted at gasoline and automotive service/repair stations may
not exceed the following:
(1) Integral graphics or attached price signs on gasoline pumps as
regulated in Chapter 165 of the City Code;
(2) Three auxiliary signs per station, each not exceeding six square
feet; and
(3) One portable product display sign which is set back at least 20 feet
and does not exceed 12 square feet in area per face; or three feet in
height.
F. Murals may be painted or adhered on any wall of a structure. Signage
and advertising may be erected in conjunction with murals and shall not
exceed 5% of the total area of the mural. Murals erected in conjunction
with signage shall be considered signs for the purpose of this article, if
such murals are clearly separate from the signage and the content and
design of the mural does not represent specific goods, services or
activities offered for sale. Generalized depictions of types of goods;
commonly used symbols other than trademarks, brand names and
logos; and scenes which do not specifically illustrate commercial
activity may be allowed in murals. [Added 2-28-2005]
G. Signs located at or on museums, not in a R-1 or R-2 District, as defined
in  300-0106, provided, however, that any such signs shall be reviewed
and approved in conjunction with the site plan review and approval
process pursuant to Chapter 300, Article IX, Site Plan Review. [Added
4-27-2015]
A. General regulations. Except as otherwise provided by this article, all
temporary signs shall be subject to the following standards:
 300-0706 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0707
292:608
(1) Such signs shall be erected no earlier than six weeks prior to the
activity or event taking place nor be in place any later than one
week after the activity or event is finished;
(2) Such signs shall not exceed the following area standards: four
square feet in L-C, R-1 and R-2 Districts; 16 square feet in the R-C
and C-1 Districts; 24 square feet in the C-2, C-3, C-4, C-M, L-M and
M Zones;
(3) Such signs shall not exceed the following height standards: Three
feet in L-C, R-1 and R-2 Districts; 10 feet in all remaining districts;
(4) Such signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the
property lines and driveways in all L-C, R-1 and R-2 Districts and 10
feet from the same in the R-C, commercial and manufacturing
zones; and
(5) Such signs shall not carry commercial copy.
B. Specific regulations.
(1) Temporary signs listing the architect, engineer, contractor,
sponsors and/or owner on premises where construction, renovation
or repair is in progress, provided that such project is limited to one
sign per access street; and such signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area per sign; and such signs shall not exceed eight feet in
height.
(2) Signs placed and sponsored by public sector agencies, including
but not limited to the identification of construction, housing
rehabilitation and economic development projects, shall remain in
place until such time that the sign no longer serves a public
purpose. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area nor
exceed eight feet in height.
(3) Posters, banners, promotional devices and similar signs promoting
an opinion, cause, candidate or political party. Such signs shall not
be restricted by time or duration.
(4) Posters, banners, promotional devices and similar signs promoting
a noncommercial event shall not be regulated by the height and
area standards outlined above.
(5) Temporary private owner merchandise sale signs for garage sales
and auctions, not exceeding four square feet in area and provided
that such signs not be in place for a period exceeding seven days.
(6) Temporary nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" real estate signs
concerning the premises upon which the sign is located.
(7) One temporary nonilluminated sign for a roadside stand selling
agricultural produce grown on the premises in season, provided
that such sign be removed during the off-season.
 300-0707 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0707
292:609
 300-0708. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
 300-0709. General regulations.
(8) Temporary nonilluminated window signs and posters not exceeding
75% of each individual window surface on which it appears,
provided that such signs not be used for permanent advertising.
Such signs may contain commercial copy.
(9) Nonilluminated, temporarily displayed commercial signs which
have a changeable copy message area are permitted exclusively in
the C-3 District, provided that:
(a) Only one such sign is permitted per establishment;
(b) Such signs shall be removed at the close of business;
(c) Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area per face;
(d) Such signs shall not exceed five feet in height;
(e) Such signs shall be located within eight feet on the principle
structure; and
(f) When such sign is located on public property (e.g., sidewalk),
an encroachment permit shall be obtained from the
Department of Public Works.
A. No off-premises signs shall be allowed other than those otherwise
permitted in this article. [Amended 2-28-2005]
B. (Reserved)58
C. No sign shall consist of strobe lights, multiple banners, pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar moving, fluttering or revolving
devices.
D. No portable changeable-copy message signs are permitted, except as
provided in  300-0707.
E. No trailer or vehicle with an advertising message shall be parked on a
premises in a manner to serve as a sign.
F. Double-faced signs are prohibited. [Added 2-28-2005]
A. Signs on residential buildings which identify a permitted professional
office, accessory home occupation or business use authorized by
variance or special use permit are subject to the following:
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which prohibited certain signs illuminated by or
containing flashing, intermittent, rotating, moving or traveling messages, was repealed
1-30-2017. See  300-0709F.
 300-0707 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0709
292:610
(1) Only one on-premise freestanding or wall sign shall be permitted;
(2) Such sign shall not exceed two square feet; and
(3) Such sign shall not be internally illuminated.
B. Wall signs. The following sign types shall be considered wall signs and
shall be subject to the wall sign regulations set forth in this article:
(1) Projecting signs.
(a) Projecting signs shall not have more than two faces; however,
when a projecting sign serves as a marquee for a theater, it
may have three faces; and
(b) No part of a projecting sign shall extend into vehicular traffic
areas, and any part of a sign extending over pedestrian traffic
areas shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(2) Roof signs. No sign which is erected on a roof shall extend more
than eight feet above the roofline of such building.
(3) Awning signs.
(a) Awning graphics may be painted or affixed flat to the surface of
the front or sides and shall indicate only the name and/or
address of the enterprise or premises; and
(b) No sign shall project from an awning.
C. Freestanding signs.
(1) No freestanding sign shall be located less than 50 feet from any
other freestanding sign;
(2) If for any reason the property line is changed at some future date,
any freestanding sign made nonconforming thereby shall be
relocated within six months to conform with the minimum setback
requirements; and
(3) Freestanding signs shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance
over any pedestrian walkway and shall have a minimum of 14 feet
of clearance over any driveway.
D. Entrance and exit signs for the purpose of directing traffic on and off
the site, in R-C, C and M Districts.
(1) Such signs shall not exceed five square feet;
(2) Such signs shall not exceed three feet in height;
(3) Such signs shall be set back at least two feet from the property line;
and
(4) Such signs shall not contain any commercial copy.
 300-0709 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0709
292:611
E. Permanent residential subdivision identification signs, provided that
they are nonilluminated, single-sided and the following regulations are
not exceeded:
Permanent Residential Subdivision Identification Signs
Description Use Regulation
Maximum number 1 per subdivision
Maximum area 24 square feet per sign
Maximum height 10 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
F. Electronic message displays. [Added 1-30-2017]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following definitions
shall have the meanings indicated:
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY (EMD)  A sign capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be
electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic
means.
DISSOLVE  A mode of message transition on an electronic
message display (EMD) accomplished by varying the light intensity
or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate
and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and
legibility of the second message.
FADE  A mode of message transition on an electronic message
display (EMD) accomplished by varying the light intensity, where
the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not
being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases
intensity to the point of legibility.
FRAME  A complete, static display screen on an electronic
message display.
FRAME EFFECT  A visual effect used on an electronic message
display applied to a single frame to attract the attention of viewers.
LEVEL 1  Static display only (messages changed with no
transition/animation).
(a)
LEVEL 2  Static display with "fade" or "dissolve" transitions,
or similar subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have
the appearance of moving text or images.
(b)
LEVEL 3  Static display with "travel" or "scrolling"
transitions, or similar transitions and frame effects that have
text or animated images that appear to move or change in size,
or be revealed sequentially rather than all at once.
(c)
(d) LEVEL 4  Full animation, flashing, and video.
 300-0709 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0709
292:612
 300-0710. Permitted signs by district.
The following signs are permitted by zoning district after obtaining a permit
from the Building Inspector:
SCROLL  A mode of message transition on an electronic message
display where the message appears to move vertically or across the
display surface.
SPONSORSHIP  The display of the name or logo of an offpremises
business that has contributed to an event or operation of
the on-site business. This does not include the advertisement of a
sale or product of the off-premises business.
TRAVEL  A mode of message transition on an electronic message
display where the message appears to move horizontally or across
the display surface.
A. In all districts, signs for places of worship, schools, libraries, museums,
social clubs or societies are permitted, pursuant to  300-0709 and the
following:
Permitted Signs for Places of Worship, Schools, Libraries,
Museums, Social Clubs or Societies
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 sign per primary structure
Maximum area 16 square feet per sign
Maximum height 5 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per each access street, not to exceed a
total of two per primary structure
Maximum area 10% of the front facade(s) of the building,
provided that the total area of all wall
signage shall not exceed 100 square feet
Accessory use signs
Maximum number 3
Maximum area 9 square feet per sign
Maximum height 5 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
B. In the L-C, R-1 and R-2 Districts, only one non-internally-illuminated
sign is permitted, pursuant to  300-0709 and the following:
 300-0709 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0710
292:613
Permitted Signs in the L-C, R-1 and R-2 Districts
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 per primary structure
Maximum area 2 square feet
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per primary structure
Maximum area 2 square feet
C. In the R-C District, the following types of non-internally-illuminated
signs are permitted pursuant to  300-0709 and the following:
Permitted Signs in the R-C District
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 per primary structure
Maximum area 16 square feet per sign
Maximum height 5 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per primary structure
Maximum area 10 square feet per sign
D. In the C-1 District, the following types of non-internally-illuminated
signs are permitted pursuant to  300-0709 and the following:
Permitted Signs in the C-1 District
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 per primary structure
Maximum area 36 square feet per sign
Maximum height 15 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per each business or 1 per each access
street
Maximum area Not to exceed 7% of the front facade of the
building per sign
E. In the C-2 and C-3 Districts, the following types of signs are permitted
pursuant to  300-0709 and the following:
 300-0710 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0710
292:614
Permitted Signs in the C-2 and C-3 Districts
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 per each access street, not to exceed a
total of 2 per primary structure
Maximum area 72 square feet per sign
Maximum height 20 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per each business or 1 per each access
street
Maximum area Not to exceed 10% of the front facade of
the building per sign
F. In the C-4, C-M, L-M and M Districts, the following types of signs are
permitted pursuant to  300-0709 and the following:
Permitted Signs in the C-4, C-M, L-M and M Districts
Description Use Regulation
Freestanding signs
Maximum number 1 per each access street, not to exceed a
total of 2 per primary structure
Maximum area 80 square feet if building area is less than
30,000 square feet of gross floor area or
100 square feet if building area is greater
than or equal to 30,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Maximum height 24 feet
Minimum setback 10 feet from property line
Wall signs
Maximum number 1 per each business or 1 per each access
street
Maximum area Not to exceed 13% of the front facade of
the building per sign
G. Electronic message displays (EMDs) are allowable in the following
zones: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-M, L-M, M, Zoning Districts. [Added
1-30-2017]
H. Electronic message displays are also allowable at the following uses,
regardless of zone: [Added 1-30-2017]
(1) Museums.
 300-0710 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0710
292:615
 300-0711. Off-premises advertising signage. [Added 2-28-2005;
12-23-2008]
Except as otherwise provided by this article, all off-premises advertising
signage shall be subject to the following standards:
(2) Theaters.
(3) Sporting arenas.
(4) Libraries.
(5) City parks.
(6) Schools.
I. Up to 50% of the total allowable area (freestanding or wall signage)
may be used for electronic message displays, and cannot be any larger
than 144 square feet. Only one EMD is allowed per property, either as a
freestanding sign or wall sign, but not both. Freestanding EMDs and
wall sign EMDs will follow the same height and setback regulations that
are set for the corresponding freestanding and wall signs in  300-0710.
[Added 1-30-2017]
J. Electronic message displays must be equipped with an automatic
dimmer, and be set not to exceed 0.3 footcandle over ambient light level
(measured at 150 feet). Each message on the sign must be displayed for
a minimum of 15 seconds, transitions must be no longer than one
second each. [Added 1-30-2017]
K. Allowable animation and transition content on EMDs must fall under
the definition for Level 1 or Level 2 [defined within  300-0709F(1)].
Level 3 or Level 4 animations and transitions may be permitted with the
approval of a special use permit. [Added 1-30-2017]
L. Sponsorship usage of electronic message displays is permitted. Offpremises
advertising is not allowable on electronic message displays.
[Added 1-30-2017]
A. Off-premises advertising signage shall be permitted in the C-M, L-M
and M Zones by right.
B. No off-premises advertising signage shall be erected within 100 feet of
distance of any mechanical traffic control device or sign that regulates
the starting and stopping of vehicles.
C. The size of allowable off-premises signage will be as follows:
(1) Four-lane roadway: a maximum size of 250 square feet overall sign
area.
(2) Two-lane roadway: a maximum size of 125 square feet overall sign
area.
 300-0710 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0711
292:616
 300-0712. Construction and maintenance standards.
All signs shall be subject to the following construction and maintenance
standards:
D. Maximum height for off-premises advertising signage shall be 24 feet
from grade.
E. A minimum clearance of 10 feet shall be maintained between the
bottom of any portion of sign and grade.
F. Separation from other off-premises signage shall be a minimum
separation of 600 feet measured radially.
G. No off-premises advertising signage shall overhang a public right-ofway
or required setback.
H. No off-premises advertising signage shall be mounted on a rooftop or
overhang a rooftop or be affixed to a structure.
I. No off-premises advertising signage shall be located on or over
required parking or drive aisle.
J. Off-premises advertising signs may be illuminated, provided that the
illumination shall be focused upon the sign itself, so as to prevent glare
upon surrounding areas.
K. Flashing signs, signs with intermittent illumination, or signs with
mechanically or electronically changing messages or signs with
animated parts shall not be permitted.
L. No off-premises advertising signage shall be located within 150 feet of a
residential zone and a park.
M. A front yard setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the front
property line.
N. Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the side property
line.
O. A minimum of 10 feet shall be required between any part of an offpremises
advertising sign, its support structure and the face of any
building or structure.
P. No part or portion of off-premises advertising signage, including sign or
support structure, shall be erected within the front yard setback
directly in front of the principal building on a site.
A. All internally illuminated signs shall be constructed in conformance
with the Standards for Electric Signs (U.L. 48) of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. If such sign does not bear the Underwriters
Laboratory label, the sign shall be inspected and certified by an
approved electrical inspection company. All transformers, wires and
 300-0711 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0712
292:617
 300-0713. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Building
Inspector. In the event that a sign is nonconforming, obsolete, unkempt
or unsafe, the Building Inspector shall give written notice to the named
owner of the land upon which the sign is located indicating the date by
which said sign shall be repaired or removed. In the event that the sign is
not brought into compliance within said time period, the Building Inspector
shall proceed with the repair or removal of the sign and, where appropriate,
the revocation of the permit and/or penalization as provided in the City
Code. All costs incurred for said repair or removal shall be assessed to the
owner of the sign or owner of the property, or both.
similar items shall be concealed. All wiring to freestanding signs shall
be underground; [Amended 2-24-2003]
B. All freestanding signs shall be designed and constructed as per the
Codes of New York State and shall bear the seal of a New York State
registered engineer or architect. [Amended 2-28-2005]
C. All signs shall be securely anchored and shall not swing or move in any
manner;
D. All signs, sign finishes, supports and electric work shall be maintained,
kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as but not
limited to faulty wiring, loose supports, braces, guys and anchors; and
E. All signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 245 of the City
Code.
A. Nonconforming signs. All signs which are not in compliance with this
article shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or replaced by another
nonconforming sign;
(2) All nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue for the life
of a business, provided that they are not deemed obsolete, unkempt
or unsafe. However, should any nonconforming sign come under
new ownership, such sign shall be brought into compliance or be
removed within six months;
(3) All portable, changeable-copy message signs shall be removed
within two years after the adoption of this article; and
(4) All nonconforming billboards shall be removed by March 1, 2007.
[Added 2-28-2005]
B. Obsolete signs. Any sign, existing on or after the effective date of this
article which no longer advertises an existing business conducted or
product sold on the premises upon which such sign is located shall be
removed within one year after the sign becomes obsolete. However, the
Planning Commission may grant a waiver to allow such obsolete signs
 300-0712 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0713
292:618
 300-0714. Interpretation; conflict with other laws or ordinances.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with
requirements of any other lawfully adopted regulations, rules or ordinances,
the most restrictive, or those which impose the highest standards, shall
govern.
in cases where the Commission finds that the obsolete sign is of
historical, cultural or architectural interest to the community and is
found not to be a detriment to the aesthetic quality of the area or to
have a negative impact on traffic safety.
C. Unsafe signs. The Building Inspector may cause the immediate removal
of any sign which is a source of immediate peril to persons or property
or is a menace to public health or safety.
D. Unkempt signs. Signs that are poorly maintained, illegible, rusted or
faded shall be removed or restored within 90 days after receiving notice
from the Building Inspector.
 300-0713 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0714
292:619

ARTICLE VIII
Planned Unit Residential Development
 300-0801. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a means whereby parcels of land can
be designed and developed without regard to the normal lot size, building
bulk and setback requirements of the typical zoning district. All dwelling
unit types or combinations thereof are permitted in this article. However,
minimum requirements are established to ensure that each living unit has
proper light and air, appropriate access to public ways and open space and
is properly connected to public facilities and properly related to adjacent
properties and buildings.
 300-0802. General provisions.
 300-0803. Permitted uses.
A planned unit residential development shall be subject to the regulations
and requirements of this chapter and shall be permitted exclusively for the
following uses:
 300-0804. Site size and development requirements.
A. The regulations set by this article shall be considered minimum
standards and shall apply uniformly to each classification or type of lot
and structure within the district.
B. Planned unit residential developments do not necessarily correspond in
minimum lot size, building area, type of dwelling unit, density lot
coverage or required open space to any other residentially zoned
district in the City.
C. The Planning Commission may, subject to approval by the City Council,
permit the development of a planned unit residential development in
any residential district, provided that all regulations and requirements
of this article are fully met.
A. Residential dwellings.
B. Accessory uses.
C. Public recreation.
D. Essential services.
E. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
rectories or parsonages.
F. Schools.
A. The proposed site shall be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwellings and other permitted uses pursuant to this article.
 300-0801 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0804
292:621
 300-0805. Area and bulk regulations.
B. The proposed site shall be approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council.
C. The proposed site shall be under single ownership or control.
D. The proposed site shall include at least five contiguous acres if located
within an R-1 District or at least three contiguous acres if located within
an R-2 District.
A. Single-family dwellings. The regulations of the R-1 and R-2 Districts
shall be observed and the average density maintained with the
following exceptions:
(1) The minimum lot area may be reduced by 20%.
(2) The minimum lot width may be reduced by 10%.
(3) The minimum front yard may be reduced to 15 feet.
(4) The minimum rear yard may be reduced to 15 feet where the lot
abuts common open space land.
(5) The minimum side yard(s) may be reduced to five feet.
(6) All lots within the planned residential area shall face and be
serviced by existing or new streets constructed within the planned
residential site boundaries but shall not face on collector-type or
arterial-type streets as determined by the Planning Commission.
B. Townhouse or apartment dwellings.
(1) No townhouse or apartment shall be more than three habitable
stories rising no more than 30 feet or 21/2 stories above ground.
(2) No townhouse or apartment shall be set back less than 50 feet from
any road or street (right-of-way) line or property line.
(3) The end walls of adjacent townhouses or apartments shall be
separated by not less than 11/2 times the height of the tallest
building.
(4) The space between faces of townhouses or apartment buildings
shall be 21/2 times the height of the tallest building or 50 feet as
the minimum.
(5) At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit, and such spaces shall be within 150 feet of any
commonly used entranceway for such dwelling unit. All open
parking areas shall be sufficiently screened from adjoining
properties by a compact hedge, solid fence or masonry wall five
feet in height.
 300-0804 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0806
292:622
 300-0806. Supplemental design standards.
 300-0807. Density.
The permitted density (dwelling units per acre) shall be computed by
multiplying the number of total acres within the proposed planned unit
residential development by the following units per acre:
 300-0808. Open space.
A. Buildings shall be so designed as to avoid monotonous patterns of
construction or repetitive spaces or modules between buildings.
B. Streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic on the site.
C. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
D. The Planning Commission shall require such additional standards as
are applicable to the proposed site and any development thereon, such
as grading, parking and landscaping, including adequate buffer zones
with tall plantings to sufficiently screen open parking areas of close
proximity to adjoining private properties.
A. In R-1 Districts: 5.5 (approximately 8,000 square feet per unit). The
principal use is to occupy no more than 25% of the proposed site.
B. In R-2 Districts: 8.7 (approximately 5,000 square feet per unit).
(Example: A ten-acre planned unit residential development in an R-1
District can contain a maximum of 55 dwelling units; and in an R-2
District, 87 dwelling units.)
A. Open space land shall be set aside and developed for the common use
and enjoyment of all residents in a planned unit residential
development area. The amount, location and proposed use of all open
space land within the site shall be clearly shown. Of the gross area of
open space land, a minimum of 40% shall be suitable for active
recreational purposes, and access to these open space lands shall be
convenient to all residents. For purposes of calculation, streets,
sidewalks or land lying within 10 feet of any townhouse or garden
apartment shall not be considered as open space land.
B. The applicant shall establish and ensure the future ownership of the
permanent open space land, as well as indicate the provision for the
burden of maintenance and control of the open space if said open space
is held in private ownership. In addition, the City Council, at its
discretion, may at any time accept the dedication of land or any interest
therein for public use and maintenance, but the City Council need not
acquire as a condition of the approval of the planned unit residential
development the land to be set aside for common open space dedicated
or made available for public use.
 300-0806 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0809
292:623
 300-0809. Application procedure.
Planned unit residential development applications and site plans shall be
prepared in accordance with the site plan review application process
(Article IX) and include such other pertinent information as the Planning
Commission shall prescribe. In addition, said application shall include
written statements of facts concerning:
 300-0810. Review procedure.
Any owner of not less than five contiguous acres of land in any R-1 District
or not less than three contiguous acres in any R-2 District may request,
in writing, that the City Council let the regulations of this article apply to
such property. The City Council shall then refer the matter to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendations in accordance with the
following procedures:
 300-0811. Approval procedure.
The final planned unit residential development shall be subject to the
following approval procedures:
A. The suitability of the site (i.e., the proposed density, the location and
proposed uses of facilities) shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
B. Provisions for services, maintenance and the continued protection of
the planned unit residential development and adjoining territories.
C. The disposition of open space land and provisions for maintenance and
control of the open space land. Financial responsibility for such open
space land shall be clearly indicated.
D. The phasing of construction.
E. The furnishing of evidence of the developer's financial capacity to carry
out the development and other installations connected to the
development.
A. Pursuant to Article IX of this chapter, the applicant shall prepare a
planned unit residential development site plan.
B. The Planning Commission shall review and, if the plan is in compliance
with the regulations and intent of this chapter, recommend the planned
unit residential development site plan to City Council for its review.
C. City Council shall then review the final planned unit residential
development plan within 45 days of the Planning Commission's
recommendation.
A. City Council may approve of the final planned unit residential
development plan, provided that it is in accordance with the regulations
of this article and in harmony with the provisions in Article IX.
 300-0809 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0811
292:624
Furthermore, once the plan is approved, Council shall sign the plan and
record it pursuant to Chapter 260 of the City Code.
B. Should the applicant fail to complete the planned unit residential
development within the approved time frame, or should the plans be
amended, the applicant shall obtain reapproval from the Planning
Commission and City Council.
C. Approval of development phasing. The applicant shall provide a
sequence of the construction and development phases. For each phase,
all construction and site improvements shall be completed before
building permits are issued for subsequent phases. Furthermore, in the
event that any minimum requirements have not been satisfied when the
development or any phase of the development is complete, the
responsible party shall correct the deficiency, regardless of the cost
involved and regardless of whether or not the plans and construction
had been approved by any City official.
 300-0811 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0811
292:625

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Review
 300-0901. Purpose.
It is the intent of this article to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Jamestown by assuring that the
development or redevelopment of real property is appropriate and
compatible with the development of adjacent or neighboring real property.
It is further intended to ensure the conservation and enhancement of
natural and man-made resources within the City through a process of
review and approval of site plans. It is not intended to prohibit development
that is otherwise permitted under this chapter. Rather, it is intended to
improve the design, function, aesthetics and safety of development projects
which are otherwise in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
 300-0902. Applicability.
All proposed development or redevelopment of real property, other than
single-family residential projects, shall hereafter be in conformance with
a site plan approved by either staff or the Planning Commission, provided
that:
 300-0903. Application procedure: preapplication conference.
Prior to submission of a formal application for approval, the applicant or
his agent shall appear before staff (i.e., the Director of Public Works, the
Building Inspector and the Planning Coordinator) for preliminary review of
a sketch plan of the proposed development. At the time of the meeting,
staff shall assist the applicant in determining zoning compliance and offer
recommendations in order to best prepare the plan for final review (e.g.,
A. If the proposal exceeds any of the following criteria or falls under any of
the following classifications, the site plan shall be brought before the
Planning Commission for review and approval:
(1) Twelve parking spaces;
(2) Five thousand square feet of gross floor area;
(3) All proposed manufacturing or light manufacturing developments
or redevelopments;
(4) Any expansion of an existing facility which exceeds 25% of the
gross floor area of such facility;
(5) Any new construction of a multiple-residential use consisting of
three or more units; or
(6) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Added 12-16-2002]
B. No physical alterations shall be made to a site, nor shall building
permits be issued, until all requirements of this chapter are met.
 300-0901 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0903
292:627
layout, design, landscaping, etc.). The sketch plan shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
 300-0904. Application procedure: formal application. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
Prior to submission of the formal application and final site plan, the
applicant should submit any revisions to the site plan for staff review.
Staff shall review the plan and make any final recommendations to the
applicant prior to submitting the final site plan for review. Upon completion
of the procedures set forth in this section, a completed application for site
plan approval shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk, together with not fewer than 12 copies of the proposed site
plan. Said application for site plan approval shall be completed on a form
provided by the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
Said application shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk not less than two weeks prior to the next scheduled meeting of
the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of a filed application for site plan
approval, the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall forward
the same to the Planning Coordinator for his review. The Planning
Coordinator shall, as part of the review process, obtain comments from
the Department of Public Works, Board of Public Utilities, Fire and Police
Departments and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation
(and other City departments as necessary) and shall thereafter render a
report to the Planning Commission. Said report shall be submitted prior to
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
 300-0905. Application procedure: final site plan.
The final site plan shall include the following site details unless as otherwise
approved by the Director of Public Works:
A. A drawing of the applicant's entire holding, with boundaries plotted to
scale at a minimum scale of one inch per 30 feet;
B. An outline of the proposed development showing the proposed layout of
streets, buildings and other features which may be of assistance to staff
in understanding the proposal;
C. The parcel area in square feet and the existing and proposed building
footprint(s) area in square feet;
D. Delineation of parking areas, loading areas, driveways, streets, buffer
strips and green areas;
E. Description of proposed use(s) and calculation of the floor area and/or
seating capacity for each use; and
F. An outline of all existing structures, paved areas and other features.
A. Site data and information:
 300-0903 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0905
292:628
(1) The name, address and phone number of the owner/applicant. If
the applicant is not the owner, authorization for said plan shall be
provided by the owner;
(2) The name, address and phone number of the architect and/or
engineer responsible for the preparation of the plan. Said plan shall
be stamped by a New York State licensed landscape architect,
architect or engineer;
(3) The name, address and phone number of the New York State
licensed land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat.
Said survey shall include, at a minimum, two benchmarks and
clearly delineate between existing and proposed survey
information (e.g., dashed, line thickness). Said plan shall indicate
the applicant's entire holding, including the boundaries of real
property plotted to scale;
(4) A description of the project, including the proposed use(s) of the
real property;
(5) Drawing dimensions shall not exceed 30 inches by 42 inches;
(6) North arrow, date and scale (minimum scale: one inch equals 30
feet);
(7) All lettering and numbering shall be, at a minimum, 1/10 inch;
(8) The lot size and zoning classification;
(9) A ruled box having dimensions of five inches by seven inches for the
date of approval of the Planning Commission and plan notes. Said
ruled box shall appear on the first sheet or page of the plans;
(10) A detailed schedule for project construction and completion; and
(11) A completed Part I of an environmental assessment form (EAF) for
all projects as required by 6 NYCRR 617, New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act.
B. Natural features.
(1) The location and dimensions of all existing landscaping features,
including trees, shrubs, greenspace and similar amenities;
(2) Existing watercourses, wetlands or other natural features of the
site;
(3) Soil characteristics, such as load bearing and drainage capacity;
(4) Geological features, such as depth to bedrock and the location of
rock outcrops;
 300-0905 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0905
292:629
(5) Topographic features, showing existing contours in two-foot
intervals, except where steep slopes make this graphically
impractical; and
(6) Hydrologic features, including existing drainage and runoff
patterns; flood hazard areas; wetlands; and depth to groundwater.
C. Existing development and infrastructure (where applicable).
(1) The location and dimensions of all existing buildings, including
footprints, setback distances and square footage calculations;
(2) The location and design of all existing parking and loading areas;
(3) The location and dimensions of all abutting parcels to include
building footprints and all departing property lines. Said parcels
shall be identified by the property owner and parcel identification
number;
(4) The location and design of all other existing site details, including
walkways and sidewalks; refuse storage and disposal areas; drains
and culverts; retaining walls and fences; signs; outdoor storage
areas; outdoor lighting facilities; all utilities within or bordering the
site (i.e., gas, water, electrical, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
telephone, district heat, cable television, meters, light standards,
fire hydrants, utility poles and other relevant structures or
markers); and
(5) An elevation drawing indicating the existing design of the
building's facade.
D. Proposed development.
(1) The location and dimensions of all proposed buildings, including
footprints, setback distances and square footage calculations;
(2) An elevation drawing indicating the proposed design of the
building's facade;
(3) The location and design of all proposed parking and loading areas,
including calculations of the required number of parking spaces
pursuant to Article V of this chapter; delineation of both regular
and handicapped spaces; and proposed parking and loading area
surface materials;
(4) The proposed ingress and egress routes, including the location of
curb cuts and traffic patterns on the site;
(5) The location and design of all other proposed site details, including
walkways and sidewalks; refuse storage and disposal areas; drains
and culverts; retaining walls and fences; signs; outdoor storage
areas; outdoor lighting facilities (indicating the type of light and
direction of illumination); all utilities within or bordering the site
 300-0905 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0905
292:630
 300-0906. Landscaping requirements.
All proposed developments shall meet the following landscaping
requirements:
(i.e., gas, water, electrical, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
telephone, district heat, cable television, meters, light standards,
fire hydrants, utility poles, and other relevant structures or
markers);
(6) A landscaping plan (pursuant to the requirements of  300-0906),
including a planting schedule and calculations of proposed green
space (e.g., the locations and types of shade trees, shrubs and
ground covers and a delineation of buffer strips);
(7) A grading and drainage plan, including proposed contours in twofoot
intervals, except where steep slopes make this graphically
impractical;
(8) A drainage analysis, indicated on the plan, to include at a minimum:
(a) Drainage areas;
(b) Existing and proposed drainage coefficients;
(c) Two-, ten- and one-hundred-year rainfall intensity;
(d) Hydraulic computations; and
(e) Storm sewer profiles.
(9) All inlets, swales, pipes and invert grades (to include sizes and
capacities); and
(10) The proposed methods of minimizing erosion and sediment
transport from the site during construction.
E. At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, additional site details
may be required of the applicant.
A. In every instance, efforts shall be made towards the maximum retention
of existing vegetation.
B. A landscaped buffer area shall be required between the applicant's
property and adjoining lands.
C. In all districts, public and private parking lots or automotive use areas
containing more than 10 parking spaces shall have at least one shade
tree for each 10 parking spaces. Said tree(s) shall have a trunk
diameter of at least two inches in width.
D. All trees, shrubs and plantings shall be maintained by the owner or
lessee of the property and shall not be removed when a lot is
reconstructed or enlarged unless said trees, shrubs and plantings are
 300-0905 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0906
292:631
 300-0907. General review criteria.
Review of a proposed site plan shall include the following:
moved to another location on the lot upon approval of a site plan by the
Planning Commission.
E. Trees, shrubs and plantings shall be so located as to provide visual
relief and to assure safe patterns of internal vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
A. Compliance with all federal, state, regional and local laws, ordinances
and regulations.
B. Compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
C. Compliance with the direction and intent of all formally adopted plans
or goals, including but not limited to the Jamestown Comprehensive
Plan; Jamestown Riverfront Reclamation and Development Study;
Brooklyn Square Urban Renewal Plan; and any future plans or goals
which are formally adopted after the date of this chapter.
D. Compatibility of design and arrangement of buildings, lighting, signs
and automotive use areas as such relate to the site and character of the
neighborhood, adjacent buildings, public parks and historic landmarks.
E. Adequacy of vehicular access and circulation, including intersections,
road widths, pavement surfaces, loading areas, off-street parking areas,
dividers and traffic controls.
F. Adequacy of pedestrian access and circulation, including walkways,
control of intersections and overall pedestrian convenience and
handicapped accessibility.
G. Adequacy of drainage and stormwater management facilities. In this
regard, no stormwater shall be caused to be discharged upon
neighboring properties, across public sidewalks or into public streets.
Surface water drainage facilities shall be designed to handle all on-site
runoff (ten-year-storm frequency as the minimum design criteria), and
the discharge into public storm sewers shall be at a rate which can be
adequately handled by existing storm sewers and drainage ways.
Measures shall be taken to prevent ponding, flooding or erosion. Where
storm sewers do not exist, the Planning Commission may approve
alternative means of discharging stormwater upon receipt of a
recommendation from the Department of Public Works, where such
alternative adequately protects the public health, safety and welfare.
H. Adequacy of landscaped areas, including the type, size and
arrangement of trees, shrubs, plantings, vegetative cover, berms,
fencing and other amenities.
I. In the case of an apartment complex or other multifamily dwelling, the
adequacy of usable open space for play areas and recreation.
 300-0906 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0907
292:632
 300-0908. Review criteria: Chadakoin River Area.
Review of any proposed site plan which is situated within 100 feet of the
Chadakoin River shall be subject to the following:
 300-0909. Review criteria: light manufacturing and
manufacturing uses.
J. The protection of adjacent or neighboring properties against noise,
glare, unsightliness or other objectionable features.
K. The adequacy of emergency access, including but not limited to fire
lanes and the provision of fire hydrants.
L. The adequacy of the site layout for efficient snow plowing and storage.
The required number of parking spaces shall be maintained year round
and shall not be utilized for snow storage.
M. The avoidance or mitigation of any negative environmental impact
identified during the environmental review conducted as part of the site
plan review.
A. Surface and subsurface water discharged from the site shall be
substantially free from contamination;
B. The natural shoreline edge shall be preserved in a vegetated state to
the maximum extent practicable; and
C. The uses proposed shall protect the visual quality of the river corridor.
A. Planning Commission review of any proposed site plan for a Light
Manufacturing (L-M) use shall be subject to the following
determinations:
(1) Such use shall be wholly contained within an enclosed building;
(2) Such use shall not have an adverse impact on the surrounding area
or environment;
(3) Such use shall not produce odors, chemicals, dust, smoke, gases,
noises or vibrations beyond the limits of the walls of an enclosed
building; and
(4) Such use shall not be a menace to public health or safety.
B. Planning Commission review of any proposed site plan for a
Manufacturing (M) use shall be subject to the following determinations:
(1) Such use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of emission of
odor, chemicals, dust, smoke, gases or continuing, vexatious
noises; and
(2) Such use shall not be a menace to public health or safety.
 300-0907 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0910
292:633
 300-0910. Costs.
All costs incurred by the Planning Commission for consultation fees and/or
other extraordinary expenses in connection with the review of a proposed
site plan shall be charged to the applicant, provided that such expenses
shall not exceed 1% of the estimated market value of the proposed
development as determined by the City Assessor. Prior to incurring such
costs, the Planning Commission shall notify the applicant. Such costs may
be in lieu of or in addition to costs reimbursable for environmental review
pursuant to 6 NYCRR 617.
 300-0911. Review procedure. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
A. Staff review. In each instance when a site plan shall be reviewed at the
staff level (pursuant to  300-0901), staff shall render a decision to
approve, approve with conditions or deny a proposed site plan within 20
days of the filing of the application and submission of the final site plan.
The decision of staff shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and with the Building
Inspector, and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant. In
the event that the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of staff, said
applicant shall be heard by the Planning Commission within 45 days
from the date of filing the decision in the office of the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk.
B. Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall render a
decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny a proposed site
plan within 45 days of the filing of the application and submission of the
final site plan. In the event that a public hearing is requested by the
Planning Commission or the applicant, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public hearing and shall render a decision to approve, approve
with conditions or deny a proposed site plan within 62 days of the filing
of the application and submission of the final site plan. The Planning
Commission shall give public notice of such public hearing by
publication of a hearing notice in the official newspaper at least five
days prior to the hearing date. Anything herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding, an extension of review periods may be
granted upon consent of both the applicant and the Planning
Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Director of Administrative
Services/City Clerk and with the Building Inspector, and a copy of the
decision shall be mailed to the applicant. In the event that the applicant
wishes to appeal the decision of the Planning Commission, said
applicant shall have 30 days from the date of filing the decision in the
office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk in which to
commence special proceedings pursuant to the provisions of Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
 300-0910 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0912
292:634
 300-0912. Completion of construction. [Amended 2-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
An approved site plan shall be carried into effect and completed by the
applicant or his successors or assigns within one year of the date that the
decision is filed in the office of the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk. Should the applicant require an extension in order to carry
the site plan into effect, an extension may be granted by the Director of
Public Works for a period of time that is deemed necessary to complete
the project. The applicant shall submit a written request to the Director of
Public Works which specifies the reasons for said extension. The Director
of Public Works shall then notify the Building Inspector, the Director of
Administrative Services/City Clerk and the applicant, in writing, of any such
extension of time and the date upon which it shall expire.
 300-0913. Inspection of improvements; certificate of occupancy.
 300-0914. Modification of provisions.
The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to modify any requirements
of this article upon an affirmative vote by 2/3 of the entire Planning
Commission in cases where the Planning Commission determines that the
existing building configuration or lot configuration creates a hardship to
A. Inspection of improvements. The Building Inspector shall be
responsible for the overall inspection of site improvements, including
consultation with the Planning Commission and other officials and
agencies, as appropriate. In the event of the expiration of a site plan
approval, including extensions if granted, the applicant shall repair any
site preparation earthwork, including rough grading and foundation
excavation, to return the site to a safe and aesthetically acceptable
condition, as directed by the Building Inspector.
B. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The Building Inspector shall
issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that all improvements shown
on the site plan are complete and all requirements of this chapter are
met. The Building Inspector may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy where the applicant guarantees the completion of
incomplete improvements within a period of time designated by the
Building Inspector by the posting of a performance bond for not less
than 110% of the value of the aforesaid incomplete improvements. No
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be renewed, nor shall a
permanent certificate of occupancy be issued, where the conditions of
site plan approval have been violated or any element of the project
violates the requirements of this chapter.
C. Denial of certificate of occupancy. Should the applicant fail to fulfill all
the provisions of the approved site plan, the Building Inspector shall
withhold the certificate of occupancy for said project until all
improvements shown on the site plan are complete and all
requirements of this chapter are met.
 300-0912 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-0914
292:635
the applicant in meeting such requirements and where the Commission
determines that the alternative measures proposed adequately conform to
the purpose and intent of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall not
be obligated to reduce any requirements of this article where the site size
or configuration of the proposed use is insufficient as determined by the
requirements of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall have no power
or authority to waive the procedures contained herein.
 300-0915. Modification of approved site plans.
Any proposed modifications to site improvements, buildings or signage
for a site which has undergone site plan review shall be reviewed by
the Building Inspector in consultation with the Director of Public Works
and Planning Coordinator. If the Building Inspector determines that the
proposed modifications do not significantly derogate from the approved site
plan, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for such proposed work and
document the site plan file that said modification has been approved. If the
Building Inspector finds that such proposed work may derogate significantly
from the approved plan, the Building Inspector shall require the applicant
to submit the modified site plan for approval before a permit shall be issued
for such work. The application and review procedures shall be the same as
for a new site plan.
 300-0916. Supplemental regulations and fees.
The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to adopt supplemental rules,
regulations and fee schedules appropriate for the administration of this
article, subject to the approval of the Jamestown City Council.
 300-0914 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-0916
292:636
ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
 300-1001. Administrative authority.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall keep a complete file of all applications, permits, orders,
certificates, requirements and decisions affecting each and every
application filed pursuant to this chapter.
 300-1002. (Reserved)59
 300-1003. Certificate of zoning compliance.
Prior to the issuance of an excavation permit or building permit in
conjunction with any construction project or prior to the change in use of
any structure or parcel of land, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be
obtained from the office of the Building Inspector. Said certificate shall be
granted only if the application complies with the zoning regulations of this
chapter. Furthermore:
A. All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be in
writing, signed by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, on
forms furnished by the Building Inspector and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The nature and definite purpose of the building, other structure or
use;
(2) A description of the property and all existing and proposed
structure(s);
(3) A statement of any restrictions by deed or other instrument of
record; and
(4) An agreement to comply with this chapter and all other laws,
ordinances and regulations that may be applicable.
B. Upon written request and application for a certificate of zoning
compliance by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, the
Building Inspector shall inspect any structure(s) or tract of land
existing on the effective date of this chapter and shall issue a certificate
of zoning compliance, certifying:
(1) The use of the building, other structure or tract of land; and
(2) Whether such use conforms to all the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Building Inspector shall make a determination within 10 days after
the application is received.
59.Editor's Note: Former  300-1002, Building permits, was repealed 3-19-2007.
 300-1001 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1003
292:637
 300-1004. Registration of new and moved businesses. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
All persons engaging in new businesses within the City after the effective
date of this chapter and all persons presently doing business within the
City who change the location of their business within the City after the
effective date of this chapter shall register the address of the business with
the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk not less than seven days
prior to the opening of the business or new place of business to the public.
 300-1005. Inspection.
The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to cause any use, structure
or tract of land to be inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the
remediation of any condition found to be in violation of any provisions of
this chapter. After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed
on any structure(s) or tract of land covered by such order, except to comply
with such order. The Building Inspector may cause the removal or
discontinuation of any use or structure which is determined to be a source
of immediate peril to persons or property or is a threat to public health or
safety.
 300-1006. Penalties for offenses.
D. No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued if there are any
pending violations of law or orders of the Building Inspector, the Board
of Appeals or the City Council.
E. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued if the application is in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense,
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Penalties.
B. A person shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section in any
case where an order to remove any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter has been served by the Building Inspector upon the owner,
general agent, lessee or tenant of the building, other structure or tract
of land or any part thereof or upon the architect, builder, contractor or
anyone who commits or assists in any such violation unless such person
shall comply with such order within 10 days after the service thereof.
Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation and shall be punishable hereunder.
C. In addition to the foregoing remedies, the City Council may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or restrain any
violation of this chapter.
 300-1003 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-1006
292:638
ARTICLE XI
Board of Appeals
 300-1101. Creation and organization.
 300-1102. Meetings, minutes and rules of procedure.
A. The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members, as appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council for terms of three years.
Two of the appointments shall expire every year, and no more than
three regular terms shall expire in any year, so that the majority of the
Board shall always be of members of at least one year's experience. The
Chairman of the Board shall be designated by the Mayor. The Board
shall receive no compensation for its services. All members of the Board
of Appeals holding office upon the effective date of this chapter shall
continue in office until the expiration of the term to which they were
appointed.
B. The Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk shall act as its
secretary and shall keep the minutes, decisions, opinions and the like as
a public record, certifying various copies thereof to the proper officers
and departments. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
A. The meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at such times as the
members shall determine. The Chairman may call a meeting at any
time, or two members may call a meeting of the Board by filing a copy of
such call with the secretary, who shall then notify the other members of
the Board of the time, place and purpose of the meeting.
B. All of the meetings of the Board shall be open to the public pursuant to
Article 7 of the Public Officers Law.
C. Unless otherwise provided by local law or ordinance, the jurisdiction of
the Board of Appeals shall be appellate only and shall be limited to
hearing and deciding appeals from and reviewing any order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
administrative official charged with the enforcement of any ordinance
or local law adopted pursuant to this article.
D. The Board shall have a right to consider matters involving the public
welfare in executive session but shall take no action in relation to such
matters except in public sessions and by open vote.
E. The presence of four members shall be necessary for a quorum.
F. Copies of all petitions, minutes, decisions, opinions and the like shall be
delivered to members of the Board of Appeals and the Planning
Commission.
G. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon every question of fact, including any failure to vote.
 300-1101 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1102
292:639
 300-1103. Authority to request assistance.
The Board of Appeals shall have the authority to call upon any department,
agency or employee of the City for such assistance as shall be deemed
necessary and as shall be authorized by City Council. Such department,
agency or employee may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred as a
result of such assistance.
 300-1104. Hearing of appeals.
H. The Board of Appeals, consistent with law and ordinance, may adopt
rules of conduct and procedure.
A. In order to be heard by the Board of Appeals, an application for appeal
shall be filed with the office of the Director of Administrative Services/
City Clerk by the owner or the tenant of the property or his duly
authorized agent, or by any person aggrieved, or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the City for which such appeal or
application is sought, specifying the grounds for said appeal and the
relief sought. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount as provided in Chapter 175, Licenses and Permits, unless it is
submitted by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City,
whereby no fee shall be required. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006; 8-28-2017]
B. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal; however, all appeals shall be taken within 60 days after the
filing of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such ordinance or local law.
C. The Board of Appeals shall give public notice thereof by publication in
the official paper at least five days prior to the date of such hearing and
shall, at least five days before such hearing, mail notices to all involved
parties.
D. The Board of Appeals shall likewise mail a copy of the notice of appeal
at least five days before such hearing to owners of property within a
radius of 100 feet of the site of the property involved in the appeal,
insofar as the same may be practical. The names of the property owners
shall be ascertained by the Board of Appeals or its secretary through an
examination of the assessment roll.
E. In addition to the giving of notice as aforesaid, the Building Inspector
shall also cause a sign to be erected on the property involved in the
appeal at least five days preceding the date of the hearing. Said sign
shall state that the property upon which the sign is erected is the
subject of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall also
designate the time and place of the hearing. Said sign shall be removed
from the subject property by the Building Inspector immediately after
the hearing is held.
 300-1102 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-1104
292:640
 300-1105. Appeals for interpretation.
 300-1106. Appeals for use variances.
The Board of Appeals, on an appeal from the decision or determination of
the administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
shall have the power to grant use variances, as defined herein:
F. The administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forward
all documentation constituting the record of the appealed action to the
Board of Appeals.
G. Any appeal to the Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from.
A. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that there is an error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement,
decision or determination by any administrative official of the City
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Board of Appeals may reverse, modify or affirm, in whole or in part,
any such order, requirement, decision or determination appealed; and
have all the powers of the administrative official from whom this appeal
is taken, provided that all decisions of the Board of Appeals be in strict
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. However, the Board of Appeals shall not have any power or authority to
modify, in whole or in part, decisions required of the Planning
Commission by this chapter.
A. No such use variance shall be granted without a showing by the
applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have
caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary
hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that
for each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for this
particular district where property is located:
(1) The applicant can not realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(2) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique
and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or
neighborhood;
(3) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood; and
(4) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
B. The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant and at the
 300-1104 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1106
292:641
 300-1107. Appeals for area variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal from
a decision or determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, to grant area variances as defined herein:
 300-1108. Appeals for special use permits.
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all applications for special use
permits in all such cases upon which the Board of Appeals is specifically
authorized to do so. All uses listed as subject to a special use permit
authorized by the Board of Appeals are declared to possess characteristics
of such unique and special form that each use shall be considered as an
individual case. Such uses shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective districts, subject to the requirements hereof:
same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and
the health, safety and welfare of the community.
A. In making its determination, the Board of Appeals shall consider the
benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed against
the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or
community. In making such determination the Board shall also
consider:
(1) Whether the granting of such variance will result in an undesirable
change in the character of the neighborhood;
(2) Whether the granting of such variance will be a detriment to
nearby properties;
(3) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by
feasible means other than the area variance;
(4) Whether the requested area variance is excessive;
(5) Whether the granting of such variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(6) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, in which
consideration shall be relevant but not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
B. The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the
same time preserve and protect the character, health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood and the community.
A. Should a particular site involved in such application be deemed wholly
inadequate for the proposed use, the Board of Appeals may deny the
application in total.
 300-1106 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-1108
292:642
 300-1109. Imposition of conditions.
The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both variances and special
use permits, have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and
restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of
the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse
impact such variance or special use permit may have on the neighborhood
or community.
 300-1110. Referral to planning agency.
B. A special use permit shall be authorized by the Board of Appeals,
provided that all of the following findings are made:
(1) Such use shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter, taking into account the location and size of use, the
nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in
connection with it and the size of the site in respect to streets
giving access thereto;
(2) Such use shall not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent
property, taking into account the possibility of screening or other
protective measures to protect adjacent properties in any R
District;
(3) Such use shall not create a hazard to health, safety or general
welfare;
(4) Such use shall not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
nor be detrimental to the residents thereof; and
(5) Such use shall not otherwise be detrimental to the public
convenience or welfare.
A. Pursuant to  239-m of the General Municipal Law, prior to granting any
variances or special use permits the Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Refer the matter to the Jamestown Planning Commission for
comment; and
(2) Refer the matter to the County Planning Board for comment if the
variance or special use permit applies to real property which is
within 500 feet of any of the following:
(a) The boundary of any existing or proposed county or state park;
(b) The right-of-way of any county or state parkway or thruway,
expressway or highway;
(c) The right-of-way of any county- or state-owned stream or
drainage channel; or
 300-1108 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1110
292:643
 300-1111. Decision of appeals.
 300-1112. Rehearing of appeals.
No person, firm or corporation shall appeal the same determination more
than once in any twelve-month period. However, the Board of Appeals
may, after a unanimous vote of all members present, rehear any order,
determination or decision of the Board of Appeals. Such hearing is subject
to the same notification provisions as an original hearing. Upon such
rehearing, the Board may reverse, modify or annul its original decision upon
a unanimous vote of all members then present, provided that the Board
finds that the rights vested in persons acting in good faith in reliance upon
the reheard order, decision or determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
 300-1113. Appealing decision of Board of Appeals. [Amended
2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
In the event that the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Board
of Appeals, said applicant shall have 30 days from the date of filing the
decision in the office of the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk
in which to commence special proceedings pursuant to the provisions of
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(d) The boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a
public building or institution is located.
B. Within 30 days, said agency shall report its recommendation to the
Board of Appeals, and, in the event of its failure to do so, the Board of
Appeals may act without such a report.
A. The Board of Appeals shall decide upon the appeal within 62 days after
the conduct of said hearing.
B. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such administrative official or to grant an
interpretation, variance or special use permit.
C. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution. Where
findings are required, the decision shall set forth each required finding,
supported by substantial evidence or other data considered by the
Board of Appeals in each specific case, or, in the case of denial, the
decision shall include the findings which are not satisfied.
D. Each decision of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk and mailed to the
appellant within five business days after the day such decision is
rendered. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 8-28-2017]
E. The Board of Appeals shall, within seven days after any final action, file
a report of the final action it has taken with the City Planning
Commission and, where applicable, to the County Planning Board.
 300-1110 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-1114
292:644
 300-1114. Modification of regulations.
 300-1115. Lapse of authorization.
 300-1116. Violations; enforcement.
Failure to comply with any condition or restriction prescribed by the Board
of Appeals in approving an appeal for a variance or special use permit
shall constitute a violation. Such violation shall be sufficient grounds for the
revocation of any variance or special use permit or for the imposition of
penalties and other applicable remedies.
A. Reduction of parking spaces for places of assembly. The Board of
Appeals may authorize a reduction of not more than 50% in the number
of required off-street parking spaces for places of assembly when
located on the same lot with other uses, provided that in accordance
with the times of operation and times of peak demand, there will be no
conflict in the joint use of such off-street parking.
B. Exception from exterior side yard requirements. The Board of Appeals
may modify the exterior side yard requirements for principal buildings
on deep corner lots, provided that the following findings are made:
(1) That the rear yard is at least 50 feet in depth; and
(2) That such modification shall not adversely affect the adjoining
property.
A. Any variance, special use permit or modification of regulations
authorized by the Board of Appeals shall be automatically revoked
unless a building permit conforming to all the conditions and
requirements established by the Board of Appeals is obtained within six
months of the date of approval by the Board of Appeals and
construction is commenced within one year of such date of approval.
B. The Building Inspector may cause the revocation or discontinuation of
any variance or special use permit for a use or structure which has been
abandoned for a period of one year.
 300-1114 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1116
292:645

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
 300-1201. Standard amendment; authority.
The City Council may, by its own motion or on petition or on
recommendation of the City Planning Commission, and after proper public
notice and public hearing, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations,
provisions or boundaries of this chapter.
 300-1202. Provisional amendment.
 300-1203. Procedure.
A. In the case of a proposed amendment which involves the
reclassification of an area to a less restricted district, the City Council
may require the petitioner to submit a site plan showing the extent,
location and character of proposed structures and uses. The City
Council shall refer such proposed site plan to the Planning Commission
for its recommendation and may require that such plan be modified to
ensure its compatibility to adjacent areas and may qualify its approval
of such amendment by attaching a special endorsement thereto. Such
endorsement may require that any future additions to the site plan area
be resubmitted to the Planning Commission to determine that the
addition is substantially in agreement with the intent of the original
ordinance amendment. Lack of general conformity in architectural
design to the original development may be considered a reasonable
basis for refusal to issue a building permit for such an addition.
B. Prior to said reclassification action, no building permit shall be issued
for construction within the area described by said amendment except in
accordance with the Council-approved site plan and with all conditions
and limitations placed thereon by the City Council or in accordance
with the applicable zoning regulations. Unless application for a building
permit for such special development is made within a period of one year
after the Council's approval, said approval shall be void, and the zoning
classification shall be as it was when the petition for amendment was
filed.
A. A petition to amend, change or supplement the text of this chapter or
any zoning district designated on the Zoning Map60 herein shall be filed
with the Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk. All
amendments shall be in accordance with the provisions of  83 of the
General City Law applicable thereto. All proposed amendment(s) shall
be submitted to the Planning Commission for a report and
recommendation prior to any action thereon by City Council. If the
Planning Commission recommends against the enactment of any
proposed amendment, it shall become effective only by a three-fourths
60.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Director of Administrative Services/City Clerk.
 300-1201 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  300-1203
292:647
 300-1204. Rehearing on petition.
The disposition of a petition for amendment by the Council shall be final,
and disapproval or denial of the proposed amendment shall void the
petition. No new petition for an amendment which has been previously
denied by the Council shall be considered by it except for a vote to table or
to receive and file, and no public hearing shall be held on such amendment
within a period of one year from the date of such previous denial, unless the
Planning Commission shall find that there have been substantial changes in
the situation which would merit a rehearing.
vote of City Council. [Amended 2-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
8-28-2017]
B. In those instances involving the proposed reclassification of any zoning
district wherein a public hearing is required pursuant to the provisions
of  83 of the General City Law, the City Council or the Planning
Commission, as the case may be, shall give public notice of the public
hearing by publication in the official paper at least five days prior to the
date of such hearing and shall at least five days before such hearing
mail notices of such public hearing to all owners of real property within
the area proposed to be reclassified and to all owners of real property
within a radius of 100 feet of the boundaries of the area proposed to be
reclassified at the addresses of such real property owners as listed in
the records of the Assessor.
C. In each instance involving the proposed reclassification of any zoning
district, the Board of Appeals shall notify the City Planning Commission
and County Planning Board pursuant to  239-m of the General
Municipal Law.
 300-1203 JAMESTOWN CODE  300-1204
292:648
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
 DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2003-11-16
11-17-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2004-01B-19
1-20-2004 City Council
procedures
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. No.
2004-01B-20
1-20-2004 City Council
procedures
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. No.
2004-01B-21
1-20-2004 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2004-04-23
4-19-2004 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-08-09
8-16-2004 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2004-08-10
8-16-2004 Unlicensed vehicles
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
2004-08-11
8-16-2004 Abandoned vehicles Ch. 288
Ord. No.
2004-11-11
11-15-2004 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-12C-16
12-20-2004 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-12C-23
12-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2005-01-24
1-24-2005 Elections amendment Ch. 19
Ord. No.
2005-01-26
1-24-2005 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 9
 300-1204 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  DL-1
292:649
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2005-01-28
1-24-2005 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2005-02-18
2-28-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2005-02-19
2-28-2005 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2005-03-19
3-21-2005 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 252
Ord. No.
2005-03-20
3-21-2005 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2005-04-14
4-25-2005 Control of dogs
amendment
Ch. 125, Art. I
Ord. No.
2005-04-15
4-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No.
1-2005
6-20-2005 Charter amendment  C-39
Ord. No.
2005-06-15
6-20-2005 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment and
abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 215 and Ch. 288
Ord. No.
2005-06-16
6-20-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 274
Ord. No.
2005-09-16
9-26-2005 Unlicensed vehicles
amendment
Ch. 292
L.L. No.
2-2005
12-19-2005 Empire Zone
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2005-12B-14
12-21-2005 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2005-12B-15
12-21-2005 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
2005-12B-16
12-21-2005 Fees amendments Chs. 89, 175, 274 and
290
Ord. No.
2005-12B-17
12-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
 DL-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  DL-1
292:650
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2006-01B-20
1-30-2006 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2006-01B-21
1-30-2006 Senior citizens tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 270, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2006
2-10-2006 Charter amendment  C-9
L.L. No.
2-2006
2-10-2006 Charter amendment  C-6
Ord. No.
2006-03C-16
3-20-2006 Sewer use
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. III
Ord. No.
2006-04B-13
4-24-2006 Collection of unpaid
taxes amendment
Ch. 270, Art. VIII
L.L. No.
3-2006
5-8-2006 Authorizing
application for
redesignation of areas
as an Empire Zone
NCM
Ord. No.
2006-06B-11
6-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2006-08A-12
8-21-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 198
Ord. No.
2006-09A-18
9-25-2006 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2006-09A-19
9-25-2006 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2006-09A-20
9-25-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 252
Ord. No.
2006-10A-13
10-30-2006 Control of dogs
amendment
Ch. 125, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2006
12-18-2006 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
L.L. No.
5-2006
12-18-2006 Taxation: coordinated
assessment program
Ch. 270, Art. IX
L.L. No.
1-2007
1-29-2007 Civil Service
Commission repealer
Ch. 13, reference only
Ord. No.
2007-02-B04
2-27-2007 Strategic Planning
and Partnerships
Commission
amendment
Ch. 80
 DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  DL-1
292:651
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007-03-A21
3-19-2007 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2007-03-A22
3-19-2007 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2007-03-A23
3-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2007-04-C16
4-30-2007 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 131
L.L. No.
2-2007
4-30-2007 Charter amendment  C-12
Ord. No.
2007-07-B10
7-23-2007 Peddling and
soliciting amendment
Ch. 204
Ord. No.
2007-08-B03
8-20-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 270, Art. I
Ord. No.
2007-08-B05
8-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2007-10-A11
10-22-2007 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2007-11-B20
11-26-2007 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 131
Ord. No.
2007-11-B21
11-26-2007 Special events
amendment
Ch. 249
Ord. No.
2007-12-A13
12-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2007-12-A14
12-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2007-12-A21
12-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2008-03-A17
3-17-2008 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
L.L. No.
1-2008
4-28-2008 Charter amendment ㎣ C-6, C-8
Ord. No.
2008-11-A13
11-17-2008 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
 DL-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  DL-1
292:652
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008-12-B31
12-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No.
1-2009
12-22-2008 Taxation: partial
exemption for certain
capital improvements
amendment
Ch. 270, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2009-02-A09
2-23-2009 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 252
Ord. No.
2009-02-A10
2-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2009-02-A11
2-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2009-03-A26
3-23-2009 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2009-03-A27
3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2009-03-A28
3-23-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-03-A29
3-23-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-06-B11
6-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2009-10-A11
10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2009-10-A12
10-26-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-11-B07
11-23-2009 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 131
Ord. No.
2009-11-B08
11-23-2009 Solid waste collection
and disposal fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
Ord. No.
2009-11-B09
11-23-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-11-B10
11-23-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-11-B11
11-23-2009 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 89
 DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  DL-1
292:653
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009-11-B12
11-23-2009 Fees and fines
amendments
Chs. 1, Art. I; 224;
252; 275; 280; 290
Ord. No.
2009-12-D17
12-21-2009 Sewer use
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. III
Ord. No.
2010-03-B19
3-29-2010 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2010-04-A11
4-26-2010 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2010-11-B08
11-29-2010 Dogs and other
animals: control of
dogs; licensing
Ch. 125, Art. I
Ord. No.
2010-11-B09
11-29-2010 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2011-02-A03
2-28-2011 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2011-05-A21
5-23-2011 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2011-05-A22
5-23-2011 Signs and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 245
Ord. No.
2011-10-A07
10-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2011-11-B0
10-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2012-06-C14
6-25-2012 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 252
Ord. No.
2012-06-C15
6-25-2012 Elections amendment Ch. 19
Ord. No.
2012-08-A10
8-27-2012 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2012-08-A11
8-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2012-11-C18
11-27-2012 Auctions and
auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 101
 DL-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  DL-1
292:654
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2012-11-C19
11-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2012-11-C20
11-27-2012 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2012-11-C21
11-27-2012 Solid waste collection
and disposal fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
Ord. No.
2012-11-C22
11-27-2012 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 89
Ord. No.
2012-11-C23
11-27-2012 Special events
amendment
Ch. 249
Ord. No.
2013-06-B26
6-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2013-06-B27
6-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2013-06-B28
6-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2013-06-B29
6-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2013-08-A10
8-26-2013 Towing amendment Ch. 275
Ord. No.
2013-08-A11
8-26-2013 Sewers: wastewater
charges and debt
retirement
apportionment
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
Ord. No.
2013-08-A12
8-26-2013 Sewers: wastewater
charges and debt
retirement
apportionment
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
Ord. No.
2013-08-A13
8-26-2013 Sewers: wastewater
charges and debt
retirement
apportionment
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
Ord. No.
2013-08-A14
8-26-2013 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
Ord. No.
2013-08-A15
8-26-2013 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
 DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  DL-1
292:655
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2013-08-A16
8-26-2013 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
Ord. No.
2013-08-A17
8-26-2013 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
Ord. No.
2013-11-B17
11-26-2013 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2014-07-A10
7-28-2014 Property
rehabilitation and
conservation
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2014-07-A11
7-28-2014 Parks, Recreation and
Conservation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 57
Ord. No.
2014-08-A08
8-25-2014 Special events
amendment
Ch. 249
Ord. No.
2014-08-A10
8-25-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
2014-10-A11
10-27-2014 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 131
Ord. No.
2015-04-B10
4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2015-04-B11
4-27-2015 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 131
Ord. No.
2016-03-B10
3-28-2016 Parks and public lands
amendment
Ch. 193
Ord. No.
2016-07-A12
7-25-2016 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
L.L. No.
1-2016
10-24-2016 Tax levy limit override
2017
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2016
11-28-2016 Charter amendment  C-57
Ord. No.
2016-12-B21
12-19-2016 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2017-01-B15
1-30-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2017-01-B16
1-30-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2017-01-B17
1-30-2017 Towing Amendment Ch. 275
 DL-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  DL-1
292:656
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-02-A13
2-27-2017 Recycling Amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
2017-02-A14
2-27-2017 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse: General
Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-07-D15
7-31-2017 Taxicabs; Liveries
Amendment
Ch. 274
Ord. No.
2017-07-D16
7-31-2017 Licenses and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 175
L.L. No.
1-2017
8-28-2017 Charter Amendment ㎣ C-6, C-8, C-11,
C-12, C-13, C-15, C-28,
C-31, C-33, C-34, C-36,
C-39, C-40, C-43, C-45,
C-46, C-51, C-52, C-53,
C-55, C-56, C-63, C-65,
C-68
Ord. No.
2017-08-B12
8-28-2017 Revising "City Clerk,"
"Treasurer," "Director
of Financial Services"
and "Director of
Financial Services/
City Clerk" to
"Director of
Administrative
Services/City Clerk"
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch. 5;
Ch. 14; Ch. 47, Art. I;
Ch. 61; Ch. 72; Ch. 82;
Ch. 89; Ch. 97; Ch.
101; Ch. 120; Ch. 125,
Art. I; Ch. 131; Ch.
135; Ch. 149; Ch. 160,
Art. I; , Ch. 160, Art. II;
Ch. 175; Ch. 204; Ch.
215; Ch. 220, Art. I;
Ch. 220, Art. II; Ch.
229; Ch. 235; Ch. 240,
Art. II; Ch. 245; Ch.
249; Ch. 252; Ch. 260;
Ch. 270, Art. II; Ch.
270, Art. VIII; Ch. 274;
Ch. 275; Ch. 290; Ch.
300
L.L. No.
2-2017
9-25-2017 Taxation: Exemption
for Owner-Occupied
Residential Property
Created, Modernized,
Rehabilitated,
Expanded or
Improved
Ch. 270, Art. X
Ord. No.
2017-09-B10
9-25-2017 Parks and Public
Lands Amendment
Ch. 193
 DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED  DL-1
292:657
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-09-B11
9-25-2017 Property
Rehabilitation and
Conservation
Amendment
Ch. 215
 DL-1 JAMESTOWN CODE  DL-1
292:658