KENMORE MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Adopted, August 17, 1982 
Effective, September 7, 1982 
____________ 
Published in 1982 by Order of the Board of Trustees 
Republished in 2017 by Order of the Board of Trustees 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
KENMORE, NEW YORK 
____________ 
Patrick Mang 
Mayor 
____________ 
Paul P. Catalano, Deputy Mayor 
Katherine Bestine 
Katie Burd 
Joseph M. DeCecco 
Trustees 
____________ 
Kathleen P. Johnson 
Clerk/Treasurer 
  
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent local laws and ordinances of the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through Local Law No. 8-2016, adopted October 18, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Village Board of Trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this Code up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under direct supervision of Regina Sosinski, Editor, of Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kathleen Johnson, Village Clerk/Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kenmore, New York. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Kenmore, New York. 2017. 
  
LOCAL LAW NO. 1 OF 1982 
An Act To Adopt and Enact the Kenmore Municipal Code for the Incorporated Village of Kenmore, New York; To Establish the Same; To Provide for the Repeal of Certain Local Laws and Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; To Provide for the Manner of Amending Such Code; To Provide a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; And To Provide When This Local Law shall Become Effective. 
Be It Enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Kenmore, as Follows: 
    Section 1. The document consisting of Chapters 1 to 25, each inclusive, entitled the "Kenmore Municipal Code," shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive local law which shall supersede all other general and permanent local laws and ordinances of the Village of Kenmore passed on or before March 8, 1982. All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Kenmore, enacted on or before March 8, 1982, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed. 
    Section 2. The repeal provided for in Section 1 hereof shall not be construed to revive any local law or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent local law or ordinance which is repealed by this local law. 
    Section 3. Whenever in such Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or an offense or a violation, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required, and state law does not provide or require otherwise, any such violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of such Code. 
    Section 4. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to the "Kenmore Municipal Code," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 5. In case of the amendment by the Board of Trustees of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 1-7 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 6. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the Village Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, local laws or ordinances or other legislation which indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the Board of Trustees. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 7. All local laws or parts of local laws in conflict with this local law are repealed. 
    Section 8. This local law and the Code adopted hereby shall take effect immediately upon its being filed in the offices of the Secretary of State and the State Comptroller. 
[Editor's note- L.L. No. 1-1982 was so filed on September 7, 1982.] 
(Mrs.) Phyllis G. Higgins 
Village Clerk - Treasurer 
    PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF KENMORE, N.Y. 
Dated: July 7, 1982 
Publish: July 14, 1982 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
L.L. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 4-2017  8-15-17 Included 1 1-2018  1-16-18 Included 1 2-2018  1-16-18 Omitted 1 Supp. No. 2 3-2018  3- 6-18 Included 2 4-2018  6- 5-18 Included 2 5-2018  7- 3-18 Included 2 6-2018  7-17-18 Included 2 7-2018 11-20-18 Included 2 8-2018 11-20-18 Included 2 9-2018 12- 4-18 Included 2 10-2018 12-18-18 Included 2  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The provisions contained in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Kenmore Municipal Code", as may be so cited. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 20, subdiv. 3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all local laws and ordinances the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed unless such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees, be repugnant to the context of the provisions, or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. The provisions of the General Construction Law shall be applicable to all local laws and ordinances except as otherwise provided. 
    Affidavit. When an affidavit is authorized or required it may be sworn to before any officer authorized by law to take the acknowledgment of deeds in this state, unless a particular officer is specified before whom it is to be taken. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 12. 
    Armed forces of the United States. The term "armed forces of the United States" means the army, navy, marine corps, air force and coast guard, including all components thereof, and the national guard when in the service of the United States pursuant to call as provided by law. Pursuant to this definition no person shall be considered a member or veteran of the armed forces of the United States unless his service therein is or was on a full-time active duty basis, other than active duty for training. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 13-a. 
    Board of trustees. The terms "board of trustees" "village board" or "board" shall mean the board of trustees of the Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Bond and undertaking. Any provision authorizing or requiring a bond to be given shall be deemed to have been complied with by the execution of an undertaking to the same effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 14. 
    Calendar day. A calendar day includes the time from midnight to midnight. Sunday or any day of the week specifically mentioned means a calendar day. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 19. 
    Chattels. The term "chattels" includes goods and chattels; and, where the term appears in any local law or ordinance pertaining to an action to recover the same, it also includes all specific personal property, such as, but not limited to, certificates of stocks, bonds, notes or other securities or obligations. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 15. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Kenmore Municipal Code as established and designated in section 1-1 above. 
    Computation of days. A number of days specified as a period from a certain day within which or after or before which an act is authorized or required to be done means such number of calendar days exclusive of the calendar day from which the reckoning is made. If such period is a period of two (2) days, Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday must be excluded from the reckoning if it is in an intervening day between the day from which the reckoning is made and the last day of the period. In computing any specified period of time from a specified event, the day upon which the event happens is deemed the day from which the reckoning is made. The day from which any specified period of time is reckoned shall be excluded in making the reckoning. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 20. 
    Computation of months. A number of months after or before a certain day shall be computed by counting such number of calendar months from such day, exclusive of the calendar month in which such day occurs, and shall include the day of the month in the last month so counted having the same numerical order in days of the month as the day from which the computation is made, unless there be not so many days in the last month so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day of the month so counted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 30. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean Erie County, New York. 
    Effect of holidays. When any period of time, computed from a certain day, within which or after which or before which an act is authorized or required to be done, ends on a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday, such act may be done on the next succeeding business day and if the period ends at a specified hour, such act may be done at or before the same hour of such next succeeding business day. Where time is extended by virtue of the provisions of this paragraph, such extended time shall not be included in the computation of interest, except that when the period is specified as a number of months, such extended time shall be included in the computation of interest. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 25-a. 
    Gender. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter, and may refer to a corporation, or to a board or other body or assemblage of persons; and, when the sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer to any gender. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 22. 
    Heretofore and hereafter. Each of the terms, "heretofore," and "hereafter," in any provision of local law or ordinance, relates to the time such provision takes effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 23. 
    Local law. The term "local law" shall refer to a local law of this village. 
    Men. The term "men" includes boys. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 29. 
    Month. In a local law or ordinance, unless otherwise provided, the term "month" means a calendar month and not a lunar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 31. 
    Municipal officers. A reference to several officers of the village holding the same office, or to a board of such officers, shall be deemed to refer to the single officer holding such office, when but one person is chosen to fill such office in pursuance of law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 32. 
    Must. The word "must" is mandatory. 
    Newspapers. The terms "daily newspaper" and "newspaper published each business day" shall mean, respectively, a newspaper customarily published on each business day of the year, whether or not such newspaper is published on any other day. The term "business day" when used herein does not include Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 60. 
    Night time. Night time includes the time from sunset to sunrise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 54. 
    Notice. When a notice is required to be given to a board or body, service of such notice upon the clerk or chairman thereof shall be sufficient. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 35. 
    Now. The term "now" in any provision of a local law or ordinance referring to other local laws or ordinances in force, or to persons in office, or to any facts or circumstances as existing, relates to the laws in force, or to the person in office, or to the facts or circumstances existing, respectively, immediately before the taking effect of such provision. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 34. 
    Number. Words in the singular number include the plural, and in the plural number include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 35. 
    Oath, affidavit and swear. The terms "oath" and "affidavit" include every mode authorized by law of attesting the truth of that which is stated. The term "swear" includes every mode authorized by law for administering an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 36. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, any state, municipality, county, or any political subdivision thereof, and all other groups and legal entities or combinations thereof. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes chattels, money, things in action, and all written instruments themselves, as distinguished from the rights or interest to which they relate, by which any right, interest, lien or encumbrance in, to or upon property, or any debt or financial obligation is created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated, wholly or in part, and everything, except real property, which may be the subject of ownership. 
    Oil wells and all fixtures connected therewith, situate on lands leased for oil purposes and oil interests, and rights held under and by virtue of any lease or contract or other right or license to operate for or produce petroleum oil, shall be deemed personal property for all purposes except taxation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 39. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 38. 
    Public holidays designated. The term "public holiday" includes the following days in each year: the first day of January, known as New Year's day; the third Sunday of January as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. day; the twelfth day of February, known as Lincoln's birthday; the third Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday; the last Monday in May, known as Memorial day; the second Sunday in June, known as Flag day; the fourth day of July, known as Independence day; the first Monday in September known as Labor day; the second Monday in October, known as Columbus day; the eleventh day of November, known as Veterans' day; the fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving day; and the twenty-fifth (25th) day of December, known as Christmas day, and if any of such days except Flag day or Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. day is Sunday, the next day thereafter; each general election day, and each day appointed by the president of the United States or by the governor of this state as a day of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer, or other general religious observances. The term half-holiday includes the period from noon to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 24. 
    Quorum and majority. Whenever three (3) or more public officers are given any power or authority, or three (3) or more persons are charged with any public duty to be performed or exercised by them jointly or as a board or similar body, a majority of the whole number of such persons or officers, at a meeting duly held at a time fixed by law, or by any by-law duly adopted by such board or body, or at any duly adjourned meeting of such meeting, or at any meeting duly held upon reasonable notice to all of them, shall constitute a quorum and not less than a majority of the whole number may perform and exercise such power, authority or duty. For the purpose of this provision the words "whole number" shall be construed to mean the total number which the board, commission, body or other group of persons or officers would have were there no vacancies and were none of the persons disqualified from acting. 
    Any meeting referred to above may be adjourned by a less number than a quorum. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, §§ 41, 13. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 40. 
    References to officials, departments, etc. Whenever a reference is made to an officer, employee, board, department, or commission, such reference shall be interpreted as if it was followed by the words "of the village." A reference to an officer or employee of the village shall include the assistants, employees or designees of such officer or employee. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" shall refer to a resolution adopted by the board of trustees. 
    Signature. The term "signature" includes any memorandum, mark or sign, written, printed, stamped, photographed, engraved or otherwise placed upon any instrument or writing with intent to execute or authenticate such instrument or writing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 46. 
    References to repealed provisions. If any provision of an ordinance or local law be repealed and, in substance, reenacted, a reference in any law to such repealed provision shall be deemed a reference to such re-enacted provision. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 80. 
    References to sections. References in this Code to sections are references to sections of this Code unless expressly stated otherwise or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    State. The term "state" shall refer to the state of New York. 
    Tense. Words in the present tense include the future. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 48. 
    Village. The term "village" or "this village" shall mean the Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Women. The term "women" includes girls. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 55. 
    Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include every legible representation of letters upon a material substance, except when applied to the signature of an instrument. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 56. 
    Year. The term "year" in a local law or ordinance means three hundred sixty-five (365) days, but the added day of a leap year and the day immediately preceding shall for the purpose of such computation be counted as one day. In a local law or ordinance the term year means twelve (12) months, the term "half-year", six (6) months, and the term a quarter of a year, three (3) months. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, § 58. 
Sec. 1-3. - Certain legislation not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or in the local law adopting this Code shall affect any local law or ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the village; 
(2)  Fixing salaries of officers or employees of the village; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise to any person. 
(4)  Appropriating moneys; 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village; 
(6)  Establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the village; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village, or providing regulations for the subdivision of land; 
(9)  Relating to annexation; 
(10)  Rezoning specific property, amending the zoning map, granting a zoning variance, exception or special use permit; 
(11)  Which is temporary, although general in effect; 
(12)  Which is special, although permanent in effect; 
(13)  Whose purposes have been accomplished; 
and all such ordinances and local laws are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and local laws are on file in the village clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-4. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the local law adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or local law of the village in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of legislation. 
(a)  The repeal of a local law or ordinance includes any local law or ordinance amendatory of the section repealed. The repeal hereafter or by this Code of any provision of a local law or ordinance which repeals any provision of a prior local law or ordinance, does not revive such prior provision. The provisions of a local law or ordinance repealing a prior local law or ordinance, which are substantial re-enactments of provisions of the prior local law or ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of such provisions of such prior local law or ordinance modified or amended according to the language employed, and not as new enactments. 
(b)  The repeal of a local law or ordinance or part thereof shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accepted or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected. Unless otherwise specially provided by law, all actions and proceedings, civil or criminal, commenced under or by virtue of any provision of a local law or ordinance so repealed, and pending immediately prior to the taking effect of such repeal, may be prosecuted and defended to final effect in the same manner as they might if such provisions were not so repealed. 
(c)  When two (2) numbers in a schedule of repeals of local laws or ordinances or sections of this Code are connected by a dash both such numbers are included as well as all intermediate numbers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law, §§ 90-96. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty. 
    Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or an offense or a violation, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required, and state law or this Code does not provide or require otherwise, any such violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the thing prohibited or rendered unlawful, or a violation, or a misdemeanor, or an offense, or the thing required is, in its nature, continuous in respect to time, then, in the absence of provisions to the contrary, each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05; Village Law, § 20-2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code. 
    All local laws passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent local laws, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent local laws as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent local laws until such time that this Code and subsequent local laws are readopted as a new Code by the board of trustees. 
Cross reference- Amendments to zoning ordinance, § 25-51 et seq. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of trustees. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of local laws of a general and permanent nature adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest local law included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in local laws and parts of local laws included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this act" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____", (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the local law incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of the material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Examining board of plumbers, § 7-72 et seq.; landmarks preservation commission, § 17-31 et seq.; traffic violations bureau, § 21-31 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 25-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Department of public works. 
    There is hereby established a department of public works. Administrative powers and duties vested in the board of trustees may, in its discretion, be exercised through the department of public works. The board of trustees shall determine and prescribe the jurisdiction and duty of the department and the powers and duties of the officers and employees therein. 
(L.L. No. 1-1943, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-43) 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, § 9-16 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; water, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Streets, sidewalks and public grounds, Village Law, § 6-600 et seq.; sewers, Village Law, § 14-1400 et seq.; water, Village Law, § 11-1100 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Early retirement incentive program. 
(a)  The village hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 69, Laws of 2002. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 3, 2002. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefits shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of this local law shall be paid as one lump sum, or in five (5) additional installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System and it shall be paid by the village for each employee who receives the retirement benefits payable under this local law. 
(L.L. No. 6-2000, §§ 1-5, 8-31-00; L.L. No. 5-2002, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-02; L.L. No. 6-2002, §§ 1, 2, 8-30-02) 
Secs. 2-3-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Mileage allowance for volunteer firemen. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of the village, pursuant to its power to provide for its affairs and government, to authorize the payment of a mileage allowance to designated volunteer firemen, since it is the finding of the board of trustees that the Kenmore Volunteer Fire Department provides an invaluable service to the village and the health, safety and welfare of its residents, and that reimbursement of expenses incurred by firemen in the course of their responsibilities will promote and support the work of the Kenmore Volunteer Fire Department. 
(b)  As used in this section the term "volunteer fireman" shall mean a member of the Kenmore Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., and the term "fire department" shall mean the Kenmore Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. 
(c)  All volunteer firemen may be paid a mileage allowance representing reimbursement for use of their own motor vehicles on fire department business. The village board shall designate by resolution which volunteer firemen or classes of volunteer firemen are to receive such mileage allowance and at what rate expressed in terms of an amount per mile. Such designation may be changed at any time by the village board by further resolution. 
(d)  All volunteer firemen designated by the village board as authorized to be paid a mileage allowance shall keep a record of mileage travelled on fire department business. Such record shall include the dates of motor vehicle use, places or locations of travel, a brief description of business accomplished and mileage total per trip. Designated volunteer firemen shall submit vouchers each month to the village board for payment of the mileage allowance due. Such vouchers shall be in the form prescribed by the treasurer's office of the village, shall be certified by the volunteer fireman submitting the voucher and shall be approved by the administrative secretary of the fire department or his duly appointed deputy. Submitted vouchers shall be reviewed, audited and paid by the village board in accordance with its regular auditing procedures pursuant to article 5 of the Village Law. 
(L.L. No. 1-1980, §§ 1-4, 3-4-80) 
State Law reference- Power of village to legislate to provide for its affairs and government, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (i); Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1. 
Sec. 2-17. - Election and nomination of fire department chiefs, assistant chiefs, company officers and delegates. 
(a)  Fire department officers. The annual election of fire department officers, other than chiefs, as provided for in Village Law section 10-1010, shall be held on the first Saturday in April at the fire hall. In the event that the first Saturday of April is during Easter Sunday weekend, the elections will then be held on the Saturday preceding the first Saturday in April. 
(b)  Chiefs. The annual nomination and election of chiefs, as provided for in Village Law section 10-1012, shall be held on the first Saturday in April at the fire hall. In the event that the first Saturday in April falls during Easter Sunday weekend, the elections will then be held on the Saturday preceding the first Saturday in April. 
(L.L. No. 1-1990, § 1, 11-20-90) 
Editor's note- Local Law 1-1990, adopted Nov. 20, 1990 did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 2-17 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Secs. 2-18-2-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of village to regulate its officers and employees, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii)a.(1). 

Sec. 2-26. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide legal and financial protection for those individuals serving the village from losses which may be brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken while in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting this division, the board of trustees finds that the state has enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers and employees and further finds that such security is also required for local personnel. By enactment of this division, the board of trustees does not intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of the village or its employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense. It is solely the intent of this division to provide similar coverage for local employees as is presently provided for state employees, so as to continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, § 1, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Defense and indemnification of state officers and employees, Public Officers Law, § 17. 
Sec. 2-27. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "employee" shall mean any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the village, whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a municipally-sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, § 2, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Officers Law, § 17, subdiv. 1. 
Sec. 2-28. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, the provisions of this division shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the village, or any right to defense and/or indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with, or by reason of, any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law. 
(c)  The benefits of this division shall inure only to employees as defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party nor shall any provision of this section be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision of the Workers' Compensation Law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, §§ 6, 7, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Officers Law, § 17, subdiv. 5, 7, 9. 
Sec. 2-29. - Defense. 
(a)  Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of section 2-31, the village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties, or which is brought to enforce a provision of Sections 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the village. 
(b)  Subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (a), the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the village attorney; provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial proceeding whenever the village attorney determines, based upon his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation by the village attorney would be inappropriate, or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his choice. The village attorney shall notify the employee in writing of such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his choice. The village attorney may require, as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by private counsel under the provisions of this section, the village attorney shall so certify to the village board. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the village to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding subject to certification that the employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this section by the head of the department, commission, division, office or agency in which such employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant of the village treasurer. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding. 
(c)  Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the village attorney as required by section 2-31, the attorney shall take the necessary steps including the retention of private counsel under the terms and conditions provided in subsection (b) of this section on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, § 3, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Officers Law, § 17, subdiv. 2. 
Sec. 2-30. - Indemnification. 
(a)  The village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties; the duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee. 
(b)  An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be submitted to the board of trustees any proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification by the village and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the mayor shall certify such settlement, and submit such settlement and certification to the village attorney. The attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give his approval if in his judgment the settlement is in the best interest of the village. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the village to indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by the village attorney. 
(c)  Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon the settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered mail within thirty (30) days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the mayor, and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the village treasurer. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, § 4, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Officers Law, § 17, subdiv. 3. 
Sec. 2-31. - Duty of employees. 
    The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this division shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Delivery to the village attorney or his assistant, at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five (5) days after he is served with such document; and 
(2)  The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against the state based upon the same act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal. 
Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the village provide for his defense pursuant to this division. 
(L.L. No. 3-1980, § 5, 4-16-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Officers Law, § 17, subdiv. 4. 
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Regulation of certain amusement devices using booths, § 8-2; licenses, Ch. 12; coin-controlled amusement or vending machines, § 12-16 et seq.; live music in commercial establishments, § 12-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Public entertainment on Sunday. 
    Public entertainments are hereby authorized on the first day of the week after five (5) minutes past 1:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 7-27-25, § 1) 
State Law reference- Power of village to so provide, General Business Law, § 15. 
Secs. 3-2-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAME ROOMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Coin-operated amusement devices, § 12-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-16. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the control of game rooms within the village through the licensing thereof, for the procedures to be followed with respect to the administration of this article, and for the fees to be collected in connection therewith. In enacting this article, the board of trustees finds that the licensing of game rooms is in the best interest of the village, promotes the good government of the village, its management and business, and preserves the public safety, property, good morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 1, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the contest clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin-controlled amusement device or coin-operated amusement device: These terms shall have the definition assigned to them in section 12-17 of this Code. 
    Game room: A building or place containing six (6) or more coin-controlled amusement devices. This definition does not include any device the possession or use of which is prohibited by law. 
    Owner: A person who is the record owner, contract purchaser, receiver, assignee, lessee or bailee of one or more coin-controlled amusement devices. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 2, 10-6-81; L.L. No. 6-1981, § 2, 11-3-81) 
Sec. 3-18. - Compliance with law. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinance, rules or regulation relating to the conduct of business and the use and maintenance of the premises. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(B), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-19. - Supervision. 
    The owner or operator of a game room shall not allow it to be open or used unless it is under the control of and supervision by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance with this article. No game room containing more than ten (10) coin-controlled amusement devices shall be open or used unless staffed by at least one person for each ten (10) games or fraction thereof. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(G), (H), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-20. - Capacity. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall not permit a greater number of persons on the premises at any time than the capacity approved by the village board as set forth in the license for such game room. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(D), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-21. - Area. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall provide at least twelve (12) square feet of floor space within the game room for each coin-controlled amusement device. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(I), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-22. - Maintenance of order. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall maintain good order on the premises at all times. The lack of good order on the premises shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fighting and rowdy behavior. 
(2)  Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except upon premises licensed for on-premises consumption by the state. 
(3)  Gambling. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(E), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-23. - Minors. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall not permit a coin-controlled amusement device therein to be played or operated between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day by a person under the age of fifteen (15), unless accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent or guardian. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(F), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-24. - Inspection. 
    Any duly authorized employee of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection and observation as to compliance with this article. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 7, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-25. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall permit the operation of a game room without first obtaining the required license therefor shall be in violation of this article, shall be given written notice of the requirements hereunder, and shall be advised to cease and desist from use of the device until such time as a proper license shall be obtained. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation of this article shall be guilty of a violation and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 8, 10-6-81) 
Secs. 3-26-3-31. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General power of village to license, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a.(11). 

Sec. 3-32. - Required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a game room within the village whether or not such game room is under the control of such person, without a license to do so having first been issued in accordance with this division. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 3, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-33. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to maintain or operate a game room shall make and submit an application to the clerk-treasurer's office of the village for a license permitting such a game room. Said application shall be made on a form supplied by the village, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall contain a certification under oath that the information contained in the application is complete, accurate and truthful to the best knowledge and belief of the applicant. Said application shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, date of birth, social security number and telephone number of the proposed operator of the game room. If the operator is a partnership, unincorporated association, firm or corporation, the names of the officers, members, directors or holders thereof together with their addresses, social security numbers, date of birth and telephone numbers. 
(2)  The number of devices which are to be placed in such game room. 
(3)  A description of the devices including the name of the manufacturer, serial number, if any, and their general mechanical features. 
(4)  The name, addresses, social security number, date of birth and telephone number of the person having charge of the devices. 
(5)  The address of the premises upon or at which the devices are to be located. 
(6)  As to each person whose name appears on the application, the fact of conviction in any jurisdiction of all felonies relating to gambling or obscenity with a full disclosure of the offense, time and place of commission, legal proceedings and penalty imposed. 
(7)  As to each person whose name appears on the application, his fingerprints for the purpose of expediting the investigation of said application. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 4(A), 10-6-81; L.L. No. 6-1981, § 2, 11-3-81) 
Sec. 3-34. - Issuance and appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed and signed game room license application and upon receipt of the requisite license fee computed pursuant to the schedule of fees in effect at the time of application, the clerk-treasurer's office shall refer all applications relating to game rooms to the building inspector to determine whether the premises where the devices are to be located comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the village, and to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation to be made of the background of the applicant to determine that all persons involved can reasonably be expected to operate the game room in accordance with law and free from gambling and other illegal conduct. The foregoing investigations shall be completed within forty-five (45) days from the time of filing of a completed application. In the event that any such investigation does not result in a report within the foregoing time period, said application shall be deemed to be approved by the building inspector and chief of police. 
(b)  If after review of the application and the reports of the building inspector and chief of police the clerk-treasurer's office finds that all requirements of this local law and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the village have been met, said office shall issue the license permitting operation of the game room in accordance with the further provisions of this local law; provided, however, that no such licensee shall issue for any such game room which shall contain or employ devices prohibited from use by the laws of the state, such as a gambling device or slot machine; and provided further that, except as provided in Correction Law, Article 23-A, no such license shall issue to be held by any person who has been convicted of a felony relating to gambling or obscenity or by any corporation, partnership or association, a member, officer, director or holder of ten (10) percent or more of the stock of which has been convicted of any felony relating to gambling or obscenity. 
(c)  If an application for a license or licenses is denied by the clerk-treasurer's office, the grounds for such denial shall be set forth in writing. The applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of trustees of the village, if requested, within fourteen (14) days following notice of the denial of the application. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity at such hearing to present evidence and witnesses on his behalf in connection with the application. Following such hearing, the board shall render a determination on the application within twenty (20) days. Said determination shall bet set forth in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 4(B)-(D), 10-6-81; L.L. No. 6-1981, § 2, 11-3-81) 
Sec. 3-35. - Location restrictions. 
    No license shall be issued for a game room unless such game room is located on Military Road and Kenmore Avenue. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(A), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-36. - Fee. 
    An application for a game room license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount now hereafter established by local law or resolution. If a license is denied, seventy-five (75) percent of said fee shall be returned to the applicant. The annual fee for a game room license shall be as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 6(A), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-37. - Term. 
    Each game room license shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December next succeeding the date of issuance. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 6(B), 10-6-81) 
Sec. 3-38. - Posting. 
    The owner and operator of any game room shall cause the game room license to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(L.L. No. 5-1981, § 5(C), 10-6-81) 
Secs. 3-39-3-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAMES OF CHANCE 

Sec. 3-50. - Authorization to conduct games of chance. 
    Pursuant to General Municipal Law, § 188, the option to authorize games of chance is hereby exercised and authorized organizations are authorized to conduct games of chance. 
(L.L. No. 7-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-51. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of all terms are the same as found in General Municipal Law, § 186. 
(L.L. No. 7-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-52. - Licenses. 
    Application for a license to conduct games of chance shall be made to the clerk of the village as prescribed by General Municipal Law, § 190. An authorized organization may file a summary application pursuant to the provisions of that statute. 
(L.L. No. 7-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-53. - Restrictions and enforcement. 
    The chief of police of the village shall exercise control and supervision over all games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. All games of chance shall be conducted in such manner and under such conditions as to not constitute a nuisance or to endanger the safety or welfare of any participant. 
(L.L. No. 7-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-54. - Penalties. 
    The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a term of imprisonment of no more than one year or both. 
(L.L. No. 7-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Secs. 3-55-3-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BINGO 

Sec. 3-60. - Authorization to conduct bingo games. 
    Pursuant to General Municipal Law, § 477, the option to authorize bingo games is hereby exercised and authorized organizations are authorized to conduct bingo games. 
(L.L. No. 8-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-61. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of all terms are the same as found in General Municipal Law, § 476. 
(L.L. No. 8-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-62. - Licenses. 
    Application for a license to conduct bingo games shall be made to the clerk of the village as prescribed by General Municipal Law, § 480. 
(L.L. No. 8-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-63. - Restrictions and enforcement. 
    The chief of police of the village shall exercise control and supervision over all bingo games conducted under an appropriately issued license. All bingo games shall be conducted in such manner and under such conditions as to not constitute a nuisance or to endanger the safety or welfare of any participant. 
(L.L. No. 8-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Sec. 3-64. - Penalties. 
    The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a term of imprisonment of no more than one year or both. 
(L.L. No. 8-2004, § 1, 8-3-04) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Livestock or fowl at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having the care, custody, or control of any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, goats, chickens, ducks, geese or pigeon to suffer or permit them to run at large. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 6) 
Sec. 4-2. - Keeping livestock or fowl. 
    No person shall use any premises within the village for the purpose of housing any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, goats, chickens, ducks, geese or pigeons, and the owner and occupant of any premises within the village shall not permit the use of any premises for the purpose of housing same. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 6) 
Secs. 4-3-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CATS 

Sec. 4-16. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Kenmore Cat Regulation Law". 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 1, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-17. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good order in the village and to contribute to the public welfare and the preservation and protection of the property and the person of the inhabitants of the village by declaring and enforcing certain regulations and restrictions of activities of cats and owners of cats within the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 2, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-5-79) 
Sec. 4-18. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal warden shall mean any peace officer or other person authorized by the village board to enforce the provisions of this article. 
    At-large shall mean elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or on the premises of another person without the knowledge, consent and approval of said other person. 
    Cat shall mean both male and female cats. 
    Owner shall mean any person owning, harboring, keeping or having the custody or control of any cat. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 3, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-19. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person harboring, keeping or maintaining any cat to permit such cat while in the village to run at large without bearing a plainly legible tag or collar identifying the name and address of the owner of such cat. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a female cat to permit such female cat to run at large when in heat, and such animal shall be confined to the owner's premises during such period. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, §§ 4(a), 5, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-20. - Destruction of property and nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person harboring, keeping or maintaining any cat to permit such cat while in the village to cause damage or destruction to property, or commit a nuisance upon a public area, or the premises of a person other than the owner or other person having custody and control of such cat. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), a prohibited "nuisance" shall include but not be limited to permitting or allowing such cat to urinate, defecate or commit any other nuisance or damage to public property, park, public building, street, parking lot or sidewalk or on any private property of a person other than the owner. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 4(b), 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-21. - Noisy cats and annoying conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person harboring, keeping or maintaining any cat to permit such cat while in the village to engage in habitual loud howling, screeching or to conduct itself in such manner so as to habitually annoy any person other than the owner or person harboring such cat. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 4(c), 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-22. - Biting cats or vicious-acting cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person harboring, keeping or maintaining any cat to permit such cat while in the village to bite, chase or otherwise harass any person or other dog or cat in such a manner as reasonably to cause intimidation or to put such person or other dog or cat in reasonable apprehension of bodily harm or injury. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 4(d), 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-23. - Restrictions on keeping. 
(a)  The owner of every cat shall be responsible for maintaining such animal in safe, sanitary and healthful surroundings and in such a manner as will not constitute a nuisance to neighboring property owners or to the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain or permit more than an unreasonable number of cats on any premises, regardless of the number of owners. For the purposes of this subsection, an unreasonable number of cats shall mean a number in excess of the number that may be safely maintained in sanitary and healthful conditions on the premises without constituting a nuisance to neighboring property owners. The existence of noxious odors, unsightly litter, or repeated or habitual violations of other provisions of this article shall be deemed to constitute such a nuisance. For the purposes of this subsection, proof that more than four (4) cats are kept, harbored, maintained or permitted at any premises shall constitute prima facie evidence of an "unreasonable" number in violation of this subsection; however, the owner of such cats may refute such evidence by showing to the court that such cats are, in fact, maintained in a safe, sanitary and healthful condition and do not constitute a nuisance to neighboring owners and such proof shall constitute a defense to a charge under this subsection. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 5, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-24. - Animal wardens. 
    The board of trustees may designate one or more animal wardens and such persons, as well as any other peace officer, may enforce the provisions of this article, and execute any lawful orders of the village clerk or any competent court with respect thereto, or in connection with any other provisions of this article. An animal warden shall have all the powers of a constable or a peace officer in the execution of the provisions of this article, including the service of a summons, and the service of an appearance ticket, pursuant to Criminal Procedure Law, § 150.20, of the state. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, §§ 3, 6, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-25. - Impoundment. 
    Any police officer or the animal warden of the village shall seize any cat found at large in violation of this article. Every cat seized by a police officer or animal warden shall be delivered promptly to the S.P.C.A., 205 Ensminger Road, Town of Tonawanda, or at the facility then maintained by said organization in the Town of Tonawanda for the harboring of animals. Care and disposition of the animal shall be the sole responsibility of the S.P.C.A. Notwithstanding the fact that an owner may elect not to redeem any such cat, said owner shall nevertheless be responsible to the village for the cost charged to the village by the S.P.C.A. for harboring such animal. An action may be commenced by the village to collect such sum. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, §§ 7, 10, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Appearance tickets authorized, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. a. 
Sec. 4-26. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  Any person who observes a cat causing damage or destruction to property of a person other than its owner, or committing a nuisance upon the premises of a person other than its owner, may file a signed complaint, under oath, with the village clerk, or a police officer, specifying the objectionable conduct of the animal, the date thereof, the damage caused, a description of the animal, and name and residence, if known, of the owner or other person harboring said animal. 
(b)  Upon the observation of a peace officer, or upon a written complaint filed by any person with the police or with the village clerk, the police may issue, or the village clerk may direct the police to issue an appearance ticket to any person alleged to be in violation of this article, and such person shall be required to appear before the village justice to answer the complaint. Each appearance ticket shall be supported by an information and written complaint of a police officer, animal warden or other person having knowledge. 
(c)  Any person who violates this article or knowingly permits the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed an offense. Any person convicted of any such violation after investigation and hearing shall be liable to a penalty of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation and not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second or any subsequent violation. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, §§ 8, 9, 11, 10-4-77; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05; Village Law, § 20-2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Secs. 4-27-4-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Dogs in parks, § 14.5-20. 
State Law reference- Dogs generally, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 106 et seq. 

Sec. 4-36. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Kenmore Dog Regulation Law". 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 1, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-37. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good order in the village and to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village by enforcing regulations and restrictions on the activities of dogs, consistent with the rights and privileges of dog owners as well as the rights and privileges of other citizens of the village. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 2, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-38. - Scope. 
    This article shall be applicable in the area within the village. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 3, 12-18-79) 
Sec. 4-39. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of terms as set forth in Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7, of the state shall be applicable to such terms contained in this article. 
    Family: One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage living or cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or not more than four (4) individuals who are not so related, living together as a single housekeeping unit. One "family" may include up to four (4) boarders or lodgers when such persons are part of the single housekeeping unit. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 4, 12-18-79; L.L. No. 2-2002, § 1, 2-5-02) 
State Law reference- Applicable definitions, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 108. 
Sec. 4-40. - Enforcement. 
    Dog control officers, as defined in Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7, any code enforcement officers employed by the village, any peace officer employed by the village, or any other duly designated person to be determined by resolution of the board of trustees, may be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this article as well as the provisions of Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 6, 12-18-79; L.L. No. 2-2002, §§ 2, 3, 2-5-02) 
State Law reference- Dog control officers, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 114. 
Sec. 4-41. - Restrictions on keeping. 
(a)  No more than two (2) dogs six (6) months or more in age shall be harbored by any family within the village; provided, however, that a special permit may be granted by the board of trustees to a licensed veterinarian or veterinary hospital or any incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or similar incorporated dog protective association to allow the harboring of more than two (2) dogs six (6) months or more in age. Such special permit may be granted in such instances and upon such terms and conditions, as the board of trustees shall determine. 
(b)  No owner of a dog shall keep or harbor a dog in an unclean or unsanitary manner. 
(c)  No owner of a dog shall fail to provide adequate feed, water, or space for such dog. "Adequate" shall mean sufficient for the age, size and number of dogs on the premises. 
(d)  No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking, or in charge of any dog shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any sidewalk, gutter, street, play area, park or other public area, nor on any private property, without the permission of the owner of such property. This prohibition shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which may be used to curb such dog under the following conditions: 
(1)  Feces shall be picked up with a scoop, shovel, broom, plastic bag or similar implement and shall be placed directly in an airtight container, plastic or otherwise, and then deposited in a container used for the disposal of refuse. 
(2)  In no event shall any feces be deposited in any storm sewer or drainage ditch. 
(3)  This provision shall not apply to a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog, as defined in the Agriculture and Markets Law, § 108 accompanying any person with a disability, as defined in the Agriculture and Markets Law, § 108. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 5(A)-(C), 12-18-79; L.L. No. 6-1995, § 1, 1-2-96; L.L. No. 1-1996, § 1, 1-2-96; L.L. No. 2-2002, §§ 4, 5, 2-5-02) 
Cross reference- Restrictions on keeping animals, § 25-70. 
State Law reference- Power of village to regulate the keeping of dogs, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124. 
Sec. 4-42. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog in the village to permit or allow a dog to be off the premises of such owner and in the village unless restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length and under the control of a responsible person. Whenever a dog is found off the premises of the person owning, keeping, harboring or having the care, custody or control of such dog, not restrained as above provided, it shall be presumed that such person permitted or allowed such dog to be off such premises in violation of this section. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 5(D), 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Power of village to regulate the running at large of dogs, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124. 
Sec. 4-43. - Noisy dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog in the village to permit or allow a dog to engage in habitual loud howling, barking, crying or whining or conduct itself in such a manner so as to unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 5(D), 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Power of village to regulate the keeping of dogs, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124. 
Sec. 4-44. - Biting dogs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog in the village to permit or allow a dog to bite, chase or otherwise harass any person or domestic animal. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 5(D), 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Power of village to regulate dogs, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124. 
Sec. 4-45. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  Any person claiming ownership of any dog seized pursuant to Agriculture and Markets Law, § 118 shall pay the following impoundment fees: 
(1)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person; 
(2)  Forty dollars ($40.00) for the second impoundment, within one year of the first impoundment, of any dog owned by that person; 
(3)  Sixty dollars ($60.00) for the third and subsequent impoundment, within one year of the second impoundment of any dog owned by that person. 
In addition thereto, any person claiming ownership of any dog shall be responsible to pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof for sheltering, feeding and watering said dog. In any case where veterinary care is necessary to protect the health and welfare of a dog, the village shall also charge for the cost of such veterinary care, in addition to the impoundment fee. 
(b)  Even though an owner may elect not to redeem said dog, said owner shall nevertheless be responsible to the village for the impoundment fee and other expenses as set forth herein. An action may be commenced to collect said sum. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, §§ 7, 8, 12-18-79; L.L. No. 2-1996, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-96) 
State Law reference- Impoundment fees and authority of village to regulate same, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 118, subdiv. 4, 5. 
Sec. 4-46. - Appearance tickets. 
    The issuance of an appearance ticket pursuant to the provisions of Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124 to assist in the enforcement of the Agriculture and Markets Law and this article is hereby authorized. 
(L.L. 6-1979, § 9, 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Appearance tickets authorized, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 114; appearance tickets, Criminal Procedure Law, § 150.20. 
Sec. 4-47. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  Any person taking part in or assisting in any violation of this article shall also be subject to the penalties herein. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article is committed or is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Said penalties herein are in addition to those fees and charges provided in section 4-45. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 10, 12-18-79) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village dog control legislation, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124; Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.15; Village Law, § 20.2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Sec. 4-48. - Application of state law. 
    The provisions of Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7 shall be applicable in addition to provisions set forth in this article. 
(L.L. No. 6-1979, § 11, 12-18-79) 
Chapter 5 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). Auctions and auctioneers generally, General Business Law, § 21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auctioneer: Any person conducting a sale by public auction of personal property or real property of his own, or as agent for another. 
    Property: All goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, compounds, things, chattels, jewelry and all other property of whatsoever form or nature other than choses in action or real property. 
    Public auction: Any public offer to sell personal property or real property to the highest bidder or to the person offering to pay the highest price therefor. 
(b)  The term "sell at public auction" shall not include judicial sales, sales by public officers in the manner prescribed by law, sales pursuant to statute to satisfy any lien on the property sold, resales pursuant to statute of property retaken under a conditional sale contract, or sales of horse, cattle or other live animals. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall open or conduct any public auction sale until all the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 9) 
Sec. 5-3. - Prior authorization required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct a public auction sale unless such sale has been authorized by the village clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  To obtain such authorization the auctioneer shall file, or cause to be filed, with the village clerk-treasurer at least five (5) days before the sale is to be held, a typewritten or other printed statement giving the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the property to be sold; 
(2)  The street and number where the property is located; 
(3)  The places, if any, where the owner had conducted business during one year next preceding the filing of such statement; 
(4)  The date of opening and probable duration of the proposed sale; 
(5)  The place where sale is to be conducted; 
(6)  The reasons why an auction sale is desired; 
(7)  The name and address of the auctioneer who will conduct the auction sale; an itemized inventory which complies with the provisions of section 5-4. 
(c)  Such statement shall be signed by the auctioneer who is to conduct the sale and verified by him to the effect that it is to the best of his knowledge, information and belief true. Such statement shall also be signed by the owner of the property to be auctioned. 
(d)  Upon filing of such statement and the required inventory and the approval of same by the village clerk-treasurer, the authorization shall be granted. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, §§ 5, 9) 
Sec. 5-4. - Inventory records. 
(a)  The required itemized inventory shall be of the property to be offered for sale at public auction, specifying as to each item, the quantity, quality, kind and grade, and the material of which it is composed, with a distinctive number for each item. If the property to be sold consists of a stock of goods in trade, in whole or in part, of a person engaged in the wholesale or retail sale thereof immediately preceding the time of the filing of the inventory, there shall be attached to the inventory a complete statement including the name of such person so engaged, the location by place, street and number where so engaged, the length of time so engaged, and that each and every article contained in the aforesaid inventory is a part of the stock of goods of said person and has been a part of the stock of goods of said person for a period of at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the filing of the inventory, and that no property purchased, procured or placed in stock specially for such public auction sale is included therein. If such property consists of the household furniture, or the fixtures and equipment of a business, the inventory shall be accompanied by a statement that each article was a part of the household goods of the householder (naming him), or in the case of fixtures and equipment, was a part of the fixtures and equipment of the person (naming him) for at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the sale. 
(b)  Such statement and inventory must be signed by the auctioneer who is to conduct the sale and verified by him to the effect that it is to the best of his knowledge, information and belief true. Such statement and inventory shall also be signed by the owner of said property and shall be verified by him by affidavit, stating that said inventory is true and correct in all particulars. 
(c)  A copy of the itemized inventory of the property to be offered for sale filed with the village clerk-treasurer, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale is conducted and shall be available for examination by the bidder. 
(d)  No property not included in the inventory shall be sold or offered for sale at public auction or private sale during the time that such auction sale is being conducted in the same room or in a room opening therefrom. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of such auction sale, the auctioneer shall file or cause to be filed with the village clerk-treasurer a report which shall consist of a copy of said inventory, with superimposed thereon a list of the articles sold and a statement that no other articles were sold during said sale; such report shall be subscribed by said auctioneer and verified by his oath before an officer authorized to take oaths in the county, and shall be kept on file by the village clerk-treasurer and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, §§ 5, 6, 9(6)) 
Sec. 5-5. - Tagging or labeling of goods. 
(a)  The auctioneer shall attach or cause to be attached securely to each article to be offered for sale at public auction a tag or label, upon which shall be plainly written or printed in the English language a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the material or substance of which such article is made or composed and the distinctive number of such article on the itemized inventory and appraisal filed with the mayor; if said article is commonly classed as jewelry or articles commonly carried by persons engaged in the jewelry business, the tag shall state the percentage or carat of purity of such material; if the article is plated or overlaid, the tag shall state a true statement of the kind of plate and the percentage of purity thereof, and the kind of material or metal under the plating. If the article is one commonly known as precious, semi-precious, synthetic or imitation stones, the tag shall state the true names, weight, quality and color of said stones; if the article is a watch or clock, the tag shall state the true name of the manufacturers, the number of jewels and adjustments, and the country of manufacture. If any of such articles are used or secondhand, the tag shall state the length of time the same has been in use and in a conspicuous place on said tag the words "secondhand" or "used". 
(b)  Said tag in each and every case shall remain upon the article and shall be delivered with the article to the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 6) 
Sec. 5-6. - Other sales on same premises. 
    During the time while a public auction sale is being conducted, no sales of property shall be permitted within the same room or in any room opening therefrom by private sale or otherwise than by public auction sale. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 6) 
Sec. 5-7. - Entertainment on premises. 
    No auctioneer shall conduct a sale where entertainment is provided on the premises where the sale is conducted for the prospective bidders. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 9(5)) 
Sec. 5-8. - Sale of stock of goods. 
(a)  A stock of goods, wares and merchandise shall not be offered for sale as such by public auction, except where the same consists of a stock in trade of a person continuously engaged in the village in dealing in such goods, wares and merchandise, at wholesale or retail for a period of at least one year immediately preceding the time of the commencement of such sale, and at such sale no property shall be inventoried as proposed to be sold or sold other than property which constitutes such stock in trade of such person. Such public auction, however, shall be held at the place of business of such person and on successive days, Sundays and holidays excepted, and shall not be held for a greater period than ten (10) days in any one calendar year. 
(b)  Such sale shall be subject to all the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, §§ 8, 9(8), (9)) 
Sec. 5-9. - Time and duration. 
    Except as otherwise provided, a public auction sale shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for a period longer than ten (10) days. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, §§ 5, 7(2)) 
Sec. 5-10. - Fraudulent acts, misrepresentations, etc. 
    No auctioneer shall: 
(1)  Make any false representations as to the character, quality, condition, value or ownership of any property offered for sale, or falsely represent that such property is in whole or in part bankrupt or insolvent stock or damaged goods or goods saved from fire. 
(2)  Substitute any other article for the article sold to a bidder. 
(3)  Receive any bid from a person not a bona fide bidder at such sale, or take part in any agreement with any individual for the purpose of impeding fair competition among legitimate bidders or unfairly raising the price of any item for sale. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 9(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 5-11. - Use of criers, music, etc. 
    No person shall employ or permit to be employed any bell-man, crier, instrument of music or means of attracting the attention of passersby to a public auction, other than a sign or flag. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 9(4)) 
Sec. 5-12. - Revocation of license or authorization. 
(a)  The village clerk-treasurer may revoke any license and/or authorization to conduct an auction sale, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if he shall have cause to believe that the holder of such license and/or authorization to conduct a sale, is violating any statute of the state relative to auctions and auctioneers, or any provision of this chapter. A conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of such offense or recovery upon a bond pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conclusive evidence of such violation. 
(b)  The village clerk-treasurer shall upon the complaint of any person cause notice to be served upon the holder of a public auctioneer's license, and for holder of authorization to conduct a public auction sale, specifying the grounds of complaint or reason assigned for the revocation of such license and/or authorization to conduct a sale. The holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of trustees of the village, if requested, within fourteen (14) days following notice of the complaint and revocation. The holder shall be afforded the opportunity at such hearing to present evidence and witnesses on his behalf in connection with his license or authorization to conduct a public auction sale. Following such hearing, the board shall render a determination on the license and/or authorization to conduct a sale within twenty (20) days. Said determination shall be set forth in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 10) 
Secs. 5-13-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of village to license, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) (a) (11). 

Sec. 5-26. - Required. 
    No sale at public auction of any personal property shall be held within the village unless such sale be directly conducted by an auctioneer licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 2) 
Sec. 5-27. - Application. 
(a)  Every applicant for an auctioneer's license shall present to the village clerk-treasurer a written application signed and duly verified by him, stating: 
(1)  His full name, age, residence by street, number and place, present occupation; 
(2)  The place where he intends to conduct the business of public auctioneer in the village; 
(3)  His qualifications including education, business engaged in during the past five (5) years, giving location, kind and extent; 
(4)  Where and when he was previously licensed as auctioneer; 
(5)  Whether any previous license as auctioneer was cancelled for cause. 
(b)  Such application shall be approved by not less than five (5) reputable citizens of the village or of the place of residence of the applicant, each of whom shall certify that he has personally known the applicant for a period of at least five (5) years prior to the filing of the application, that he has read such application and believes each of the statements therein to be true; that such person is honest, of good character and competent to conduct the business or calling of auctioneer; and that such person is not related to or connected with the person so certifying. The certificate of approval shall be signed by such persons and duly verified and acknowledged by them before an officer authorized to take oaths and acknowledgments of deeds. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 3) 
Sec. 5-28. - Fee. 
    A person desiring to obtain an auctioneer's license shall pay to the village treasurer such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 4; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(J), 3, 6-1-76) 
Sec. 5-29. - Bond. 
    An applicant for an auctioneer's license shall also present to the village clerk-treasurer with his application for such license a bond running to the village executed by a duly authorized surety company, in such penal sum as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution, conditioned for the faithful observance of the laws of the state and of the village, the performance of all duties, the rendition of all accounts and the payment of all moneys required of him by law to be paid; and also conditioned for the payment to any person who shall be defrauded or suffer loss by reason of the violation by such auctioneer of any of the provisions of this article. Such bond shall be approved as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 3) 
Sec. 5-30. - Issuance. 
    Upon the village clerk-treasurer being furnished proof of payment of the required license and furnishing of the required bond, and upon the filing of an application pursuant to section 5-27, he shall issue to the applicant an auctioneer's license, authorizing him to conduct auction sales in the village as provided by law and by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 3) 
Sec. 5-31. - Term. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the first day of March next succeeding its issuance. 
(Ord. of 3-5-40, § 4) 
Chapter 6 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate, inspect and register bicycles, General Municipal Law, § 180; bicycles generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1230 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter the term "bicycle" shall have the meaning assigned to it by the state Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11 (1); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
State Law reference- Bicycle defined, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 102. 
Secs. 6-2-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 6-16. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any village resident to operate a bicycle upon any street in the village unless the said bicycle is registered and tagged as herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(1); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
Sec. 6-17. - Application and fee. 
    Bicycle registration shall be made by filing with the police department the name and address of the owner, together with a complete description of the bicycle on forms provided by said department and upon paying the fee now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Registrations and license tags shall be valid for the full period of ownership by the individual registering the bicycle. The applicant shall state in the application if the bicycle is to be used after dark, and if so, that it is equipped with lights and reflectors as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(2); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
State Law reference- Registration fees, General Municipal Law, § 180; required equipment, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1236. 
Sec. 6-18. - Record and tag. 
(a)  Bicycle registrations shall be serially numbered and kept on file in the police department as a public record. Upon such registration the said department shall cause an identification tag or other identifying device to be affixed to the registered bicycle, serially numbered to correspond with the registration number. Such tag or other identifying device shall remain affixed to the bicycle unless removed by said department for cause or for retagging upon re-registration by a new owner. In case of theft or loss, a duplicate tag or identifying device shall be issued upon payment of such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(b)  No person shall willfully remove, deface or destroy any identification tag, or other identifying device. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(3), (5); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
State Law reference- Tags, General Municipal Law, § 180. 
Sec. 6-19. - Change of bicycle ownership, dismantling bicycle, etc. 
    Within ten (10) days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed ownership, or been dismantled or taken out of operation, the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the police department. In case of change of ownership, the registration shall thereupon be changed to show the name of the new owner. In case of dismantling or taking out of operation, the registration shall be cancelled and identification tag destroyed or obliterated. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(6); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
Sec. 6-20. - Handling of fees. 
    A complete report shall be made to the village treasurer of funds received from registration of bicycles, and such funds shall be paid to the village treasurer. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(4); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
Sec. 6-21. - Suspension or revocation. 
    In addition to any other penalties prescribed by state law, any person who operates a registered bicycle in a manner considered dangerous to self, others, or property, or who otherwise violates the provisions of any state law pertaining to bicycles, may have his registration suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or in an appropriate case, may have his registration revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(8); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
Sec. 6-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person operating an unlicensed or unregistered bicycle, or who violates any provision of this article shall be denied use of the bicycle until he complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 11(7); Ord. of 9-5-72) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violations of local bicycle regulations, General Municipal Law, § 180. Penalty for violations of village legislation, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05; Village Law, § 20-2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; nuisances, Ch. 14; oil and gas, drilling, wells, etc., Ch. 15; planning and development, Ch. 17; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; permit to place building materials on street, sidewalk, etc., § 19-4; temporary water service during construction, § 24-33; zoning, Ch. 25, 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Fire limits. 
    The fire limits of the village shall be as follows: 
(1)  All that portion of the village bounded by the village line on the north, the west line of Delaware Avenue on the east, the village line on the south, and the rear line of all lots abutting on the west line of Delaware Avenue; also, all that portion of the village bounded by the village line on the north, the east line of Delaware Avenue on the west, and the village line on the south and the rear lot lines of all lots abutting on the east line of Delaware Avenue. For the purpose of describing the boundaries of this district, said rear lot lines shall be defined by subdivision maps on file in the county clerk's office on the date of the adoption of the zoning ordinance of this village. 
(2)  All that portion of the village contained within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point in the north line of West Kenmore Avenue which said point is distant one hundred thirty (130) feet west of the point of intersection of the west line of Elmwood Avenue, as now laid out as a ninety-nine-foot highway, with the said northerly line of West Kenmore Avenue; running thence northerly and parallel with the easterly line of Elmwood Avenue to a point in the northerly line of the village, which said point is distant one hundred thirty (130) feet east of the point of intersection of the said northerly line of the village with the westerly line of Elmwood Avenue; running thence easterly and along the said northerly line of the village to the centerline of Elmwood Avenue; running thence northerly along the said centerline of Elmwood Avenue to the northerly line of the village; running thence easterly and along the said northerly line of the village to a point in the said northerly line which is distant one hundred thirty (130) feet easterly from the easterly line of Elmwood Avenue, as laid out as a ninety-nine-foot street; thence southerly parallel with and at a distance of one hundred thirty (130) feet east of the easterly line of Elmwood Avenue, as laid out as a ninety-nine-foot street, to the northerly line of Kenmore Avenue; thence westerly and along the said northerly line of Kenmore Avenue as extended across Elmwood Avenue to the point or place of beginning. 
(3)  All that area bounded on the east by the easterly limits of the village; by the northerly line of Kenmore Avenue on the south; by the easterly line of Elmwood Avenue on the west and on the north by the rear line of all lots fronting or abutting on Kenmore Avenue as said lots are shown upon and described by the subdivision maps on file in the county clerk's office as of March 21, 1950. In the event any of said subdivision maps show lots facing upon intersecting streets, then the northerly line of the area herein restricted shall be the extension of the rear line of the adjacent subdivision lot under the same map cover fronting on Kenmore Avenue. 
(4)  All that portion of the village bounded by the village line on the north, the east line of Military Road on the west, the village line on the south and on the east by the rear line of all lots abutting on the east side of Military Road. For the purpose of describing the boundaries of this district said rear lot lines shall be defined by subdivision maps on file in the county clerk's office on November 6, 1962. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 48, § I; Ord. of 3-21-50; Ord. of 11-6-62) 
Secs. 7-2-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former § 7-16, which comprised Art. II, "State Building Code," was repealed by § 1(A) of L.L. No. 4-1987, adopted July 7, 1987. The former section pertained to amendments to the State Building Construction Code and derived from a resolution adopted Sept. 24, 1963, and L.L. No. 3-1981, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 22, 1981. 
Cross reference- State fire prevention and building code, § 8-16 et seq. 

Secs. 7-16-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 7-2000 repealed provisions formerly codified as Art. III, §§ 7-31-7-39, which pertained to electricity and derived from an ordinance adopted Feb. 2, 1960. In addition, L.L. No. 7-2000 enacted new provisions set out herein as a new Art. III, §§ 7-31-7-44. 

Sec. 7-31. - Purpose. 
    Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical energy, this article is enacted to regulate the installation and the alteration of wiring for electrical light, heat or power and signal systems operating on fifty (50) volts or more in or on all real property within the village. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-32. - Authorization of electrical inspectors. 
    The building inspector and/or his or her designee is hereby authorized to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or disapprove the same. All fees for inspections and/or reinspections shall be made payable to the village. Applications and fees will be accepted by the village building department. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00; L.L. 4-2003, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-33. - Duties of electrical inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector and/or his or her designee to provide a written report of any inspection and to enforce all the provisions of this article, all violations of or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions of any other applicable code and/or regulation, and all local laws, ordinances and codes as referred to in this article, insofar as any of the same apply to electrical wiring. The building inspector and/or his or her designee shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on properties in the village upon the written request of an authorized official of the village or as herein provided. 
    Such inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties within the village where said inspector deems it necessary for the protection of life and property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of such inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of the village. It shall be the duty of the building inspector and/or his or her designee to provide a written report to the owner and/or lessee of the property where defective electrical installations and/or equipment are found. The building inspector shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with this article. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00; L.L. 4-2003, §§ 3, 4, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-34. - Adoption of standards. 
    All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the National Electrical Code, as amended from time to time (National Electrical Code), except where the provisions of this article or any local law, ordinance or the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the building code) shall differently prescribe. In which event compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance or code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this article. The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as "National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 70", as approved and adopted by the American Standards Association. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-35. - Violations. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on properties in the village until an application for inspection has been filed with the village building department. It shall be a violation of this article for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance by the village building department. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-36. - Penalties for offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  Any person taking part in or assisting in any violation of this article shall also be subject to the penalties herein. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article is committed or is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Said penalties herein are in addition to those fees and charges provided in section 7-37.1 of this article. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-37. - Electrical permit. 
    No person shall install, alter, or repair any electrical equipment or installation without a permit issued by the supervising building inspector or such other person or agency as the board of trustees may designate. Such a permit will be issued only to licensed electricians or the homeowner, in the event the work is to be performed on an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, and only if the proposed work will comply with all laws. Persons desiring such a permit shall pay such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-37.1. - Electrical permit fees. 
    Electrical permit fees shall be established by resolution of the village board of trustees. In the event that work requiring an electrical permit is commenced prior to the issuance of the permit, the fee for the permit shall be double the regular rate or the additional sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00; L.L. 4-2003, §§ 5, 6, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-38. - Application for inspection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat, or power in or on properties in the village until an application for inspection has been filed with the building department. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00; L.L. 4-2003, §§ 7, 8, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-39. - Certificate of compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in/on properties for light, heat, or power to any source or electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate or certificate of compliance by the building inspector. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00; L.L. 4-2003, §§ 9, 10, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-40. - Licensing of master electricians. 
(a)  No person shall engage in business or work as a master electrician without a license issued by the village clerk. Such a license shall be issued only to a person who passes an examination administered by an electrician appointed by the village: provided, that no such examination shall be required for the renewal of the license. Such examination shall test whether such person is qualified to work as a master electrician. 
(b)  A person desiring such a license shall pay to the village treasurer such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Such a license shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-40.1. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(b)  Applications for renewal of a license shall be filed not before December 1 prior to the calendar year for which the renewal is sought. A license may be renewed without examination or referral of the application to the board of trustees upon application to the village clerk and payment of the required fee; provided however that a license for which a renewal application has not been filed on or before February 1 of any year shall be deemed abandoned by the licensee and no renewal license shall thereafter be issued. 
(L.L. 4-2003, § 11, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-40.2. - Loaning of licenses or subletting work. 
(a)  No licensed employing or master electrician shall loan his or her license or permit another to perform work under it except as specified in this section. 
(b)  A licensed employing or master electrician may be issued a permit covering work that will be performed by another person, persons or company provided that the following be provided in a writing accompanying the application for a permit: 
(1)  The person, persons or company that will perform the work; 
(2)  The extent of the work that will not be done by the licensed electrician or his or her company; 
(3)  Proof that the person, persons or company that will perform the work carries adequate liability and workers compensation insurance; and 
(4)  The contract, written estimate or other written document establishing the contract with the consumer contains the information specified in subsections (b)(1) and (2) above and has a statement signed by the licensed plumber that he or she or his or her company is responsible for the proper completion of the work to be performed. 
(L.L. 4-2003, § 12, 12-17-03; L.L. No. 5-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 7-40.3. - Revocation. 
    An employing or master electrician license may be suspended or cancelled by the board of trustees for a violation of any state or local law relating to electricity or for the performance of work which is or is designed to contribute to the violation of the zoning ordinance, or in the event that work is performed without first procuring the necessary permit. 
(L.L. 4-2003, § 13, 12-17-03) 
Sec. 7-41. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the electrical installations in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communications utility in the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This article shall not apply to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as their principal business. This article shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the governments of the United States, the State of New York or the County of Erie. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-42. - Construal of provisions. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the village or its duly authorized inspectors be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this article. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-43. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation engaged in the conduct of manufacturing in or on properties in the village who hire or employ one or more electricians, whose principal duties are installation, maintenance and repair of electrical machines, appliances or electrical distribution (hereinafter called "electrical work"). The term "electrician" shall mean a person who has completed an apprentice course or received equivalent training or had equivalent experience of at least three (3) years in electrical work and is deemed qualified by reason that his work performance is acceptable by the various codes and inspections that said person, firm or corporation is subject to. By January 1 of each year, a list of such electricians shall be submitted to the supervising building inspector of the village in order that the person, firm or corporation shall be released from or not subject to the provisions as set forth in this article pertaining to the filing of applications or penalties for noncompliance. There shall be no assessments or fees in connection with the filing of this certificate of electricians. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 7-44. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof and the person and circumstances directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
(L.L. No. 7-2000, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Secs. 7-45-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; excavations, § 19-21 et seq.; water, Ch. 24. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 7-61-7-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits, and business regulations, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 7-71. - Definition. 
    When used in this division, the words "employing or master plumber" shall mean a person duly licensed and having a regular place for the transaction of business and who by himself, or persons in his employ, performs plumbing work. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 1) 
Sec. 7-72. - Examining board of plumbers-Generally. 
(a)  There is hereby established an examining board of plumbers consisting of five (5) persons. Said board shall consist of the superintendent of public works, the plumbing inspector and three (3) persons appointed by the mayor subject to approval of the board of trustees who shall be master plumbers licensed by the village. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector and the superintendent of public works shall be members of said board during their term of office, as such, and when they shall cease to hold their offices, their successors shall act on the examining board in their stead. The term of office of the master plumbers shall be three (3) years. Vacancies occurring by reason of death, inability to act, resignation or for any other reason shall be filled by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of trustees for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The master plumbers serving as members of such board shall receive such sum as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution for their services as such. The superintendent of public works and the plumbing inspector shall receive no additional compensation for their added duties under this division. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 4) 
Sec. 7-73. - Examining board of plumbers-Powers and duties. 
(a)  The examining board of plumbers shall have jurisdiction over and examine all persons desiring or intending to engage in the business, trade or calling of plumbing, an employing or as master plumbers in the village and shall determine their fitness and qualifications for performing plumbing work and conducting the business or trade of an employing or master plumber. 
(b)  The examining board of plumbers shall meet on the second Tuesdays of January, April, July and October of each year at the municipal building at an hour to be designated by it for the purpose of conducting such examinations. In the event any regularly scheduled meeting shall fall upon a legal holiday then said examination shall be held on the following day. 
(c)  The examining board of plumbers shall report the result of the examination (with its recommendations) to the board of trustees within thirty (30) days after the examinations have been held. 
(d)  The board of trustees shall authorize the mayor to issue a license to the successful applicants within thirty (30) days after the result of the examinations has been reported to it. 
(e)  The board of examiners of plumbers shall appoint a chairman and a secretary from their number. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 4) 
State Law reference- Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84 et seq.; Open Meetings Law, Public Officers Law, § 95 et seq. 
Sec. 7-74. - License required. 
    No person shall work as an employing or master plumber without a license issued by the village clerk. 
Sec. 7-75. - License application and issuance. 
(a)  A person desiring a village employing or master plumber's license shall file an application, in writing, on forms provided by the village, with the village clerk, at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled examination, which application must be accompanied by such fees as are now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Said application shall be referred to the board of trustees for examination and in the event same is found to be in proper form then and in that event same shall be transmitted to the examining board of plumbers. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall not approve the issuance of any such license until the applicant takes the examination administered by the examining board of plumbers and the board of trustees has received a report of such examining board on the issuance of such license. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(D), 3, 6-1-76) 
Sec. 7-76. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(b)  Applications for renewal of licenses shall be filed not before December 1 prior to the calendar year for which the renewal is applied for. A license may be renewed without examination or referral of the application to the board of trustees upon application to the village clerk and payment of the required fee; provided, however that a license for which a renewal application has not been filed on or before February 1 of any year shall be deemed abandoned by the licensee and no renewal license shall thereafter be issued. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 6; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(D), 3, 6-1-76; L.L. 4-1989, § 1, 12-19-89) 
Sec. 7-77. - Loaning of licenses or subletting work. 
(a)  No licensed employing or master plumber shall loan his or her license or permit another to perform work under it except as specified in this section. 
(b)  A licensed employing or master plumber may be issued a permit covering work that will be performed by another person, persons or company provided that the following be provided in a writing accompanying the application for a permit: 
(1)  The person, persons or company that will perform the work; 
(2)  The extent of the work that will not be done by the licensed plumber or his or her company; 
(3)  Proof that the person, persons or company that will perform the work carries adequate liability and workers compensation insurance; and 
(4)  The contract, written estimate or other written document establishing the contract with the consumer contains the information specified in subsections (b)(1) and (2) above and has a statement signed by the licensed plumber that he or she or his or her company is responsible for the proper completion of the work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 5; L.L. No. 6-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 7-78. - License revocation. 
    An employing or master plumber's license may be suspended or cancelled by the board of trustees for a violation of any state or local laws relating to plumbing or for the performance of work which is or is designed to contribute to the violation of the zoning ordinance, or in the event work is performed without first procuring the necessary permit. 
(Ord. of 4-17-62, § 7) 
Secs. 7-79-7-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 7-86. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall do any plumbing work unless a permit for such work has been obtained from the village clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  No plumbing permit shall be required for the replacement or repair of existing facilities if such work does not require any change in a vent, trap or waste line. 
(Ord. of 1-15-57, § 1) 
Sec. 7-87. - Application. 
    An application for a plumbing permit shall be filed with the plumbing inspector and shall be accompanied by such plans and diagrams as are necessary for the plumbing inspector to determine whether the permit should be issued. 
(Ord. of 1-15-57, § 1) 
Sec. 7-88. - Persons eligible. 
    No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person other than a plumber licensed by the village or the homeowner, in the event the work is to be performed on an owner-occupied single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. of 1-15-87, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1986, § 2(A), 11-4-86) 
Sec. 7-89. - Issuance. 
    A plumbing permit shall not be issued unless the proposed work will comply with all state and local laws relating to plumbing. 
Sec. 7-90. - Fee. 
    An application for a plumbing permit shall be accompanied by such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. If the amount of such fee is determined by a tentative contract price or estimated cost figure and in the event the actual expenditure exceeds the estimate, the applicant shall pay the additional fee within ten (10) days after the amount has been determined. In the event the fee has been overpaid, the excess amount may be refunded to the applicant upon presentation of a proper voucher. If plumbing work for which a permit is required pursuant to section 7-86 has commenced before application for such permit has been made, application for a plumbing permit shall be made immediately as prescribed by section 7-87 and the fee for such application shall be three (3) times the fee as is established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 1-15-57, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(F), 3, 6-1-76; L.L. No. 7-1976, § 1, 10-26-76; L.L. No. 3-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Secs. 7-91-7-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE, UNFIT, ETC., BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Removal of dangerous buildings pursuant to state building conservation and fire prevention code, § 8-24; nuisances, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 7-111. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to provide for: 
(1)  The safety, health and general welfare of the inhabitants; 
(2)  The protection of property; 
(3)  The preservation of property values; 
(4)  The elimination of fire and health hazards; and 
(5)  The repair or elimination of unsafe buildings. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 1, 10-19-65) 
Sec. 7-112. - Repair, removal, etc., required. 
(a)  All buildings or structures or any part or parts thereof, which become vacant, abandoned, dilapidated, deteriorated, decayed or unattractive from any cause, so as to endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public, or which constitute a fire hazard or an attractive nuisance, shall be repaired, demolished or removed. 
(b)  All buildings or structures and any and all parts thereof shall be kept free of graffiti. As used in this article, graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, painting, figure or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by a device capable of leaving a visible mark. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 2, 10-19-65; L.L. 11-2006, § 1, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 7-113. - Inspections. 
    The building inspector, or those persons certified as code enforcement officers, shall inspect or cause to be inspected any premises alleged to be in violation of section 7-112 and shall make a written report of such examination and inspection to be filed with the village board, the village clerk and in the office of the building inspector. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 3, 10-19-95; L.L. No. 3-1996, 5-7-96) 
Sec. 7-114. - Notice to comply. 
(a)  When it shall be determined by the building inspector that a building or structure, or any part or parts thereof, is not in compliance or conformity with the provisions of section 7-112, a notice shall be served on the owner or the owner's legal representative, agent, executor, lessee, or any other person, firm or corporation having a vested or contingent interest in the building or structure as provided herein. 
(b)  Said notice shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the premises, a statement of the reasons for finding the building or structure to be unsafe, dangerous, or otherwise in violation of section 7-112 and an order requiring same to be repaired, demolished or removed. 
(2)  A statement that the person, firm or corporation served with a copy thereof shall commence and complete the repair, demolition or removal of the building or structure within a reasonable time as may be determined by the building inspector, having regard to the extent of the work required and the danger which exists, which time shall be specified in such notice. Any such repair, demolition or removal shall be made in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations then in effect. 
(3)  A statement specifying the procedure to be followed should the owner fail to make the required repairs, demolition, or removal as set forth in the notice in the time provided. 
(4)  The place and time of a public hearing as provided in section 7-116. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 5, 10-19-65; L.L. No. 3-1996, 5-7-96) 
State Law reference- Power of village to bring property into compliance with law, Village Law, § 4-414; liens for special assessments, Village Law, § 5-516. 
Sec. 7-115. - Service of notice. 
(a)  The notice provided for in section 7-114 shall be served as follows: 
(1)  Personally upon the owner, or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in same and all other persons having an interest in such property or structure, or 
(2)  By certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of such person, firm or corporation as shown by the record of the receiver of taxes, the assessor and/or county clerk. If service is made by certified mail, a copy of such notice shall be posted on the premises. 
(L.L. No. 5-2012, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-12) 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 5-2012, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 5, 2012 repealed the former § 7-115, and enacted a new § 7-115 as set out herein. The former § 7-115 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from L.L. No. 2-1965, § 6, adopted 10-19-65; L.L. No. 3-1996, adopted 5-7-96. 
Sec. 7-116. - Hearing. 
(a)  The notice required by section 7-114 shall set forth the time and place of a hearing before the village board on the matters at issue on the notice. 
(b)  The village board shall conduct a public hearing at the time and place specified in the notice prescribed under section 7-114 of this chapter at which time the owner and persons having an interest in the property or structure in question may respond to the matters at issue. 
(c)  If the owner or any person having an interest in or lien upon the property or structure involved submits evidence at such hearing before the village board, the board shall thereafter make a further determination which shall: 
(1)  Affirm the building inspector's initial determination; 
(2)  Modify the specifications of the building inspector's original determination; or 
(3)  Vacate the original notice. 
(d)  In the event that the village board shall affirm or modify the original determination of the building inspector, notice thereof shall be served upon those who appeared at the hearing in the manner prescribed by section 7-115 within ten (10) days after the hearing and an order to repair, remove or demolish said property or structure within a reasonable time as determined by the board shall be issued. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 7, 10-19-65; L.L. No. 3-1996, 5-7-96) 
Sec. 7-117. - Repair or removal by the village upon noncompliance; collection costs. 
    In the event of the failure of the person, firm, or corporation served with a notice and afforded the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to this chapter to repair, demolish or remove the building or structure in question in accordance with the provisions of the notice, the village may make repairs or remove said building or structure and either: 
(1)  Pursuant to Village Law, § 4-414, assess all costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the proceedings to remove or secure, including the costs of actually removing said building or structure, against the property on which said buildings or structures are located after notice of the amount of such assessment has been given to the person, firm or corporation described in section 7-114 of this chapter; or 
(2)  Pursuant to General Municipal Law, § 78-b, the village board may commence a special proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the costs of demolition, including reasonable and necessary legal expenses incidental to obtaining an order to demolish from the owner of said building or structure. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 8, 10-19-95; L.L. No. 3-1996, 5-7-96) 
Sec. 7-118. - Filing of notice in county clerk's office. 
    A copy of the notice provided for under section 7-116 shall be filed by the building inspector in the office of the Erie County Clerk within five (5) days after service under section 7-115 is complete. Such notice shall be filed by such clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law Rules of the State of New York and shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein provided, except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section. A notice so filed shall be effective for a one-year period from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order of a judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the village attorney. The Erie County Clerk shall mark such notice and any record or docket thereof as canceled of record upon the presentation and filing of such consent or of a certified copy of such order. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 9, 10-19-65; L.L. No. 3-1996, 5-7-96) 
Sec. 7-119. - Records, reports and liens. 
    The building inspector shall keep in his office a record of all buildings not in compliance with section 7-112 with additional information showing the action taken by him from time to time relative to each property and not later than April first of each year shall report to the board of trustees the premises upon which work has been performed by the village, the name of the owner, the expenses incurred in the repair, demolition or removal that are unpaid, whereupon the board of trustees shall order the assessment against said premises for the several sums so reported. 
(L.L. No. 2-1965, § 10, 10-19-65) 
State Law reference- Power of village to collect cost of work to bring property into compliance with law and collect cost thereof, Village Law, § 4-414. Special assessment liens, Village Law, § 5-516. Collection of special assessments, Village Law, § 5-518. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES 

Sec. 7-120. - Demolition permit required. 
    No building or structure within the village, or any part thereof, of any kind whatsoever, shall be demolished and/or removed without a demolition permit issued by the board of trustees. The demolition permit is in addition to the building permit required under chapter 8 and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. No demolition permit is required for interior renovations where the exterior portion of a property is not demolished or removed. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-121. - Application. 
    An application for a demolition permit shall be in the form of a letter from the applicant, addressing the factors set forth in section 7-122 below. In addition, the application should address compliance with applicable asbestos regulations, the information required to obtain a building permit pursuant to chapter 8, as well as a detailed analysis of the need for demolition and/or removal. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-122. - Criteria. 
    In determining whether to grant a demolition permit, the board of trustees shall consider: 
(1)  The condition of the structure; 
(2)  The feasibility of repair of the structure; 
(3)  The public health and safety; 
(4)  The aesthetic impacts to the community; 
(5)  The impacts on community character and streetscape; 
(6)  Plans for reuse of the structure; 
(7)  The likelihood another structure could be feasibly constructed on the property once the structure is removed; and 
(8)  Any other factor the board of trustees deems relevant, appropriate, and reasonable under the circumstances of the particular application. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-123. - Procedure. 
    Upon receipt of the application, the board shall review the material and determine whether or not the application is complete. Upon a completeness determination, the board will set a public hearing on the application. Following the public hearing, and the completion of the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA") process, the board of trustees shall make its determination. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-124. - Decision. 
    The board of trustees shall set forth its decision, either denying or granting a demolition permit, in writing. The board of trustees shall have the power to impose conditions on any demolition permit, as are reasonable and necessary in its judgment to further the goals and purposes of this article and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community. If the board of trustees approves the application, it authorizes the building inspector to issue the building permit for the work so specified in the application; provided, however, that the applicant has obtained all other permits or approvals that may be required by the codes and local laws of the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-125. - Hardship criteria. 
    An applicant whose demolition permit application has been denied may apply to the board of trustees for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that: (1) the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; this factor must analyze the likelihood/cost of reusing the property under the existing zoning laws; (2) the property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return, again also in comparison to the ability/cost of reconstructing a similar structure on the existing parcel; and (3) efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed. After receiving written notification from the board of trustees of the denial of a demolition permit, an applicant may commence the hardship process. No building permit shall be issued unless the board of trustees makes a finding that a hardship exists. The board of trustees may hold a public hearing on the hardship application, at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views. A finding that a hardship exists may include reasonable conditions as determined by the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-126. - Durational limitation. 
    A demolition permit shall expire automatically within one year from the date it was issued. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-127. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who demolishes and/or removes a structure without a demolition permit shall be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, for each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of the village for injunctive relief. The remedies available to the village are not intended to be exclusive. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 7-128. - Article 78 proceeding. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of trustees on an application for a demolition permit may apply to the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. 
(L.L. No. 3-2017, § 2, 7-18-17) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Mileage allowance for volunteer firemen, § 2-16; unsafe, unfit, etc. buildings, § 7-111 et seq.; bonfires in streets, § 13-6; fires in parks, § 14.5-19; use of fire hydrants, § 24-61; private fire protection, § 24-62. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. (1), para. (ii), a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Attendant for dry cleaning machines. 
(a)  The board of trustees hereby finds that the operation or maintenance of unattended dry cleaning machines constitutes a threat to the safety and welfare of the community. 
(b)  Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of a business of maintaining and operating for hire separate dry cleaning machines for personal and individual use, where made available to the public, shall provide an attendant who is familiar with the operation of such machines and who shall be in attendance at all times when such machines are made available for hire. 
(Ord. of 8-8-61, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 8-2. - Premises showing films, staging games, etc., in booths. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to meet the need for legislation created by the risk of fire hazards in certain business establishments within the village which as a part of their operation deal in the showing of films or playing of games in confined quarters such as booths and to tie such legislation to existing legislation of the village dealing with fire prevention. 
(b)  All establishments, premises, buildings, or locations within which movies, films, or games of any kind are shown, staged, or played on an individual booth or booth-by-booth basis, by use of automatic amusement devices or otherwise, shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  In the construction of all walls and partitions in all booths, material of not less than one hour fire resistant time shall be used; 
(2)  All aisles within such establishments shall not be less than fifty (50) inches in width; 
(3)  The light level in such establishments shall not be less than ten (10) foot-candles at floor level; 
(4)  In every room of such establishment wherein such partitioned rooms or booths are constructed, there shall not be less than two (2) lighted exits, which exits shall lead directly to the outside of such building. 
(c)  Any person owning, operating, occupying, having custody, control or supervision over any property, premises, building or location within the scope of this section shall comply with all the provisions of this section, and all orders, notices or determinations issued in connection herewith. 
(d)  The administration of this section shall be the same as the administration and enforcement of the state building conservation and fire prevention code in the village as provided for in article II of this chapter, and in furtherance thereof, the provisions of sections 8-17, 8-19, and 8-21 through 8-23 are incorporated herein as if set forth at length herein. 
(L.L. No. 1-1981, 1-20-81) 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3; coin-controlled devices, § 12-16 et seq. 
Sec. 8-3. - Use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  No fire hydrant within the village shall be used for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fires, periodic testing of the fire protection system or periodic drills by the village fire department, unless a permit for special use is first obtained. 
(b)  Application for a permit for special use of a village fire hydrant shall be made to the clerk/treasurer's office of the village. Said application shall be made on a form supplied by the village, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A description of the proposed use of a village fire hydrant and the location of the fire hydrant(s) to be used; 
(3)  The length of time of use of the fire hydrant. 
(c)  Upon filing of the foregoing application, the applicant shall pay to the office of the clerk/treasurer such fee as is established from time to time by resolution of the board of trustees of the village. Upon payment of said fee, the special use permit shall be issued. 
(d)  The board of trustees of the village may, by resolution, require any user of a village fire hydrant to pay, in addition to the application fee, a charge for water usage and to post a bond or make a deposit with the clerk/treasurer to ensure proper use of the fire hydrant. 
(e)  Any user of a village fire hydrant shall notify the village within twenty-four (24) hours after such use, to enable the village to inspect the fire hydrant and determine if it has been returned to its proper operating condition. Failure to return a fire hydrant to its proper operating condition shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(L.L. No. 1 of 1983, § 1, 6-22-83) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 12; water, Ch. 24; use of hydrants, public fire protection, § 24-61. 
Secs. 8-4-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 13-2006, §§ 1-17, adopted Dec. 5, 2006, amended Art. II in its entirety as set out herein. The former Art. II derived from L.L. No. 4-1987, §§ 2(1)-2(11), adopted July 7, 1987; L.L. No. 1-1993, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 1993; L.L. No. 4-1999, §§ 1-5, adopted June 1, 1999; L.L. No. 4-2004, § 1, adopted May 4, 2004; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 1, adopted April 18, 2006; and L.L. No. 9-2006, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 2006. 

Sec. 8-16. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article provides for the administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the uniform code) and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the energy code) in the Village of Kenmore. This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10. Except as otherwise provided in the uniform code, other state law, or other section of this article, all buildings, structures, and premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions this local law. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 1, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-17. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Building inspector shall mean an inspector appointed pursuant to subsection 8-18(b). 
    Building permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to section 18-19. The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article. 
    Certificate of occupancy shall mean a certificate issued pursuant to subsection 8-22(b). 
    Certificate of compliance" shall mean a certificate issued pursuant to subsection 8-22(b). 
    Code enforcement officer shall mean the building inspector or any code enforcement officer appointed pursuant to subsection 8-18(b). 
    Code enforcement personnel shall include the building inspector, code enforcement officers and all inspectors. 
    Compliance order shall mean an order issued by the building inspector pursuant to subsection 8-30(a). 
    Energy code shall mean the State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time. 
    Operating permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to section 8-25. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this local law. 
    Permit holder shall mean the person to whom a building permit has been issued. 
    Person shall include an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association, or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description. 
    Stop-work order shall mean an order issued pursuant to section 8-21. 
    Temporary certificate shall mean a certificate issued pursuant to subsection 8-22(d). 
    Uniform code shall mean the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Kenmore. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 2, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-18. - Code enforcement officer and inspectors. 
(a)  The office of building inspector is hereby created. The building inspector shall be the chief code enforcement officer and shall administer and enforce the uniform fire prevention and building code and such other provisions of this Code shall be delegated to him or her. 
(b)  The building department shall be under the direction and charge of the building inspector. The building inspector shall have as his or her representative code enforcement officers and such other assistants, representatives and inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively the powers and duties of the department. All such positions must be approved by the board of trustees. 
(c)  The building inspector shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance/certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with such applications; 
(2)  Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and conditions as the building inspector may determine to be appropriate; 
(3)  To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, fire safety and property maintenance inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under any provision of this article; 
(4)  To issue stop-work orders; 
(5)  To review and investigate complaints; 
(6)  To issue orders pursuant to subsection 8-30(a) (violations); 
(7)  To maintain records; 
(8)  To collect fees as set by the board of trustees of this village; 
(9)  To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings; 
(10)  In consultation with village attorney, to pursue such legal actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the uniform code, the energy code and this article, or to abate or correct conditions not in compliance with the uniform code, the energy code or this article; and 
(11)  To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred upon the building inspector by this article. 
(b)  The building inspector shall be appointed by the mayor with confirmation by the board of trustees. The building inspector shall possess background experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the state shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the code enforcement officer shall obtain certification from the state fire administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(c)  One or more code enforcement officers may be appointed by the mayor with confirmation of the board of trustees to act under the supervision and direction of the building inspector and to assist the building inspector in the exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the building inspector by this article. Each code enforcement officer shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the state shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain certification from the state fire administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(d)  The mayor with confirmation by the board of trustees may also appoint one or more plumbing inspectors and/or electrical inspectors to act under the supervision and direction of the building inspector and to assist the building inspector in the exercise and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon him or her by this article. A plumbing and/or electrical inspector shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the state shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain certification from the state fire administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(e)  The compensation for the building inspector, code enforcement officers and inspectors, including electrical and plumbing inspectors, shall be fixed from time to time by the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 3, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-19. - Building permits. 
(a)  Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), a building permit shall be required for any work which must conform to the uniform code and/or the energy code, including, but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or structure or driveway or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid fuel burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No person shall commence any work for which a building permit is required without first having obtained a building permit through the building department. 
(b)  Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the following categories: 
(1)  Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where such pools are designed for a water depth of less than twenty-four (24) inches and are installed entirely above ground; 
(3)  Installation of fences which are not a part of an enclosure surrounding a swimming pool, except as required under section 25-167 of this Code; 
(4)  Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a surcharge or impound class I, II or IIIA liquids; 
(5)  Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery; 
(6)  Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses); 
(7)  Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five (5) feet nine (9) inches in height; 
(8)  Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish work; 
(9)  Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances; 
(10)  Replacement of any equipment provided the replacement does not alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the equipment's original specifications; or 
(11)  Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve: 
(i)  The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load bearing component; 
(ii)  The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which affects egress; 
(iii)  The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any building system; or 
(iv)  The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection system for any period of time. 
(c)  Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work. The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for work in any category set forth in subsection (b) shall not be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the uniform code or the energy code. 
(d)  Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the building inspector. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such information as the building inspector deems sufficient to permit a determination by the building inspector that the intended work complies with all applicable requirements of the uniform code and the energy code. The application shall include or be accompanied by the following information and documentation: 
(1)  A description of the proposed work; 
(2)  The tax map number and the street address of the premises where the work is to be performed; 
(3)  The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure; 
(4)  Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in accordance with the provisions of the uniform code; and 
(5)  At least two (2) sets of construction documents (drawings and/or specifications) which: 
(i)  Define the scope of the proposed work; 
(ii)  Are prepared by a state-registered architect or licensed professional engineer where so required by the Education Law; 
(iii)  Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of the work proposed; 
(iv)  Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the uniform code and the energy code; and 
(v)  Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location of the intended work, and the distances between the building and structures and the lot lines. 
(e)  Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the requirements set forth in subsection (d)(5). Construction documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building permit shall be marked as accepted by the building inspector in writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents shall be retained by the building inspector and one set of the accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a building permit is issued. 
(f)  Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the uniform code and energy code. The building inspector shall issue a building permit if the proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the uniform code, energy code, and any and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(g)  Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized work has been completed. 
(h)  Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall be performed in accordance with the construction documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The permit holder shall ;immediately notify the building inspector of any change occurring during the course of the work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the building inspector determines that such change warrants a new or amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is issued. 
(i)  Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized work is commenced within six (6) months following the date of issuance. Building permits shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of issuance. A building permit which has become invalid or which has expired pursuant to this subdivision may be renewed upon application by the permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the application by the building inspector. 
(j)  Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the building inspector determines that a building permit was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for which a building permit was issued violates the uniform code or the energy code, the building inspector shall revoke the building permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit holder demonstrates that: 
(1)  All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the uniform code and the energy code; and 
(2)  All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the uniform code, the energy code, and any and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(k)  Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 8-31, fees, must be paid at the time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit. If a building permit has not been obtained prior to beginning work for which a permit is required, application shall be made for such permit as provided by this section and the fee for such permit shall be three (3) times the fee as established by local law or resolution. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 4, 12-5-06; L.L. No. 4-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 8-20. - Construction inspections. 
(a)  Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible and exposed until inspected and accepted by the building inspector or by a code enforcement officer authorized by the building inspector. The permit holder shall notify the building inspector when any element of work described in subsection (b) is ready for inspection. 
(b)  Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the construction process shall be respected, where applicable: 
(1)  Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit; 
(2)  Footing and foundation; 
(3)  Preparation for concrete slab; 
(4)  Framing; 
(5)  Building systems, including underground and rough-in; 
(6)  Fire-resistant construction; 
(7)  Fire-resistant penetrations; 
(8)  Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents; 
(9)  Energy code compliance; and 
(10)  Final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit has been completed. 
(c)  Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to where the work fails to comply with the uniform code, energy code, and/or other applicable law or regulation. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of the uniform code, energy code, and/or other applicable law or regulation shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions of the uniform code, the energy code and/or other applicable law or regulation, reinspected, and found satisfactory as completed. 
(d)  Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 8-31, fees, must be paid prior to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 5, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-21. - Stop-work orders. 
(a)  Authority to issue. The building inspector is authorized to issue stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The building inspector shall issue a stop-work order to halt: 
(1)  Any work that is determined by the building inspector to be contrary to any applicable provision of the uniform code, energy code, and/or any other applicable law or regulation without regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been issued for such work, or 
(2)  Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner in the opinion of the building inspector without regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been issued for such work, or 
(3)  Any work for which a building permit is required which is being performed without the required building permit, or under a building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall: 
(1)  Be in writing, 
(2)  Be dated and signed by the building inspector, 
(3)  State the reason or reasons for issuance, and 
(4)  If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume. 
(c)  Service of stop-work orders. The building inspector shall cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The building inspector shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work order or a copy thereof to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the stop-work order. 
(d)  Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order. 
(e)  Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in subsection (a), and the authority to issue a stop-work order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other penalty under section 8-30, violations, or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 6, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-22. - Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance. 
(b)  Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable provisions of the uniform code and energy code and, if applicable, that the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies with all applicable provisions of the uniform code and energy code. The building inspector or an inspector authorized by the building inspector shall inspect the building, structure or work prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance. In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the uniform code by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the building inspector at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the building inspector/code enforcement officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance: 
(1)  A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special inspections, and 
(2)  Flood hazard certifications. 
(c)  Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The building permit number, if any; 
(2)  The date of issuance of the building permit, if any; 
(3)  The name, address and tax map number of the property; 
(4)  If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is issued; 
(5)  The use and occupancy classification of the structure; 
(6)  The type of construction of the structure; 
(7)  The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any; 
(8)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to whether the sprinkler system is required; 
(9)  Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of the building permit; and 
(10)  The signature of the building inspector issuing the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of issuance. 
(d)  Temporary certificate. The building inspector shall be permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no event shall be building inspector issue a temporary certificate unless the building inspector determines: 
(1)  That the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, 
(2)  That any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire-protection equipment which has been installed is operational, and 
(3)  That all required means of egress from the building or structure have been provided. 
The building inspector may include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and intent of the uniform code. A temporary certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six (6) months, which shall be determined by the building inspector and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the uniform code and the energy code. 
(e)  Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the building inspector determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, accurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the building inspector within such period of time as shall be specified by the building inspector, the building inspector shall revoke or suspend such certificate. 
(f)  Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 8-31, fees, must be paid at the time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or for temporary certificate. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 7, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-23. - Notification regarding fire or explosion. 
    The village fire department fire chief shall promptly notify the building inspector/code enforcement officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel burning appliance, chimney or gas vent. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 8, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-24. - Unsafe building and structures. 
    Unsafe structures and equipment in this village shall be identified and addressed in accordance with the procedures established by section 7-112 of the Kenmore Municipal Code, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to time. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 9, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-25. - Operating permits. 
(a)  Operating permits required. Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed below: 
(1)  Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities exceeding those listed in tables 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR section 1225.1; 
(2)  Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to, commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling; 
(3)  Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies; 
(4)  Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an occupant load of one hundred (100) persons or more; and 
(5)  Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted by the board of trustees of the village. 
Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of building listed in this subsection shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or operation. 
(b)  Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the building inspector. Such application shall include such information as the building inspector deems sufficient to permit a determination by the building inspector that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of the uniform code. If the building inspector determines that tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the building inspector, at the expense of the applicant. 
(c)  Inspections. The building inspector an inspector authorized by the building inspector shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an operating permit. 
(d)  Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in subsection (a) is to be conducted at a location, the building inspector may require a separate operating permit for each such activity, or the building inspector may, in his or her discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities. 
(e)  Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three (3) years in any other case, as shall be determined by the building inspector to be consistent with local conditions. The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon application to the building inspector, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of such application by the building inspector. 
(f)  Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the building inspector determines that any activity or building for which an operating permit was issued does not comply with the applicable provision of the uniform code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended. 
(g)  Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 8-31, fees, must be paid at the time submission of an application for an operating permit, for an amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 10, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-26. - Fire safety and property maintenance inspections. 
(a)  Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and structures shall be performed by the code enforcement personnel at the following intervals: 
(1)  Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be performed at least once every twelve (12) months. 
(2)  Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at least once every twelve (12) months. 
(3)  Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple dwellings not included in subsections (a)(1) or (2), and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not included in subsections (a)(1) or (2), shall be performed at least once every twenty-four (24) months. 
(b)  Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by subsection (a), a fire safety and property maintenance inspector of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may also be performed by the building inspector or an inspector designated by the building inspector at any time upon: 
(1)  The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an authorized agent of such owner; 
(2)  Receipt by the building inspector/code enforcement officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the uniform code or energy code exist; or 
(3)  Receipt by the building inspector of any other information, reasonably believed by the building inspector to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to comply with the uniform code or energy code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained. 
(c)  OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this article shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under Executive Law, § 156-e and Education Law, § 807-b. 
(d)  Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 8-31, fees, must be paid prior to or at the time each inspection performed pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 11, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-27. - Complaints. 
    The building inspector shall review and investigate complaints which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the uniform code, the energy code, this article, or any other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of the uniform code or the energy code. The process for responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the code enforcement officer may deem to be appropriate: 
(a)  Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection; 
(b)  If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding the manner described in section 8-30, violations; 
(c)  If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order; 
(d)  If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected, performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement or correction, and filing such report with the complaint. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 12, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-28. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  The building department shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement personnel, including records of: 
(1)  All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied; 
(2)  All plans, specifications and construction documents approved; 
(3)  All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued; 
(4)  All inspections and tests performed; 
(5)  All statements and reports issued; 
(6)  All complaints received; 
(7)  All investigations conducted; 
(8)  All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by sections 8-19 through 8-27, inclusive; and 
(9)  All fees charged and collected. 
(b)  All such records shall be public records open for public inspection during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for at least the minimum time period so required by state law and regulation. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 13, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-29. - Program review and reporting. 
(a)  The building inspector shall annually submit to board of trustees of this village a written report and summary of all business conducted by the building department, including a report and summary of all transactions and activities described in section 8-28, recordkeeping, and a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded. 
(b)  The building inspector shall annually submit to the secretary of state, on behalf of this village, on a form prescribed by the secretary of state, a report of the activities of this village relative to administration and enforcement of the uniform code, a copy of which shall be on file with the office of the village clerk. 
(c)  The building inspector shall, upon request of the state department of state, provide to the state department of state, from the records and related materials this village is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other information and accounts of the activities of this village in connection with administration and enforcement of the uniform code. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 14, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-30. - Violations. 
(a)  Compliance orders. The building inspector is authorized to order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the uniform code, the energy code, or this article. Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the building inspector shall issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Be dated and signed by the building inspector; 
(3)  Specify the condition or activity that violates the uniform code, the energy code, or this article; 
(4)  Specify the provision or provisions of the uniform code, the energy code, or this article which is/are violated by the specified condition or activity; 
(5)  Specify the period of time which the code enforcement officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance; 
(6)  Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of time; and 
(7)  State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period of time. 
The building inspector shall cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property personally or by certified mail. The building inspector shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order. 
(b)  Appearance tickets. The building inspector and code enforcement officers are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the uniform code. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. In addition to those penalties proscribed by state law, any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of the uniform code, the energy code, or any rule or regulation of this article, or any terms or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, for each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of this village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of the uniform code, the energy code, this article, or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the building inspector pursuant to any provision of this article. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the uniform code, the energy code, this article, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order obtained under the uniform code, the energy code or this article, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of this village, in the supreme court or in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the board of trustees of this village. 
(e)  Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in section 8-21, stop-work orders, in any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in section 8-21, stop-work orders, in any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Executive Law § 381, subdivision 2, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Executive Law § 381, subdivision 2. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 15, 12-5-06; L.L. No. 5-2014, § 1, 6-4-14) 
Sec. 8-31. - Fees. 
    A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the board of trustees of this village. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits, fire safety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the code enforcement officer described in or contemplated by this article. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 16, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 8-32. - Intermunicipal agreements. 
    The board of trustees of this village may, by resolution, authorize the mayor of this village to enter into an agreement, in the name of this village, with other governments to carry out the terms of this local law, provided that such agreement does not violate any provision of the uniform code, the energy code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law. 
(L.L. No. 13-2006, § 17, 12-5-06) 
Secs. 8-33-8-35. - Reserved. 

Chapter 8.5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8.5-18.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 8.5-21. - Statutory authorization and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The Village of Kenmore Board of Trustees finds that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village of Kenmore and that such damages may include: destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this local law is adopted. 
(b)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this local law to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damages; 
(5)  Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(6)  Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this local law are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 )  
Sec. 8.5-22. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this local law shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this local law its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure is a structure used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage, represent a minimal investment of not more than ten (10) percent of the value of the primary structure, and may not be used for human habitation. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this local law or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this local law, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard." 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
Cellar has the same meaning as "Basement." 
Crawl space means an enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, eighteen (18) inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency means the Federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in (1) above. 
Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in detail in the flood insurance study. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A but no flood elevations are provided. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. See "Flood elevation study." 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flooding"). 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway." 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Local administrator is the person appointed by the community to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the building inspector, code enforcement officer, or employee of an engineering department. 
Lowest floor means lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this local law. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
Mobile home has the same meaning as "manufactured home." 
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
One hundred year flood or 100-year flood has the same meaning as "base flood." 
Principally above ground means that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as provided in section 8.5-24(d)(2) of this law. 
Start of construction means the date of permit issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. The term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this local law which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this local law. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 )  
Sec. 8.5-23. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this local law applies. This local law shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of Kenmore. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: 
(1)  Flood insurance rate maps: 
36029C0182H, 36029C0184H, 36029C0205H 
whose effective date is June 7, 2019, and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction. 
(2)  A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Erie County, New York (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 7, 2019. 
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this local law. The flood insurance study and/or maps are on file at: 
Office of the Village Clerk, Clerk/Treasurer's Office Kenmore Municipal Building - Room 17, 2919 Delaware Avenue, Kenmore, NY 14217 
(c)  Interpretation and conflict with other laws. This local law includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through October 27, 1997 and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this local law shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this local law are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
(d)  Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this local law shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
(e)  Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this local law and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this local law by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this local law or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for not more than fifteen (15) days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Kenmore from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of this local law for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under section 8.5-26 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this local law is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This local law does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This local law shall not create liability on the part of the Village of Kenmore, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this local law or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 )  
Sec. 8.5-24. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the local administrator. The building inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(b)  The floodplain development permit. 
(1)  Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 8.5-23(b), without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
(2)  Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the board of trustees by resolution. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Kenmore for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover these additional costs. 
(c)  Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on the permit application form. 
(1)  The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located in zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor. 
(3)  A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in section 8.5-25(b)(3), utilities. 
(4)  A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 8.5-25(d), nonresidential structures. 
(5)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the documents enumerated in section 8.5-23(b), when notified by the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained. 
(6)  A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property. 
(7)  In zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following. 
(1)  Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit: 
a.  Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of section 8.5-24(c), application for a permit, and for compliance with the provisions and standards of this law. 
b.  Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the applicable standards of section 8.5-25, construction standards and, in particular, section 8.5-25(a)(1), subdivision proposals. 
c.  Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to complete the determination. 
If the proposed development may result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of section 8.5-25, construction standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application. 
d.  Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or federal law. 
(2)  Use of other flood data. 
a.  When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of special flood hazard on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas are designated zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to section 8.5-24(c)(7), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements of this law. 
b.  When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes of this law. 
c.  When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation, and/or floodway data are available from a federal, state or other authoritative source, but differ from the data in the documents enumerated in section 8.5-23(b), the local administrator may reasonably utilize the other flood information to enforce more restrictive development standards. 
(3)  Alteration of watercourses. 
a.  Notification to adjacent municipalities that may be affected and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(4)  Construction stage. 
a.  In zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use). 
b.  Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project unless immediately corrected. 
(5)  Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions. 
(6)  Stop work orders. 
a.  The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop work order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a development permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 8.5-23(e) of this local law. 
b.  The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop work order for any floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 8.5-23(e) of this local law. 
(7)  Certificate of compliance. 
a.  In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in section 8.5-24(d)(5), it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. 
b.  A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard. 
c.  Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as prescribed in section 8.5-24(d)(5), inspections, and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit. 
(8)  Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and make available for inspection, copies of the following: 
a.  Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance; 
b.  Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures required pursuant to section 8.5-24(d)(4)a. and b., and whether or not the structures contain a basement; 
c.  Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to section 8.5-24(d)(4)a., and whether the structures contain a basement; 
d.  Variances issued pursuant to section 8.5-26, variance procedures; and 
e.  Notices required under section 8.5-24(d)(3), alteration of watercourses. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 )  
Sec. 8.5-25. - Construction standards. 
(a)  General standards. The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the flood insurance rate map designated in section 8.5-23(b). 
(1)  Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions): 
a.  Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(2)  Encroachments. 
a.  Within zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless: 
1.  The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location; or 
2.  The Village of Kenmore agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of Kenmore for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of Kenmore for all costs related to the final map revision. 
b.  On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map or the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 8.5-23(b), no new construction, substantial improvements or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless: 
1.  A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or 
2.  The Village of Kenmore agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received, and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of Kenmore for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of Kenmore for all costs related to the final map revisions. 
c.  In zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, if any development is found to increase or decrease base flood elevations, the Village of Kenmore shall as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, notify FEMA and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with standard engineering practice. 
(b)  Standards for all structures. The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the flood insurance rate map designated in section 8.5-23(b). 
(1)  Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within zones A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two (2) openings of each enclosed area having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and 
3.  Openings not less than three (3) inches in any direction. 
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not permitted. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall be located at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, or at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade in a zone A without an available base flood elevation, or be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated or designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the components unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such items in wet locations; 
b.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
c.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and 
d.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Storage tanks. 
a.  Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement during conditions of the base flood. 
b.  Aboveground tanks shall be: 
1.  Anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood; or 
2.  Installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 8.5-23(b) plus two (2) feet. 
(c)  Residential structures. 
(1)  Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in section 8.5-25(a)(1), subdivision proposals, and 8.5-25(a)(2), encroachments, and section 8.5-25(b), standards for all structures. 
a.  Within zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
c.  Within zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 8.5-23(b) plus two (2) feet (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). 
d.  Within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures on slopes. 
(d)  Nonresidential structures. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in section 8.5-25(a)(1), subdivision proposals, and section 8.5-25(a)(2), encroachments, and section 8.5-25(b), standards for all structures. 
(1)  Within zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Within zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM plus two (2) feet (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in section 8.5-25(d)(1)b. 
(3)  If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of section 8.5-25(d)(1)b., including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed. 
(4)  Within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures on slopes. 
(5)  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(e)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following standards in addition to the standards in section 8.5-25(a), general standards, and section 8.5-25(b), standards for all structures apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard. 
(1)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall either: 
a.  Be on site fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in section 8.5-25(e)(2)(4). 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(2)  A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is elevated to or above two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(3)  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
(4)  Within zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 8.5-23(b) plus two (2) feet (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(f)  Accessory structures including detached garages. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved accessory structures, including detached garages, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the flood insurance rate map designated in section 8.5-23(b). 
(1)  Within zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, A, accessory structures must meet the standards of section 8.5-25(b)(1), anchoring. 
(2)  Within zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, areas below two (2) feet above the base flood elevation shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  Within zones AO and zone A, if base flood elevation data are not available, areas below three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Structures must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with section 8.5-25(b)(2)c. 
(5)  Utilities must meet the requirements of section 8.5-23(b)(3), utilities. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 )  
Sec. 8.5-26. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Appeals board. 
(1)  The Village of Kenmore Planning Board as established by the Village of Kenmore shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this local law. 
(2)  The Village of Kenmore Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this local law. 
(3)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Village of Kenmore Planning Board may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the Village of Kenmore Planning Board, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this local law and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting search and rescue operations during periods of flooding; 
k.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
l.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including search and rescue operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (a)(4) of this section and the purposes of this local law, the Village of Kenmore Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this local law. 
(6)  The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions including technical information and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items a. through l. in section 8.5-26(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon determination that: 
a.  The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; and 
b.  The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria of subsections (b)(1), (4)(6) of this section are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public safety. 
(4)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(6)  Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(7)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required in section 8.5-24(d)(8) of this local law. 
( L.L. No. 2-2019, 4-2-19 ) 


Chapter 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; unsafe, unfit dwellings, § 7-111 et seq., removal of unsafe buildings or structures, § 8-24; coin-controlled vending devices, § 12-16 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 14; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; water, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE LAW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section XXXI of L.L. No. 3-1992, adopted Sept. 1, 1992, repealed former Art. II, §§ 9-16-9-26. Sections IV-XXIX of said local law added a new Art. II to read as herein set out. The former Art. II pertained to garbage and trash and derived from Comp. Ords. 1918, § 16; Ord. of 1-16-74, §§ 1-12; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(L), adopted June 1, 1976; L.L. No. 2-1983, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 1983; and L.L. No. 5-1987; § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1987. 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-1; handbills, § 13-3; deposits of snow and ice on streets, etc., § 19-2. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

Sec. 9-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural uses means the development and cultivation of the soil for planting of trees, fruits, vegetables or flowers. 
    Aluminum means aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily of aluminum. 
    Appearance ticket means written notice issued and subscribed to by a duly authorized person directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with an alleged commission of a designated offense. A notice conforming to such definition constitutes an appearance ticket regardless of whether it is referred to in some other provision of law as a summons or by any other name or title. 
    Ash residue means the noncombustible constituents of waste remaining after combustion or incineration (e.g., residue from a fireplace). 
    Brush means cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are less than four (4) inches in diameter. 
    Bulkies means large items such as sofas, upholstered chairs, mattresses and box springs, but excluding large appliances (white goods). 
    Cans means containers composed of aluminum, tin, steel or any metal alloy, which formerly contained only nonaerosol edible substances, or such empty metal containers as have been approved by recycling regulations. 
    Cardboard means heavy paper items normally used for packaging, mailing, shipping or containing goods, merchandise or other material, but excluding plastic, foam or wax-coated or soiled heavy paper items. 
    Code enforcement officers means persons designated by the village board, authorized and directed to enforce this article. 
    Collection means the act of picking up waste material from the public right-of-way abutting homes, businesses or industrial sites. 
    Collector means the Village of Kenmore Department of Public Works or those collectors/haulers licensed by the village. 
    Compost means organic material which may be reduced to humus through organic activity. 
    Composting means a process through which organic materials such as grass and leaves are reduced to humus through organic activity. 
    Commercial operations means all properties used for industrial or commercial purposes including but not limited to retail and wholesale establishments, apartments, trail courts, offices, garages, gas stations, manufacturing, and repair establishments, banks, motels, restaurants and other similar and related facilities. 
    Construction and demolition debris means waste material from building, remodeling, repair, and/or schools, including but not limited to wood scraps, metal, concrete, brick, block, wire and industrial packaging material. 
    Container means a permanent container made of metal or high-quality vinyl plastic sufficient to withstand severe weather, which is substantially airtight, watertight and provided with a tight-fitting cover; it shall not include a disposable plastic or heavy paper bag of any type. 
    Electronic waste (e-waste) means an electronic device, including, but is not limited to, computers, laptops, televisions, printers, monitors. 
    Extraction procedure (EP) toxicity test means a series of laboratory tests designed to determine the level of toxicity in solid waste or landfill material. 
    Facility means any solid waste management-resource recovery facility employed beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to be used, occupied or employed for or is incidental to the receiving, transporting, storage, or processing or disposal of solid waste or the recovery by any means of any material or energy product or resource therefrom, including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing systems, resource recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting or landspreading of solid wastes, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing and recycling facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage, incinerators and other solid waste disposal, reduction or conversion facilities. 
    Garbage means all table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat, fish and fowl, vegetables and fruits and parts thereof (and materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use, or which for any reason have been discarded), including market refuse and waste from handling, storage or sale of produce. 
    Gardening or landscape uses means the development and cultivation of herbs, fruit, vegetables, and flowers. 
    Glass containers means all clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass containers, excluding crystal, ceramic, light bulbs, plate, window, laminated, wired or mirrored glass, and glass cookware. 
    Hazardous waste means solid waste that is especially harmful or potentially harmful to public health. This shall include, but not be limited to, explosives, toxic materials, and medical waste. For purposes of this ordinance, hazardous waste does not include small quantities of such waste available on a retail basis to the homeowner (e.g., aerosol cans, pesticides, fertilizers, etc.) 
    Institutions means an organization or establishment devoted to the promotion of a particular object or cause including schools, nursing homes and retirement homes, health facilities, governmental facilities, libraries, fire halls, etc. 
    Lead acid batteries means electrical storage batteries as commonly used in automobiles and trucks. 
    Major appliances means large and/or bulky mechanisms ordinarily operated by gas or electric current including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers and stoves. 
    Municipal solid waste (MSW) means all putrescible and nonputrescible materials including garbage, refuse, and other discarded solid materials, including but not limited to, solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. Liquids, semi-solids, and contained gaseous materials are hereby defined as solid waste. It shall not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or other common water pollutants. In addition, it shall not include hazardous waste. 
    Newspaper means paper of the type commonly referred to and known as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other information or communication, excluding magazines, phone books, periodicals and papers that have a shiny or wax-coated surface. 
    Nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish means all waste material discarded as useless or worthless trash including, but not limited to, sweepings, leather, crockery, shells, straw, dirt, and ash. 
    Paint means a substance composed of solid coloring matter suspended in a liquid medium and applied as a protective or decorative coating to various surfaces, or to canvas or other material. 
    Person means any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other entity, as well as an individual. 
    Plastic containers means empty plastic food and beverage containers, as defined by the recycling regulations including, but not limited to, containers used for milk, detergent, apple cider, water soft drinks, and vegetable oil. 
    Private collector means a person, firm, corporation, or legal entity providing for the collection of MSW and/or recyclable materials for profit. To operate in the village, they shall be required to obtain a license from the village and be subject to the rules and regulations of the village. 
    Private subscription means the collection of MSW and recyclable materials where the resident or business contracts directly with the private collector of the subscriber's choice. 
    Public right-of-way means the land abutting a given premises between the sidewalk and curb, or the land beyond the pavement or stone of a road, street, alley or highway as surveyed. 
    Recyclable material means all material specified by the village for collection pursuant to this article and/or recycling regulations promulgated hereunder. Such materials may include, but are not limited to: 
Aluminum means aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily of aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverages or other food and drink. 
Corrugated means woodpulp-based material which is usually smooth on both sides with corrugated center. Commonly used for boxes; excludes material with a wax coating. 
Glass food and beverage containers means new and used glass food and beverage containers which have been rinsed and are free of food contamination, including clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass bottles and jars. Glass shall not include ceramics, plate glass, auto glass, Pyrex, leaded glass, mirrored glass or flat glass. 
High grade paper means white and colored office bond, duplicating paper, computer paper and other high-quality paper. 
Large appliances means stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing machines, water heaters, and other large appliances and scrap metal but excluding air conditioners, microwaves, and televisions. The above materials will be reviewed quarterly and will be modified as the need arises by the superintendent of public works or other designated person. 
Magazines means magazines, glossy catalogs and other glossy paper. 
Metal cans means containers fabricated of steel or tin or bimetal cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including aluminum cans. 
Newsprint means any common newspaper including inserts. 
Plastic food and beverage containers includes high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) designated as #2 and #1 on the recycling code located on the containers. 
    Recycling means the separation, collection, processing, recovery, and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of as solid waste. 
    Recycling regulations means rules adopted pursuant to this article and as amended from time to time by the superintendent of public works to implement the program established and known as the Village of Kenmore Recycling Regulations. 
    Resident means person residing within the village on a temporary or permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels or motels. 
    Residential property means properties used as primary dwellings. 
    Silvicultural uses means development, cultivation and reproduction of trees. 
    Solid waste management means the purposeful systematic control of the storage, collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of solid waste. 
    Source separate means to separate the recyclable materials from the MSW stream at the point of waste generation. 
    Tires means rings or bands of rubber, either solid or hollow and inflated, placed over the rims of wheels to provide traction, resistance to wear, or other properties, including the following: 
(1)  Passenger car: Size 13-inch, 14-inch, 15-inch and 16-inch; 
(2)  Light truck: Size 16-inch-19-inch; 
(3)  Semi-truck: Sizes up to and including 1124.5 series. 
    Tree parts means cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are more than four (4) inches in diameter. 
    Used oil means any motor oil previously used in machinery, but not including other petroleum fluids. 
    Waste means products and materials to be discarded after use from any premises within the village. 
    Yard waste means grass clippings, leaves, brush, plants, or dirt materials from vegetable and flower gardens, lawns and yards, or ash from fireplaces or wood stoves. 
    Recycling container means a rectangular box to store and carry only recyclable material into the public right-of-way for collection, but not limited to can, bin, box, bag or other dedicated unit used for storage of recyclable materials. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § IV, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 9-2004, § 1, 10-5-04; L.L. No. 1-2017, § 1, 3-21-17) 
Sec. 9-17. - Establishment of program. 
    There is hereby established a solid waste management program for separation, preparation for collection, and collection of waste material (rubbish). The program shall be under the supervision of the village superintendent of public works, who shall make rules and regulations for its implementation, subject to the approval of the village board. Such rules and regulations under the "solid waste law" shall be known as the "Village of Kenmore Recycling Regulations." 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § V, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-18. - Duty of owners and occupiers of property regarding solid waste management. 
(a)  No person shall permit any municipal solid waste to accumulate for a period of longer than seven (7) days upon property owned or occupied by said person in the municipality. All municipal solid waste shall be kept until ready for collection in closed containers, commonly called "refuse totes," which have been approved for use by the superintendent of public works and originally purchased from or through the village. 
(b)  Owners and occupiers of residential multifamily, commercial and institutional properties are hereby required to make accumulated municipal solid waste available for collection as scheduled under the terms hereof. 
(c)  All municipal solid waste accumulated on any residential, commercial and institutional property in the municipality may be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and dispose of any municipal solid waste within the village except as provided in this division. 
(d)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall supply adequate facilities or containers, which conform to the requirements of this chapter, for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of municipal solid waste and yard waste. In single-family and two-family dwellings, the occupant shall furnish such facilities and containers. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § VI, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 9-2004, §§ 2, 3, 10-5-04; L.L. 1-2006, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-06; L.L. 10-2006, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-18A. - Duty of owners and occupiers of multifamily, commercial, institutional and industrial property regarding solid waste management. 
(a)  Residential properties are required to have one closed container, commonly referred to as a "refuse tote" for each dwelling unit. Single-family households are required to have one refuse tote and two-family households are required to have two (2) refuse totes. Such containers shall be stored, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector, behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or shall be secured in a separate structure located on the property until placed to the curb for collection. 
(b)  An owner or occupier of a property that contains more than two (2) dwelling units, or of commercial, institutional or industrial property shall keep all municipal solid waste securely in closed containers, commonly called refuse totes, or in dumpsters which have been approved for such use on such property by the superintendent of public works until ready for collection. Such containers shall be kept until placed for collection behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or secured in a separate structure on the lot unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(L.L. No. 9-2004, § 4, 10-5-04; L.L. 10-2006, § 3, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-18B. - Duty of owners and occupiers of residential properties regarding recyclables. 
(a)  Residential properties are required to have one closed container, commonly referred to as a "recycle tote" for each dwelling unit. Single-family households are required to have one recycle tote and two-family households are required to have two (2) recycle totes. Such containers shall be stored, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector, behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or shall be secured in a separate structure located on the property until placed to the curb for collection. 
(b)  An owner or occupier of property that contains more than two (2) dwelling units are required to have one recycle tote for every two (2) units, or more as determined by the superintendent of public works. Such containers shall be stored, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector, behind the front setback line of the building on the lot, or shall be secured in a separate structure located on the property until placed to the curb for collection. 
(L.L. No. 1-2017, § 2, 3-21-17) 
Sec. 9-19. - Source separation of recyclable materials. 
    Municipal solid waste generated or originated within the village which has been left for collection, shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  Prior to initial collection of transport, source separation shall be required of each and every person or party discarding municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials. Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other solid waste during collection, transportation or storage following collection. 
(2)  The village shall refuse to collect MSW from any person or party who has clearly failed to source separate the recyclable materials and/or who has not properly prepared the recyclable materials to the specifications of the village. 
(3)  The village shall refuse to collect recyclables from any person or party who has failed to source separate MSW from recyclables and/or where MSW is found in the recycle tote. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § VII, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 1-2017, § 3, 3-21-17) 
Sec. 9-20. - Preparation of garbage, recyclable rubbish and nonrecyclable rubbish for collection. 
(a)  Each person shall place garbage and recyclable material in village-approved totes. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of garbage or recyclable or non-recyclable rubbish except in accord with regulations established by the superintendent of public works. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of garbage or recyclable or non-recyclable rubbish except as follows: 
(1)  Garbage (see section 9-16 definitions), to be placed in village-approved garbage totes, not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(2)  Recyclable materials (see section 9-16 definitions). 
(d)  Pre-collection preparation for recyclable items are as follows but not limited to: 
(1)  Newspapers, magazines and paper products. Keep clean and dry and placed in the dedicated recycling tote. 
(2)  Corrugated cardboard. Disassemble and flatten and place in the recycle tote. Boards larger than three (3) feet by three (3) feet should be flattened and placed next to the recycle tote. 
(3)  Glass bottles and jars, metal cans and plastic containers should be rinsed clean and placed in the recycle tote. 
(4)  Heavy plastic furniture and storage containers should be placed next to the recycle tote with all hardware removed. 
(e)  Items not collected by the department of public works at the property address: 
(1)  Waste oil shall be placed in a separate sealed plastic container, clearly labeled as to contents, your name and address and brought to an auto service station, to the retail outlet where purchased and/or delivered to the department of public works. 
(2)  Tires will not be picked up or removed by the village. Tires may be brought to the department of public works for disposal with proof of residency or property ownership required. The fees for said disposal shall be established and periodically amended by the recycling regulations. 
(3)  Electronic waste will not be picked up or removed by the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § VIII, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 1-2017, § 4, 3-21-17) 
Sec. 9-21. - Village rights. 
    From the time of placement of recyclable rubbish at the curb by a resident for collection in accordance herewith such recyclable rubbish shall become and be the property of the village or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of chapter 9 or the Village Law for any person without authority from the village to collect, pick up, remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed by, recyclable rubbish and each such collection, picking up, or removal from one or more premises shall constitute a separate and distinct offense in violation of the Village Law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § IX, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-22. - Duties of owners, lessees, occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of every dwelling, store or other building within the village to keep such buildings free, clear and clean of all kinds of municipal solid waste of any kind or description and to keep sidewalk and yard areas free, clear and clean of all municipal solid waste of any kind or description. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of every store or other building within the village excepting dwellings, to keep all garbage and refuse containers inside the building on the occupied premises or in a suitable, completely enclosed structure considered for that particular purpose of approved design from approved noncombustible building materials in accordance with the building regulations of the village, but nothing herein shall be construed to require the alteration, modification or reconstruction of any existing structure or portion thereof presently in use for such purpose in the village. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of chapter 9 or the Village Law for any person to place at the curb for collection any can or container other than the one which contains garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish or recyclable rubbish which has not been source separated. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § X, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-23. - Collection and disposal of municipal solid waste (MSW) and recyclable materials placed at curbside. 
(a)  The village shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed any solid waste recyclable materials so placed for collection. Where the village has refused to collect certain recyclable materials because they have not been separated, placed or treated in accord with the provisions of the article, the person responsible for initially placing those materials for collection may and shall remove those materials from any curb, sidewalk or street side. 
(b)  The fact that waste material is in a public right-of-way shall be rebuttable prima facie evidence that such material was placed there by the owner of the property abutting that public right-of-way. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XI, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-24. - Collection and disposal of construction and demolition debris, major appliances and large household furnishings. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works shall determine, subject to the approval of the board of trustees, schedules for the collection of construction and demolition debris, major appliances and large household furnishings. 
(b)  No person shall place or store construction and demolition debris with garbage or rubbish. The person creating construction and demolition debris shall remove same and dispose of same in a sanitary manner. In the event construction and demolition debris results from work performed by an owner or resident individually, the debris may be placed at the curb for pickup by the village except that the quantity of such debris may not exceed ten (10) containers or bundles of not more than fifty (50) pounds each per week. Quantities of such debris in excess of the amount stated shall be removed by the property owner or resident at his expense. 
(c)  Debris may be placed temporarily on owner's property, on public right-of-way and/or curb line, if necessary in the course of the work which produced said debris, and then for no longer than twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(d)  Any and all debris from work done by a contractor must be removed by the contractor that did the work. The village will not collect any contractor debris. 
(e)  All major appliances or large household furnishings which are to be discarded from a residence where the appliance or furnishing was actually in use shall be placed by the owner of said appliance or furnishing at the curb on the scheduled collection day for pickup by the village. It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner to dismantle the appliance or furnishing so that it will not be a hazard to the public before placing it at the curb for collection. 
(f)  White goods. Section 608 of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments prohibits the disposal of refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners and other goods containing chlorofluorocarbon (C.F.C.) refrigerants. Prior to recycling or disposal, all C.F.C. refrigerants must be removed and recovered and/or safely disposed of. This is a requirement under this Section 608 of the 1990 Clean Air Act. 
    Verification of certification and/or a contract, invoices stipulating the removal should be obtained by owner and attached to appliances in plain view to be collected. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or place any refrigerator or freezer in a public right-of-way for collection unless the door or doors of the same, latching or locking mechanism on the door or doors of the same have been removed or dismantled. 
(g)  The village shall have no obligation to pick up and remove any construction and demolition debris, major appliance or household furnishing which was not used in a residence in the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XII, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference- Abandoned refrigerators, §13-7. 
Sec. 9-25. - Removal of garbage, recyclable rubbish, nonrecyclable rubbish, construction debris, major appliances and large household furnishings. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works shall designate the days and hours for collection of garbage, recyclable rubbish and nonrecyclable rubbish. 
(b)  Village employees or equipment shall not enter private property or structures in making collections. 
(c)  All garbage, recyclable rubbish, non-recyclable rubbish, construction and demolition debris, major appliances and large household furnishings must be placed in a public right-of-way and/or curb line for collection. All garbage and other municipal solid waste shall be placed for collection in containers, commonly called "refuse totes", approved for such use by the superintendent of public works and purchased from or provided through the village. Recyclable rubbish shall be placed in collection containers commonly referred to as "recycle totes" approved for such use by the superintendent of public works. Refuse and recycle waste shall be fully contained within the tote such that the lid is completely closed. Yard waste shall be placed for collection in clear plastic bags or open containers made of metal or plastic. 
(d)  All garbage, recyclable rubbish and nonrecyclable rubbish, construction and demolition debris, major appliances and large household furnishings to be picked up must be at the curb as follows: 
(1)  For property located in all zoning districts, no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection and no earlier than 4:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled day of pickup. 
(2)  No material is to be placed at the curb after 4:00 p.m. on Friday through 4:00 p.m. Sunday. 
(e)  Improper deposit of debris. Any person who shall deposit or leave or cause any other person to deposit or leave in any public right-of-way, road, street, highway or alley in the village, any waste material, unless contained and prepared as specified in this article, and before 4:00 p.m. prior to the designated collection day shall be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(f)  Removal of uncollected waste material. Where the village has not collected waste material because it was not placed or prepared in accord with the provisions of this article, the person who placed it for collection and the owner of the premises whereon the waste material was generated shall remove such material as soon as possible after the village has refused collection and, in any event, by 7:00 p.m. of the designated collection day. The failure to remove any such material by 7:00 p.m. on the designated collection day shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(g)  Empty containers shall be removed from the curb line or other place of collection by the occupants of the premises before the end of the day on which collection is made from the premises. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XIII, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 1-1995, §§ 1-4, 5-16-95; L.L. No. 2-1995, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-95; L.L. No. 9-2004, § 5, 10-5-04; L.L. No. 3-2005, § 1, 12-6-05; L.L. 1-2006, 4-11-06; L.L. No. 10-2010, § 1, 10-19-10; L.L. No. 1-2017, § 5, 3-21-17) 
Sec. 9-26. - Brush and tree parts. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works is authorized to provide for the collection of brush and tree parts at such times and in such manner as the board of trustees shall from time to time provide. 
(b)  The authorization provided for in the preceding paragraph shall apply only to brush and tree parts produced by the individual activity or efforts of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Brush and tree parts less than four (4) inches diameter shall be bundled and tied not to exceed ten (10) bundles of fifty (50) pounds in weight per, and placed in the public right-of-way and/or curb line for collection in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Brush and tree parts produced by commercial contractors must be removed from the premises by the contractor or by the owner or occupant of the premises. Such brush and tree parts may not be placed at or near the curb line or public right-of-way, except temporarily as may be necessary in the course of the work which produced the brush and tree parts. 
(e)  The village will not collect or remove brush or tree parts produced by commercial contractors. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XIV, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-27. - Yard waste. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works is authorized to provide for the collection of yard waste at such times and in such manner as the board of trustees shall from time to time provide. 
(b)  The authorization provided for in the preceding paragraph shall apply only to yard waste produced by the individual activity or efforts of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Grass clippings, leaves, plants, dirt or material from gardens must be placed in an open container, not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight per, and placed in the public right-of-way and/or curb line for collection in accordance with this article. 
(d)  The village recommends and encourages owners or occupants of the premises to leave grass clippings on their lawns as an organic material or use in composting for gardening uses. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XV, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-28. - Hazardous waste. 
    The village shall not collect dangerous, hazardous or chemically toxic wastes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Dangerous wastes. Wastes that represent an immediate threat to the safety of employees of the village and/or the general public including, but not limited to, waste with jagged or protruding objects, broken glass or nails. 
(2)  Hazardous wastes, as defined in the Environmental Conservation Law and regulations thereto including, but not limited to: 
a.  Ignitable wastes, such as paint thinners, solvent based cleaners, degreasers (e.g., acetone, xylene), and gasoline. 
b.  Corrosive wastes, such as containers of battery acid or metal cleaning bath sludges (e.g., sodium hydroxide, sulfuric or hydrochloric acid). 
c.  Reactive wastes, such as cyanide metal plating sludges or any waste that will react violently with water, or which generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes (e.g., sodium metal). 
d.  EP toxicity test wastes which produce an extract containing contaminants such as arsenic, lead, chromium, silver or herbicides; or industrial process wastes, contaminated soil from a spill or other solids containing any of the metals or organic material in excess of the concentrations listed in state law and regulations. 
e.  Toxic wastes, such as sludges from solvent recovery, solvents and the industry specific wastes listed in the regulations of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Commission. 
    Dangerous, hazardous, or chemically toxic wastes shall be properly disposed of by their owner or producer. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XVI, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-29. - Unauthorized removal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee, licensed private collector and/or agent of the village to remove the lid from any refuse container or to collect, molest or scatter any waste material, garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish and refuse, and/or recyclable material set out for collection. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XVII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-30. - Noncurbside private collection. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent a resident from making arrangements for the private collection, sale or donation of recyclable materials prior to placement at the curbside. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XVIII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-31. - Power to amend recycling regulations. 
    The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to promulgate and, from time to time, amend the recycling regulations, subject to the approval of the village board. Said amendments shall include, but not be limited to, regulations relating to the separation, preparation, placement and collection of waste material. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XIX, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-32. - Collection of excessive amounts. 
    If in the judgment of the superintendent of public works, a police officer, building inspector, code enforcement officer or such other person as may be designated by the board of trustees, it becomes necessary to remove accumulations of refuse and debris from any property, the cost of such removal may be assessed on the tax rolls to said property. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XX, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-33. - Littering. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any rubbish, filth, leaves or grass clippings in the streets or on the sidewalk of the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXI, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-34. - Dumpster placement. 
(a)  Dumpster shall be located on private property and shall be in an area enclosed by fencing and screening to a height at least one foot higher than the dumpster. The fencing and screening shall be constructed of metal, wood or such other material as to completely hide the dumpster(s) from view and shall be further constructed to prevent access to the dumpster(s) by animals. The fencing and screening shall at all times be maintained in good repair. 
(b)  The fencing and screening of dumpsters shall be completed in accordance with subsection (b) within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. Persons who are unable to comply with the fencing and screening requirements may file a written request for an exception thereto with the building inspector. An investigation of the requested exception will be conducted by the building department. At the conclusion of such investigation, the building inspector shall, within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the requested exception, render a decision granting, conditionally granting, or denying the requested exception. The person seeking the requested exception shall bear the burden of demonstrating inability to comply with the requirements of this division. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35. - Dumpster regulations. 
(a)  No dumpster shall be placed or located within any public right-of-way within the village by any person unless such person first obtains written permission from the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  A dumpster shall be located in such a manner that it does not obstruct or interfere with the passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  A dumpster must be equipped with a workable lid and reflectors or reflective tape on both ends and along the outer edges adjacent to a right-of-way. Reflectors shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, and reflective tape shall be a minimum in width of two (2) inches. If reflectors are used, a minimum of three (3) shall be affixed to both ends, and a minimum of four (4) shall be affixed on the sides. If reflective tape is used, the tape shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in length on both ends and the sides. 
(d)  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the dumpster shall be conspicuously displayed thereon. 
(e)  No garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish and refuse, recyclable material or other waste material, including but not limited to solid and liquid waste, which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase of serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, shall be placed in a dumpster by any person. 
(f)  Every dumpster must be watertight, and every dumpster and every dumpster area must be kept and utilized in a safe, clean and orderly manner and in such a manner as to minimize dust. The dumpster lid shall remain closed except when garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish and refuse, and/or recyclable material and other waste are being loaded into the dumpster. 
(g)  A dumpster shall be promptly removed or emptied when it is full. 
(h)  The superintendent of public works may impose such additional requirements, rules and regulations as he determines to be necessary in the administration of this section. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXIII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.1. - Authorized collectors: obtaining a license. 
(a)  Generally. All authorized collectors must obtain a solid waste collection license from the village. A fee for such license shall be set by the governing body on an annual basis, and all licenses shall be issued for the calendar year, or such portion thereof. There shall be no reduction in the fee for a license issued after the beginning of any calendar year. 
    Authorized collector applications may be denied if the applicant or license has been adjudged or administratively determined to have committed one or more violations of this article during the preceding calendar year. 
    All authorized collectors licensed by the village shall indemnify and hold harmless the village for any pending, threatened or actual claims, liability or expenses arising from waste disposal by the authorized collector in violation of this article. 
(b)  Private collectors. Any person(s) utilizing a private collector for the collection and disposal of waste material must separate recyclable material from nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish prior to collection by a private contractor. Said recyclable material shall include, but not be limited to, newspaper, cardboard, glass containers, cans, and plastic containers. Recyclable material shall be prepared for collection according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the private collector responsible for the collection of said waste material. 
(c)  Authorized collectors. All private collectors authorized to collect waste material in the village shall provide collection services for all recyclable material for which economic markets exist to all customers for whom they provide waste material collection services. 
    Each collector who shall apply for a license under this section shall state the manner of collection and the place and method of disposal of the MSW and recyclable materials from its commercial, industrial, and institutional customers. Each collector shall maintain separate monthly records of solid waste and recyclable materials collected, transported or disposed of by the authorized collector which include the following information: 
(1)  The municipality or geographical area and number of units in which the solid waste or recyclable material was generated. 
(2)  The quantity, by ton, of solid waste and of each type of recyclable material collected. 
(3)  The quantity, by ton, of recycled material delivered to a recycling facility(ies) and the location of the recycling facility(ies). 
(4)  The quantity, by ton, of solid waste delivered to each facility. 
    Reports containing the information required as stated above shall be compiled and delivered to the village superintendent of public works or other designated individual for each reporting period as designated by the regulations, but which shall be no more frequently than quarterly. 
    Authorized collectors shall not accept for collection MSW which has not been source-separated in conformity of this article. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXIV, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.2. - Approval, denial suspension or revocation of license; noncompliance of the article. 
(a)  Failure to comply. When the designated public official determines that a failure to comply with this article may have occurred, the superintendent of public works shall recommend to the municipality that the authorized collector application or the license be denied, suspended or revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand or fine or that the generator or originator of the solid waste or recyclable materials be subject to sanctions, fines or penalties as described herein. Notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided prior to the denial, suspension or revocation of a solid waste license or authorized collector permit or the issuance of a sanction, fine or penalty. 
(b)  Notice. The superintendent of public works shall notify the affected generator, applicant or licensee of the alleged failure in writing. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the pertinent ordinance, law, rule or regulation. 
(2)  A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct. 
(3)  A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing. 
    The notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the generator, applicant or licensee's last known address, at least ten (10) days before the hearing date, with a copy to the superintendent of public works and village clerk. 
(c)  Hearing. Hearings shall be held before the village justice within a reasonable period, which shall be at least ten (10) days after service of notice. The generator, applicant, or licensee may be represented by counsel at the hearing and may offer evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Within twenty (20) days after the close of the hearing, the village justice shall: 
(1)  Determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this article has occurred; and 
(2)  If the village justice determines that such a failure has occurred, decide whether the generator or applicant shall be subject to fine or penalty, the application shall be denied or an existing solid waste license or authorized collector status be suspended or revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand and issue an order carrying out this decision. 
(d)  Determination, decision and orders. Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlements, consent order, default or other informal method. The village justice shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee, in writing, of the final determination, decision or order. 
(e)  Penalties. During any twelve (12) consecutive months, the failure of any person engaged in the business of collecting MSW and/or recyclable materials or rendering solid waste and/or recycling services who is not authorized by the village or who collects, picks up, removes or causes to be collected, picked up or removed MSW or recyclable materials in a manner not in compliance with this article shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not exceeding the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXV, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally, the superintendent of public works, a police officer, building inspector, code enforcement officer or such other person as may be designated by the board of trustees, is authorized and directed to enforce this article and to cause collections to be made accordingly. 
(b)  Reporting of violations. All employees or agents of the village, including those engaged in the work of collecting waste, are hereby authorized to report each and every violation of this article to their supervisors. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXVI, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.4. - Inspections. 
(a)  Vehicles and containers. All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport, or dispose of MSW materials, including such containers placed outside residential, commercial, industrial and institution sites, shall be subject to inspection to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(b)  Unauthorized disposal of garbage, recyclable rubbish, nonrecyclable rubbish or construction or demolition debris. No person shall cart to, dump, or deposit, any municipal solid waste upon any property in the village except under the authorization, supervision and direction of the superintendent of public works or designated person. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXVII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.5. - Appearance tickets. 
    The superintendent of public works, a police officer, building inspector, code enforcement officer or such other person as may be designated by the board of trustees, is hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to violations of this article. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXVIII, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 9-35.6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violators of a provision of chapter 9, article II shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first violation: a warning shall be issued; 
(2)  For the second violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation: a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
(3)  For the third violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation: a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(4)  For the fourth violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation: a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(5)  For the fifth violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation: a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00); 
(6)  For each subsequent violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  The notice of a violation shall state the date of the violation, the specific violation, the fine imposed and the date on which the violator may appear in Kenmore Justice Court to contest the violation. The notice of violation shall be signed and affirmed by the building inspector or his designate. 
(c)  If a penalty imposed pursuant to subsection (a) remains unpaid for thirty (30) days, the board of trustees may authorize the village attorney to commence legal action to collect such fine. 
(d)  Any unpaid penalties and fines under this section may be collected pursuant to provisions of the General Municipal Law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1992, § XXIX, 9-1-92; L.L. No. 2-2005, § 1, 6-7-05; L.L. No. 10-2010, § 1, 10-19-10; L.L. No. 1-2016, § 1, 1-19-16) 
ARTICLE III. - AIR POLLUTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Local air pollution laws, Environmental Conservation Law, § 19-0709; Air Pollution Act, Environmental Conservation Law, § 19-0101 et seq., Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

Sec. 9-36. - Restriction on harmful emissions of smoke, etc. 
(a)  No person shall cause, permit, or allow to escape into the open air such quantities of ashes, dust, cinders, soot, smoke or other material or noxious gas in such place or manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury, detriment, or annoyance to any person or persons or to the public, or in such manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause damage or injury to business or property. 
(b)  The building department is hereby designated as the enforcement agency, and shall be charged with the duty of administering this section or securing compliance herewith. Enforcement shall be carried out pursuant to the provisions of sections 11-31 through 11-35 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-27-28, §§ 1-3) 
Secs. 9-37-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE POLLUTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). 

Sec. 9-51. - Excessive or unnecessary noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make or continue to be made, any excessive or unusually loud noise within the corporate limits of the village, including the following prohibitions: 
(1)  The creation of any unreasonable, loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise. 
(2)  Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual. 
(3)  Unnecessary noise during the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., standard or daylight saving time, whichever may be in effect, which unlawfully interferes with the sleep, comfort, and repose of individuals. 
(b)  The following acts are deemed to be a violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The use of any automobile, truck or motorcycle so out of repair or equipped in such a manner so as to create loud and unnecessary noise. 
(2)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, truck, or motorcycle, except as a danger warning, or the sounding on any such device for an unnecessary period of time. 
(3)  The use of any amplifier system on any public streets, except for the protection of persons or property. 
(4)  The performance of any work, the sound in connection with which penetrates beyond the limits of the premises upon which said work is performed, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  The use of any sound reproduction device outside of a structure, whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on property being used for residential purposes at a point more than eighty (80) feet from the real property boundary line of the property from which said noise emanates. 
(6)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device inside a structure so as to result in the sound, or any part thereof, emitted from such device to be projected therefrom outside the structure, whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on the property being used for residential purposes at a point more than eighty (80) feet from the real property boundary line of the property from which the said noise emanates. 
(7)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church or courthouse while the same is in session, so as to interfere with the function of such facility, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the location of such facility. 
(8)  The outdoor use or operation of any powered tool or equipment, including, but not limited to, saws, sanders, drills, lawn mowers or tractors, leaf blowers, or other garden tools or equipment, on property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(9)  Sound emanating from a business, where said business abuts a residential property, whereby sound emitted is audible at a point more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the real property boundary line of the property from which the noise emanates. 
(10)  The operation in or within any motor vehicle of any radio, horn, siren, or any other sound-producing device, except as required by emergency, police or fire vehicles, whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on property being used for residential and/or commercial purposes at a point more than eighty (80) feet from the motor vehicle from which said noise emanates. 
(11)  The keeping on any property, including, but not limited to, any home, building or structure, of any animal or bird which, by frequent or continued noise (continuous for ten (10) minutes or intermittent for thirty (30) minutes) shall disturb the peace and comfort and repose of the general public. 
(c)  Unless specific time limitations are mentioned within this section, all prohibitions remain in effect at all times. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an offense, and individuals convicted thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each time that a violation of this section is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-28-49, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1995, 12-5-95; L.L. No. 4-2017, 8-15-17) 
State Law reference- Making of unreasonable noise, Penal Law § 240.20, para. 2. 
Sec. 9-52. - Exceptions. 
    The following sounds shall not be deemed to be in violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Sound created by bells or chimes associated with a church, synagogue, or other place of public worship. 
(2)  Sound created by any governmental agency, or by the use of public warning devices, emergency, police and fire vehicles and personnel in the course of their duties. 
(3)  Sound created by public utilities in carrying out the operation of their function. 
(4)  Sound created by carnivals or fairs, sporting events of any public organization or school, authorized parades, exhibitions or musical events, provided such events take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  Sound created by the use of snow blowers, snow plows, and other snow removal equipment, during the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning, during emergency and severe weather conditions. 
(6)  Sound created by air conditioning units between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning. 
(L.L. No. 5-1995, 12-5-95) 
Secs. 9-53-9-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRASS, WEEDS, AND PLANT GROWTH 

Sec. 9-60. - Purpose. 
    The village has become concerned about the potential dangers and health problems associated with the presence of insects, rodents, debris and garbage found in and among the excessive growth of grass, weeds, plants and other vegetation. In addition, the village notes that property values of residences and businesses, and those of surrounding properties, can be adversely affected by the presence of excessive grass, weeds, plant and vegetation growth. This chapter is intended to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure the aesthetic appeal and the stability of property values through the regulation of excessive grass, weeds, plant, and other vegetation growth consistent with other laws of the village, state and the constitution of the state. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Sec. 9-61. - Definitions. 
    As used in the article, the following terms shall have the meanings described thereto: 
    Grass, weeds, plant growth. All grasses, weeds, annual or perennial plants, trees, shrubs or other vegetation that pose a danger to the public health, safety and/or general welfare, including, but not limited to, stumps and roots. 
    Noxious vegetation. Grass, weed, shrub and plant growth deemed by the village building inspector as potentially dangerous to the public welfare, or such plant growth that is an unattractive public nuisance or grows in an undesirable location. 
    Owner. Any person, party, partnership, company, corporation or entity possessing legal title to real property, including heirs and legal representatives. The identity of the owner of the real property shall be deemed to be the owner of record as designated in the most recent assessment rolls on file with the Town of Tonawanda Assessor's Office. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Sec. 9-62. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to every owner of any parcel of real property located in the village. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Sec. 9-63. - General restrictions. 
    Every owner or any parcel of real property located in the village shall cut, trim or otherwise remove or cause to be cut or trimmed or otherwise removed, all grass, weeds, or plant growth in excess of six (6) inches in height. It shall be the duty of any such owner to prevent the growth of grass, weeds, or plant growth and/or the accumulation of debris thereon as shall constitute a health hazard, fire hazard, safety or traffic hazard or public nuisance. 
    Noxious vegetation shall be prohibited on any parcel of real property in the village. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; L.L. No. 5-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 9-64. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector, code enforcement officers and/or any other person so designated by the village board of trustees, is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Sec. 9-65. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When it shall be determined by the building inspector that a property is not in compliance or conformity with the provisions of section 9-63, a notice shall be served on the owner or the owner's legal representative, agent, executor, lessee, or any other person, firm or corporation having a vested or contingent interest in the property as provided herein. 
(b)  Said notice shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the property, a statement of the reason for finding the property to be in violation of section 9-63 and an order requiring the owner to cut, trim or remove the grass, weeds, plants, noxious vegetation, and/or any debris, and/or garbage found within or upon said property. 
(2)  An order to bring the property into compliance of section 9-63 as follows: 
1.  First notice -Within seven (7) calendar days of service of the notice. 
2.  Final notice -Within five (5) calendar days of service of the notice. 
3.  A statement specifying the procedure to be followed should the owner fail to bring the property into full compliance within ten (10) calendar days. 
(3)  A statement specifying the procedure to be followed should the owner fail to bring the property into full compliance with seven (7) calendar days. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; L.L. No. 5-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 9-66. - Service of notice. 
    Upon finding that the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the building inspector, code enforcement officer and/or other persons so designated by the board of trustees, shall serve upon the owner of the real property in question of such violation a notice as described in section 9-65. Said notice shall be served by certified and ordinary first class mail addressed to the owner together with a posting at the parcel of real property, or by personal service upon the owner. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; L.L. No. 5-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 9-67. - Compliance. 
    Any owner upon whom notice has been served to cut, trim, or remove such grass, weeds, or plant growth and who, for seven (7) calendar days after service of notice, shall neglect or fail to comply with the provisions of any such notice, shall be in violation of this section. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; L.L. No. 5-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 9-68. - Action by village upon noncompliance; collection of costs. 
(a)  In the event the owner is served with a notice and afforded seven (7) days to bring the real property into compliance with this section [article], and fails to bring said property into compliance with the provisions of this article, the village, or any person, designee, or contractor hired by the village, shall have the power to enter upon the real property in violation of this chapter, and may cut, trim or remove grass, weeds, noxious vegetation, and/or plant growth and remove debris and/or garbage from the real property so as to bring such property into full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any expense incurred by the village in facilitating and/or performing the cutting, trimming and/or removal such grass, weeds, noxious vegetation and/or plant growth shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property in question and shall be paid by such owner within thirty (30) calendar days of the mailing of a statement detailing the expense thereof to the owner by the office of the village clerk/treasurer. 
(c)  In the event the owner fails to pay said expenses incurred by the village in bringing the real property into compliance with the provisions of this article within thirty (30) calendar days of the mailing to the owner of the statement, the expense thereof shall become a lien upon the parcel of real property in question and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next so assessed. Such expenses shall be included in the next annual tax levy against the parcel of real property in question and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected in the same manner as the general village taxes. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; L.L. 5-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 9-69. - Penalty. 
    Any person committing an offense against this article or any section or provision hereof is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Sec. 9-70. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section of the article or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of each section of this local law are hereby declared severable. 
(L.L. 2-2003, § 1, 7-2-03) 
Secs. 9-71-9-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL WASTE REMOVAL AND FEEDING 

Sec. 9-75. - Purpose. 
    The village board of trustees recognizes that rodent populations are growing and that rodents feed on bird seed, bread and other food left out in the open. In addition, rodents will feed off of animal feces. This legislation is designed to promote the health and safety of the community by eliminating possible food sources for rodents. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-76. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all residents, including property owners, renters, visitors, and business owners. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-77. - General restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall feed in the open any domestic or wild fowl, birds or animals other than in a suitable container and in such a manner so as to prevent scattering of food upon the ground or ground level which can or will provide food for rodents, insects, vermin or other pests. 
(b)  All persons housing a pet or animal shall immediately pick up and properly dispose of any animal waste in a suitable container. It shall be the responsibility of the pet owner, or any person owning and/or residing on a property to immediately clean up after any pet or animal and not to allow animal feces to remain in any outdoor area. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-78. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector, code enforcement officers and/or any other person designated by the board of trustees is responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-79. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When it shall be determined by the building inspector that a property is not in compliance or conformity with the provisions of section 9-77, a notice shall be served on the owner or the owner's legal representative, agent, executor, lessee, or any other person, firm or corporation having a vested or contingent interest in the property as provided herein. 
(b)  Said notice shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the property, a statement of the reason for finding the property to be in violation of section 9-77. 
(2)  An order to bring the property into compliance with section 9-77. 
(3)  A statement specifying the procedure to be followed should the owner fail to bring the property into full compliance within five (5) calendar days. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-80. - Service of notice. 
    Upon finding that the provisions of this article are being violated, the building inspector, code enforcement officer and/or other persons so designated by the board of trustees, shall serve upon the owner of the real property in question of such violation a notice as described in section 9-79. Said notice shall be served by certified and ordinary first class mail addressed to the owner together with a posting at the parcel of real property, or by personal service upon the owner. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-81. - Compliance. 
    Any owner, upon whom notice has been served notice of violation under section 9-77, and who, for five (5) calendar days after service of notice, shall neglect or fail to comply with the provisions of any such notice, shall be in violation of this section. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-82. - Action by village upon noncompliance; collection of costs. 
(a)  In the event the owner is served with a notice and afforded five (5) days to bring the real property into compliance with this section, and fails to bring said property into compliance with the provisions of this article, the village, or any person, designee, or contractor hired by the village, shall have the power to enter upon the real property in violation of this chapter, and may take such action as is required so as to bring such property into full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any expense incurred by the village in facilitating and/or bringing said property into compliance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property in question and shall be paid by such owner within thirty (30) calendar days of the mailing of a statement detailing the expense thereof to the owner by the office of the village clerk/treasurer. 
(c)  In the event the owner fails to pay said expenses incurred by the village in bringing the real property into compliance with the provisions of this article within thirty (30) calendar days of the mailing to the owner of the statement, the expense thereof shall become a lien upon the parcel of real property in question and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next so assessed. Such expenses shall be included in the next annual tax levy against the parcel of real property in question and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected in the same manner as the general village taxes. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-83. - Penalty. 
    Any person committing an offense against this article or any section or provision hereof is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 9-84. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not effect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section of the article or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of each section of this local law are hereby declared severable. 
(L.L. No. 7-2010, §§ 1, 3, 9-21-10) 
Chapter 10 - ALARMS 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the village by reducing the number of avoidable alarms for fire, robbery, intrusion or other emergencies which result in ineffective use of police, fire and medical emergency agencies requiring emergency responses, which are susceptible to high accident rates, interfere with genuine emergency response, and produce unnecessary alarm noise and concern to the surrounding community. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Alarm system. A device or assembly of equipment which is designed to identify an intrusion or detect smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, medical, fire emergency or an entry into or exit from a building, structure, or other facility resulting in an audible or other response intended to alert persons outside of the premises and/or transmit a signal or message to an emergency agency either directly or through a private answering point. 
    Automatic dialer. A device that automatically dials and relays a prerecorded message to an emergency agency. 
    Avoidable alarm. The initiation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence or care carelessness of the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of an alarm system or that person's employee(s), guest(s) or agent(s) requiring an emergency response from an emergency agency when in fact an emergency requiring such a response does not exist. Avoidable alarm also includes the intentional activation of an alarm system when the person activating it knows an emergency does not exist as well as, all alarm system activations in which an investigation by the police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village reveals no evidence of the existence of an emergency. An avoidable alarm does not include the activation of an alarm system by violent conditions of nature, acts of God or similar causes beyond the control of the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of an alarm system or that person's employee(s), guest(s) or agent(s). An avoidable alarm does not include the activation of an alarm system under circumstances whereby the person activating the alarm system reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists. 
    Business, commercial or industrial property. Any property, excluding residential properties. 
    Emergency agency. The Kenmore Police Department, the Kenmore Volunteer Fire Department, any fire, rescue company or any emergency dispatch center. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, business, or any unincorporated association. 
    Residential property. Any one- or two-family dwelling located in an RI or RII residential use district. 
    Village. The Village of Kenmore, New York. 
    Village board. The Village Board of the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement officer. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector, police chief, or fire chief, or their representatives, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-4. - Consent to inspection. 
    Owners, users, operators, lessees or custodians of an alarm system and owners, lessees and occupants of the premises in which an alarm system is installed, shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of the alarm system and premises in which said alarm system is installed at reasonable hours by the police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village or their designated representative. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-5. - Automatic shut-off system required; automatic dialer disconnection. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm system which does not possess an operational automatic cutoff system which turns off the external audible alarm after a period not to exceed ten (10) minutes. 
(b)  An automatic dialer connected directly to an emergency agency shall automatically disconnect and/or terminate its message after the message has been transmitted a maximum of two (2) times. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the total transmission time of all messages shall not exceed five (5) minutes. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-6. - Connection of enhanced 911 or 911 emergency telephone service restricted. 
(a)  No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of alarm alert which connects automatically to enhanced 911 or the 911 emergency telephone system. 
(b)  There shall be no automatic alarm system with direct communication of any type to an emergency agency without prior written authorization from the emergency agency where the alarm terminates or connects. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-7. - Penalties for offenses: notice. 
(a)  General provisions: 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit an avoidable system. The owner, user, custodian, operator and/or lessee of the alarm system from which an avoidable alarm emanates shall be held accountable for all avoidable alarms emanating from that alarm system and shall be fully liable for all fines arising from said alarm system. 
(2)  The police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village shall keep a record of all avoidable alarms relayed by all alarm systems installed within the village. 
(b)  Fines: 
(1)  An owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of an alarm system from which an avoidable alarm emanates shall pay a fine for each avoidable alarm in each calendar year as follows: 
a.  Residential properties: 
i.  First through third avoidable alarm responses: no charge; written notice of warning will be issued for each avoidable alarm. 
ii.  Fourth through sixth avoidable alarm responses: fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each avoidable alarm. 
iii.  Seventh and more avoidable alarm responses: fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each avoidable alarm. 
b.  Business, commercial and industrial properties: 
i.  First through third avoidable alarm responses: No charge; written notice of warning to be issued for each avoidable alarm. 
ii.  Fourth through sixth avoidable alarm responses: Fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each avoidable alarm. 
iii.  Seventh or more avoidable alarm responses: Fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each avoidable alarm. 
(2)  The police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village shall cause written notice of any warning or fine imposed by this section to be mailed to the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of the alarm system by first class mail or shall personally serve any written notice under this section to the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of the alarm system. 
(3)  Fines shall be paid by the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of the alarm system to the Village Clerk at 2919 Delaware Avenue, Kenmore, New York, 14217. 
(4)  All fines imposed by this section shall be paid no later than thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the written notice or the date of receipt if said notice is delivered by personal service. If the owner, user, occupant, custodian or lessee fails to pay within the time period so designated, the police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village may seek to recover said fine in the justice court of the village. 
(c)  Notice of avoidable alarm. The written notice of any warning or fine issued pursuant to this chapter shall advise the owner, user, custodian, operator or lessee of the alarm system that any further avoidable alarms issued from that alarm system during the remaining calendar year shall be subject to the warnings and fines contained in this chapter. Said notice will include the time, date and place where the avoidable alarm occurred, and identify the emergency agency which responded. Written notice will direct the owner, user, custodian, occupant or lessee to take appropriate remedial action to eliminate further avoidable alarms emanating from that alarm system and will advise the owner, user custodian, occupant or lessee of the right to appeal, as specified in section 10-8 of this chapter. Said notice shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner, user, custodian, occupant or lessee of the alarm system or shall be personally served upon the owner, user, custodian, occupant or lessee. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Sec. 10-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  In the event that the owner, user, custodian, occupant or lessee of an alarm system, upon receiving notice of a avoidable alarm, desires to challenge the determination made by the police chief, fire chief, or building inspector of the village, the owner, user, custodian, occupant or lessee of the alarm system shall, in writing, notify the village clerk's office within thirty (30) days after receipt of any notice of avoidable alarm. The failure to give timely notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to review the determination. 
(b)  All appeals will be heard before the village board of trustees of the village where evidence may be presented and testimony heard as to which any such alarm should not be deemed an avoidable alarm. Upon review, the board of trustees of the village will affirm or dismiss the determination of the police chief, fire chief, or building inspector that there was an avoidable alarm. 
(L.L. No. 2-1999, 2-16-99) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3; game rooms, § 3-16 et seq.; auctions and auctioneers, Ch. 5; bicycle registration, § 6-16 et seq.; licensing of master electricians, § 7-38; regulation of plumbers, § 7-71 et seq.; attendant for dry cleaning machines, § 8-1; permit for use of fire hydrant, § 8-3; business use of sidewalks, § 12-56 et seq.; special permit to reserve park facilities, § 14.5-25; peddlers, Ch. 16; taxation, Ch. 20; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23; taxicabs, § 23-16 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- General power of village to license, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COIN-CONTROLLED AMUSEMENT OR VENDING DEVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3; game rooms, § 3-16 et seq.; special regulations for certain games played in booths, § 8-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-16. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the licensing of coin-controlled amusement or vending devices located within the village for the procedures to be followed with respect to administration of this article, and for the fees to be collected in connection therewith. In enacting this article, the board of trustees finds that the licensing of the foregoing devices and the production of revenue thereby is in the best interest of the village, promotes the good government of the village, its management and business, and preserves the property and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 1, 7-15-80) 
Sec. 12-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin-controlled amusement device or coin-operated amusement device: Any mechanical or electronic device used or designated to be used, for amusement or entertainment purposes, operated or controlled through the insertion of a coin or coins, token or similar object, or through the charging of a fee for use, including, but not limited to, games known as bagatelle, baseball, football, foosball, pinball, bowling, soccer, shuffleboard, and movie machines. 
    Coin-operated vending devices or coin-controlled vending devices: Any mechanical or electronic device used or designated to be used for the vending of personal property operated or controlled through the insertion of a coin or coins, token, or similar object, including, but not limited to, machines designated to vend cigarettes, ice, food and drink of any kind, and sundries, and specifically including jukeboxes. 
    Owner: A person who is the record owner, contract purchaser, receiver, assignee, lessee or bailee of one or more coin-controlled amusement or vending devices. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2, 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, §§ 1, 2, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 12-18. - Inspection. 
    Any duly authorized employee of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection and observation as to compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 6, 7-15-80) 
Sec. 12-19. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall permit the use of a coin-controlled amusement or vending device without first obtaining the required license therefor shall be given written notice of the requirements hereunder, and shall be advised to cease and desist from use of the device or devices until such time as a proper license shall be obtained. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation of this article shall be guilty of violation with respect to each device and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 7, 7-15-80) 
Secs. 12-20-12-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General power of village to license, Municipal Home Public Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

Sec. 12-26. - Required. 
    No person shall place, deliver for use, permit the use, or use any coin-controlled amusement or vending device on any premises within the village, whether or not such premises are under the control of such person, without a license to do so having first been obtained from the village as herein provided. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 3, 7-15-80) 
Sec. 12-27. - Application. 
    The owner of one or more coin-controlled amusement device or coin-operated vending device, or the authorized agent of such owner, desiring to place, deliver for use, permit the use, or use such device or devices shall make and submit an application to the clerk-treasurer's office for a license permitting such use. Said application shall be made on a form supplied by the village, shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain a certification under oath, made by the applicant, that the information contained in the application is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge and belief. Said application shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, social security number, date of birth and telephone number of the owner and the applicant, if same shall be the agent of the owner. If the foregoing are a partnership, unincorporated association, firm or corporation, the names of the officers, members, directors or holders thereof together with their addresses, social security numbers, date of births and telephone numbers. 
(2)  The number of devices for which application is being made. 
(3)  A description of the device or devices, including the name of the manufacturer, serial number if any, and its general mechanical features. 
(4)  The name, address, social security number, date of birth and telephone number of the person having charge of the device or devices. 
(5)  The name, address, social security number, date of birth and telephone number of the person having charge of the premises upon or at which the device or devices are to be located, together with a description of the character of the business as carried on at such premises. 
(6)  With respect to applications for the licensing of coin-controlled amusement devices: 
a.  As to each person whose name appears on the application; the fact of conviction in any jurisdiction of all felonies relating to gambling or obscenity, with a full disclosure of the offense, time and place of commission, legal proceedings and penalty imposed. 
b.  As to each person whose name appears on the application his fingerprints for the purpose of expediting the investigation of said application. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 4(A), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 3, 10-6-81; L.L. No. 6-1981, § 1, 1-3-81) 
Sec. 12-28. - Issuance and appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed and signed application and upon receipt of the requisite license fee computed pursuant to the schedule of fees in effect at the time of application, the clerk-treasurer's office shall refer all applications relating to coin-controlled amusement devices to the building inspector to determine whether the premises where the device or devices are to be located comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the village, and to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation to be made of the background of the applicant to determine that all persons involved can reasonably be expected to operate the devices in accordance with law and free from gambling and other illegal conduct. The foregoing investigations shall be completed within forty-five (45) days from the time of filing of a completed application. In the event that any such investigation does not result in a report within the foregoing time period, said application shall be deemed to be approved by the building inspector and chief of police. 
(b)  If after review of the application and the reports of the building inspector and chief of police the clerk-treasurer's office finds that all requirements of this article and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the village have been met, said office shall issue the license permitting use of the coin-controlled amusement or coin-operated vending device or devices, in accordance with subsection (c) below; provided, however, that no such license shall issue for any coin-controlled amusement device which shall be prohibited from use by state law, such as a gambling device or slot machine; and provided further that except as provided in Corrections Law, Article 23-A, no such license shall issue to be held by any person who has been convicted of a felony or by any corporation, partnership or association, a member, officer, director or holder of ten (10) percent or more of the stock of which has been convicted of any felony relating to gambling or obscenity. 
(c)  The clerk-treasurer's office shall issue one license for each device in the event that the application was made on more than one device. 
(d)  If an application is denied by the clerk-treasurer's office, the grounds for such denial shall be set forth in writing. The applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of trustees of the village, if requested, within fourteen (14) days following notice of the denial of the application. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity at such hearing to present evidence and witnesses on his behalf in connection with the application. Following such hearing, the said board shall render a determination on the application within twenty (20) days. Said determination shall be set forth in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 5(B)-(D), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, §§ 3, 4, 10-6-81; L.L. No. 6-1981, § 1, 11-3-81) 
Sec. 12-29. - Fee. 
    A person requesting the issuance of a license and tag for a coin-controlled amusement or vending device shall pay to the village treasurer's office such fees as are now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. All such fees shall be payable in advance and shall accompany the application. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 5(A), (C), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 5, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 12-30. - Term. 
    A license for a coin-controlled amusement or vending device, and the corresponding tag, shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date of issuance. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 5(B), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 5, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 12-31. - Transfer. 
    No license or tag for a coin-controlled amusement or vending device shall be transferred from one device to another or from one location to another. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 5(D), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 3, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 12-32. - Display. 
    A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be conspicuously displayed by the owner at the premises where the device is placed. The clerk's office shall issue to the applicant for such a license a tag bearing the same number as the license, which tag shall be securely attached by the applicant to each device licensed. 
(L.L. No. 5-1980, § 5(D), 7-15-80; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 3, 10-6-81) 
Secs. 12-33-12-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUSIC IN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-46. - Right of police to order discontinuance. 
    A person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall immediately discontinue the playing of any musical instrument in the licensed premises upon the request of any police officer and every police officer shall have authority to require such discontinuance in the event he believes a disturbance is being created thereby. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 4) 
Secs. 12-47-12-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- General power of village to license, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

Sec. 12-56. - Required. 
    No person operating a commercial establishment in the village shall play or permit to be played in said establishment or any room incidental thereto, any musical instrument other than a radio or phonograph without first having secured a license to do so from the mayor. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 1) 
Sec. 12-57. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to procure a license pursuant to the provisions of this division shall file a written application with the village clerk. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and post office address of the applicant; 
(2)  The address of the establishment in which the music is to be played; and 
(3)  Such other information as the licensing official may require. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 2) 
Sec. 12-58. - Fee. 
    At the time application is made for the license required by the provisions of this division, the applicant shall pay to the village treasurer's office such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution; provided, however, that the fee for a license issued on or after July 1 of any year shall be one-half of the yearly fee. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1976, § 2(E), 6-1-76) 
Sec. 12-59. - Term. 
    A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 3) 
Sec. 12-60. - Transfer. 
    No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be transferable. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 3) 
Sec. 12-61. - Revocation. 
    The mayor may, for cause, revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 1-6-34, § 5) 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 12-62. - Definition of contractor. 
    As used in this article, "contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged for remuneration in any business, work or activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to section 8-18 of the Kenmore Municipal Code, or any successor sections or laws. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04; L.L. No. 3-2006, § 1, 4-18-06; L.L. No. 3-2010, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 12-63. - License required; penalties. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall engage in the business of a contractor in the village without first obtaining a license therefore as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity that performs any work as a contractor without first obtaining a license shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense thereafter. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 12-64. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity desiring to do business as a contractor in the village shall make application for a contractor's license to the building department on a form prescribed by the board of trustees of the village. The application shall be verified under oath by the applicant and the applicant's signature shall be notarized. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit proof that its employees are covered by workers compensation insurance and that it has in effect liability insurance in such amount as shall be deemed adequate to compensate third parties for damage to person or property. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide proof of the existence of an escrow account as required by General Business Law, § 771 and Lien Law, § 71-a. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the village. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 12-65. - Issuance or denial of license. 
    Upon submission of all information and documents required and after review by the building inspector, the village clerk shall issue a contractor's license to the applicant, unless good cause exists for denial of such license. If the application is denied, the fee required by subsection 12-64(d) shall be refunded. The clerk shall maintain a record of contractor's licenses issued which shall be available for public inspection. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 12-66. - Term of license; reissuance; replacement licenses. 
(a)  All contractor's licenses shall be for a term of one year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Any license that has not been suspended or revoked may be reissued upon payment of the required fee and submission of proof of insurance coverages as provided in subsection 12-64(b). 
(c)  A duplicate license may be issued for a lost, destroyed or mutilated license upon application therefor to the village clerk and payment of such fee as may be authorized by the board of trustees of the village. 
(d)  Licenses are not transferable or assignable. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 12-67. - Suspension of revocation of license. 
    For good cause shown, a contractor's license may be suspended or revoked by the board of trustees of the village. Prior to such suspension or revocation, the contractor shall be given notice of the intent to suspend or revoke the license and shall have an opportunity to be heard. The notice of a hearing before the board of trustees on the matter shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least seven (7) days before such hearing to the contractor at the address listed on the application. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 12-68. - Compliance with other laws required. 
    It shall be the duty of all contractors to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including General Business Law, Article 36-A, state and federal codes, rules, and regulations, local laws and/or resolutions relating to the various activities engaged in by the contractor. 
(L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Secs. 12-69-12-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LANDLORD REGISTRATION 

Sec. 12-81. - Legislative findings. 
    The board of trustees of the village finds that there has been difficulty in enforcing the uniform fire code, building standards and municipal laws affecting residential real property when the owner of the property does not reside on it. When violations occur at non-owner occupied residential rental premises, notification to the owner and, if necessary, service of process becomes problematic, especially when the owner is a corporation, partnership or limited liability company or does not reside within Erie County. Such notices often receive no response. Required repairs, therefore, are not being performed, resulting in a loss of value for the subject property as well as surrounding properties. The board of trustees finds that a system that requires landlord registration under such circumstances will aid enforcement of building code violations and enhance and benefit the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-82. - Residential rental unit-Definition. 
    A "residential rental unit" is any apartment, house, dwelling or room that is leased for any period for use as a dwelling place. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-83. - Residential rental unit certificate. 
    An owner of a residential rental unit who does not reside on the same premises as the rental unit, or any corporation, partnership or limited liability company that owns a residential rental unit shall obtain from the clerk of the village a residential rental unit certificate. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-84. - Procedure to obtain residential rental unit certificate. 
(a)  In order to obtain a residential rental unit certificate, an owner of a residential rental unit subject to this article shall provide the following information on a registration form: 
(1)  Name and legal address of owner; 
(2)  Address of property; and 
(3)  Number of units. 
(b)  In addition to the above, if the owner of a residential rental unit subject to this article is not a natural person or does not reside within Erie County, on the registration form the owner shall appoint an agent for purpose of receiving notification of violations and service of process. The agent so appointed shall be a natural person at least twenty-one (21) years of age who either resides in Erie County or is employed at a business with an office within Erie County. If a new agent is appointed, an amended registration form must be filed. 
(c)  The registration form must be signed by the owner of the premises and, if applicable, by the appointed agent. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-85. - Frequency of registration. 
(a)  An existing owner subject to this article shall provide the registration form required by section 12-83 to the clerk of the village. 
(b)  An owner subject to this article shall provide a registration form to the clerk of the village every three (3) years after the initial registration form is provided. The form shall be provided on or before the anniversary date of the initial registration. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-86. - Charge for registration. 
    The fee for the registration form shall be set by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 12-87. - Noncompliance. 
(a)  Failure to perform the acts specified in section 12-83 shall result in a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  Any unpaid penalties under this section may be collected pursuant to provisions of the General Municipal Law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Chapter 13 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 
Cross reference- Adult uses ("sex shops"), § 25-146 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Public intoxication. 
(a)  No person shall appear upon or in any public street in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply: 
(1)  To conduct which violates the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1192. 
(2)  To conduct which violates the provisions of Penal Law, § 240.40. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 4) 
State Law reference- Emergency services for intoxicated persons and persons incapacitated by alcohol, Mental Hygiene Law, § 21.09. 
Sec. 13-2. - Possession of open containers of alcohol in public. 
(a)  It is the intent of the village as an exercise of its police power to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village by enacting this section, since it is the finding of the board of trustees that the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons on public lands, except under controlled conditions, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village in that such possession contributes to the development of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances. It is further the intent of the board of trustees that this section not be considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles or the operation thereof. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, liquor, wine, beer, cider and every liquid, patented or not, containing alcohol, wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being. 
(2)  Container means any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or used to hold any liquid. 
(3)  Public lands means any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground, public parking lot or other public land. 
All other words shall have the meanings normally ascribed to them in regular usage. 
(c)  No person shall have in his possession any open container containing an alcoholic beverage on any public land within the village. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (c) shall not apply in the event of a fair, picnic or other community gathering for which a permit has been granted by the board of trustees. No fee shall be charged for such permit. Application for such permit must be made at least three (3) days prior to the date scheduled for using such beverages. A permit shall be issued only upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Such individual or organization by its duly authorized officer must agree, in writing, to assume full responsibility for supervising the conduct of the group or individuals benefiting from such permit and to properly clean up and restore the premises, after use, to their prior condition. 
(2)  Such individual or organization must further agree, in writing, that adequate precautions shall be taken to ensure that minors will not be served or allowed to consume alcoholic beverages at the permitted event or gathering. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages shall be distributed or consumed other than the specific premises described in the permit and only during the time stated therein. 
(4)  No permit shall be issued to any individual or organization which has previously been issued a permit and has failed to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(e)  This section shall apply to all persons on public lands in the village, except as herein provided, but shall not apply to any person drinking an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public highway within the village in violation of Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1227. 
(L.L. No. 4-1979, §§ 1-5, 12-4-79) 
Sec. 13-3. - Handbills. 
(a)  No person shall give or distribute any handbill to any person who is not willing to accept such handbill. No person shall place any handbill on any unattended motor vehicle or the door of any premises within the village. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the distribution of handbills by political or nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. of 7-5-32) 
Cross reference- Littering, § 9-4. 
Sec. 13-4. - Tearing down notices. 
    No unauthorized person shall tear down or take down any notice or handbill which has been lawfully posted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 33) 
Sec. 13-5. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any firearms in the village except in defense of life or property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to police officers or members of the armed forces of the United States or the national guard engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to conduct prohibited by Penal Law, § 265.35. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 24) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms in village parks, § 14.5-17. 
Sec. 13-6. - Bonfires in streets. 
    No person shall make any bonfire in any street in the village. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 24) 
Sec. 13-7. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having in his possession a discarded or unused refrigerator to permit same to remain in any place accessible to children, unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door or doors of the same have been removed or dismantled, or unless the door or doors of the same are bolted or locked in such a manner so that it is impossible to open the same by the use of the hands alone. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) the term "discarded or unused refrigerator" shall include all refrigerators not connected or in place for use upon the premises of the owner thereof, and all refrigerators owned or in the possession of dealers, except those on display or crated, or stored in a warehouse or other enclosure not accessible to the general public. 
(Ord. of 11-24-53, §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference- Disposal of major appliances, § 9-7(b). 
State Law reference- Abandoned refrigerators, Penal Law, § 270.10. 
Sec. 13-8. - Residency restrictions for sex offenders. 
(1)  Purpose. The board of trustees recognizes that it is important to take steps to safeguard minors against encounters with convicted sex offenders. While not every convicted sex offender will be a recidivist, this statute aims to lessen the potential for those offenders inclined toward recidivism to have contact with, and possibly victimize, the youngest members of society by requiring that the convicted sex offenders live at a minimum distance away from places where minors congregate. 
(2)  Restrictions. No person who has been required to register as a sex offender in New York State, or in any other state or jurisdiction, or who has been convicted in federal district court of any offense involving child pornography, shall live within one thousand (1,000) feet of a licensed school, preschool, child care center, day care center or park that exists within the jurisdictional limits of the village. 
(3)  Penalties. A person violating this section shall be subject to a term of imprisonment of not less than thirty (30) days and not more than one year. 
(4)  Exceptions. This statute shall not apply to any convicted sex offender who resides within the village on the effective date of this statute. 
(L.L. No. 3-2008, § 1, 3-4-08) 
Sec. 13-9. - Restrictions on covering buildings and structures. 
(a)  No building or structure, or any part of a building or structure, shall remained covered by a tarp, dropcloth or other similar covering, for longer than sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Upon determining that a violation of this section exists, the building inspector of the village shall notify the owner of the building or structure of the violation in the same manner as if it were a violation of the uniform fire and building code and shall demand that the violation be remedied within seven (7) days of the date of the notification. 
(c)  If the violation is not remedied in the time specified in subsection (b), the continuing violation shall be treated in the same manner and be subject to the same sanctions as a violation of the uniform fire and building code. 
(L.L. No. 4-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animal nuisances, §§ 4-20, 4-23, 4-41; buildings, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; abandoned refrigerators, § 13-7; dangerous trees, § 22-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii), a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED, JUNKED, ETC., VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 21; parking on private property, § 21-49. 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1224. 

Sec. 14-16. - Purpose. 
    The outdoor storage of abandoned, junked or discarded and unlicensed motor vehicles on privately owned property within the village is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The same also constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and in many ways imperils their safety. Such storage also endangers the person and property of members of the community, since fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily explode. Such storage is unsightly and depreciates property values. The control of the outdoor storage of abandoned, junked, discarded and unlicensed motor vehicles on privately owned properties within the village is therefore regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 1) 
Sec. 14-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discarded motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle which the owner thereof as established by the surrounding circumstances does not intend to recover the possession of, or any motor vehicle of which the owner cannot be found after due and reasonable inquiry. 
    Junked motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle in such condition as to cost more to repair and place the same in operating condition than the reasonable market value before such repair. 
    Motor vehicle: Every vehicle originally designed and intended to be operated, drawn or driven or capable of being operated, drawn or driven upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power. The term shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, busses, motorcycles and trailers. 
    Owner of a motor vehicle: A person having the property in or title to a motor vehicle, including a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person and also including any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the use thereof under lease or otherwise. 
    Owner of private property: A person who is the owner, contract purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant, under tenant, receiver or assignee of private premises or private property located within the village. 
    Premises or property: The term "premises" or "property" includes all parcels of real property privately owned, situated in the village, whether occupied or vacant. 
    Unlicensed motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle which may be licensed or registered with the state and is not currently licensed or registered. The fact that a motor vehicle which may be licensed or registered with the state does not display a current license plate or displays an expired license plate shall be presumptive evidence of the fact that such motor vehicle is not currently licensed or registered. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, §§ 2(A)-(D), (F)-(H)) 
Sec. 14-18. - Determination of status as abandoned. 
    The intent of the owner of a motor vehicle not to use it on the public highways shall establish it as abandoned. The intent of the owner shall be determined by the physical condition of the motor vehicle, any statements as to its abandonment, the length of time since the motor vehicle was last used on the public highways, whether the motor vehicle is currently licensed and other relevant facts. With respect to a motor vehicle not required to be licensed or motor vehicles not usually used on public highways, the intent of the owner shall be determined by the physical condition of the motor vehicle, the length of time since it was last used for the purposes intended and any statements as to its abandonment, and other relevant facts. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 2(E)) 
Sec. 14-19. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store or deposit, or cause, permit or suffer to be stored or deposited, an abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle, or part or piece thereof, on any private property within the village unless: 
(1)  Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited on a premises legally used, operated and located for a junkyard, or 
(2)  Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited on any private property within the village an unlicensed motor vehicle unless: 
(1)  Such motor vehicle is the inventory or part of the inventory of a new or used motor vehicle dealer located in compliance with the laws of the village. 
(2)  Such motor vehicle has been converted to and is actually used as a permanent building or structure for carrying on purposes in such manner and circumstances as authorized by the laws of the village. 
(3)  Such motor vehicle is a camping, house or boat trailer otherwise stored and used in compliance with the laws of the village. 
(4)  Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 3) 
Sec. 14-20. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  If any provisions of this article are believed to be violated, the building inspector shall serve a written notice, either personally or by registered, certified or ordinary mail, upon the owner, occupant or person having charge of such private property, to comply with the requirements of this article. The building inspector may determine ownership of any parcel of land in the village from the current assessment roll of the village, and may serve written notice upon the owner thereof by mailing such notice to the owner at the address listed on the current assessment roll. If the building inspector is unable to determine the ownership or address of the owner of said private property, such notification may be made by publishing same in the official newspaper of the village for two (2) consecutive weeks. 
(b)  The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
"To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land within the Village of Kenmore briefly described as follows: 
(here describe subject property) 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that an abandoned, junked, discarded or unlicensed motor vehicle is stored or deposited on the above described property in the Village of Kenmore. This vehicle must be removed therefrom within ten (10) days from the date of this notice, provided, however, that if this notice is served on you by publication, the said motor vehicle shall be removed within twenty-four (24) days from the first publication date of this notice. 
If such motor vehicle is not removed on or before the expiration of said ten (10) days from the date hereof, or on or before the expiration of the said twenty-four (24) days from the date of this notice, in the event it is served on you by publication, you are hereby summoned to appear before the Village of Kenmore Village Board in Kenmore, New York at ___ o'clock ___M., on the ___ day of _______, 19___, at which time a hearing will be held to determine why the Village of Kenmore, New York, acting through its duly authorized agents, servants, officers and employees, should not enter upon the said property and remove and cause the said motor vehicle to be destroyed. In the event the Village Board directs that said motor vehicle be removed and destroyed, the expense incurred by the Village of Kenmore shall be assessed against said property and shall constitute a lien thereon and be collected in the manner provided by law. 
Dated: ___________ 
/s/   
      Building Inspector 
      Village of Kenmore   (Ord. of 12-2-69, § 4) 
Sec. 14-21. - Removal hearing. 
    In the event an abandoned, junked, discarded or unlicensed motor vehicle is not removed as prescribed herein, the village board shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time specified in the notice given pursuant to the provisions of this article, at which hearing the persons interested may be heard concerning the removal of said motor vehicle. After said persons are heard the hearing shall be closed and the village board shall determine whether said motor vehicle has been abandoned, junked or discarded in violation of this article. It shall also determine whether or not the said motor vehicle is unlicensed. In the event of such a determination, the village board may issue an order directing the removal and destruction of said motor vehicle, and the village board may also cause the expense thereof to be assessed against the property described in the notice, all in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 5) 
State Law reference- Power of village to bring property into compliance with law and collect costs thereof, Village Law, § 4-414; special assessment liens, Village Law, § 5-516. Collection of special assessments, Village Law, § 5-518. 
Sec. 14-22. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article or any provision or part hereof by any person is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 6) 
Sec. 14-23. - Alternative remedies. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the village may serve such notices, hold such hearings and do such other and further things as are set forth in sections 14-20 and 14-21 and may at the same time, or at any other time, without prior notice, proceed under section 14-22, concerning the imposition of penalties. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 7) 
Chapter 14.5 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14.5-1-14.5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF ACTIVITIES IN PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 3 of 1985, adopted Oct. 8, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 14.5-16-14.5-29, was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Dogs, § 4-36 et seq.; bicycles, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; garbage and trash, § 9-16 et seq.; miscellaneous provisions and offenses, Ch. 13; planning and development, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public grounds, Ch. 19; trees and shrubs, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 25. 

Sec. 14.5-16. - Adoption of Town of Tonawanda Parks Code, Chapter 142, for Mang Park. 
    The Village of Kenmore does hereby adopt as its own legislation Chapter 142, Sections 142-1 through 142-13, of the Town of Tonawanda Town Code, as set out herein as sections 14.5-16 through 14.5-29, with the Village of Kenmore being substituted for the Town of Tonawanda where appropriate. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-17. - Discharge of firearms and fireworks restricted. 
    No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, firearm or slingshot or any rocket, torpedo or other fireworks of any description or carry or transport the same in any park unless upon permission of the village board. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms, § 13-5. 
Sec. 14.5-18. - Damage to park property prohibited. 
    No person shall climb any tree or injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of a village park or any buildings, signs, equipment or other property found therein or remove, cut down, cut, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, ornament, statue, fence, bridge, structure or other property within any park or park approach or within any other area under the control of the superintendent of parks. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-19. - Fires. 
    No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire in any village park or park approach for any purpose except in a stove, fireplace, oven or fire circle provided for that purpose. A fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. Lighted matches, cigarettes, cigars or burning tobacco must not be deposited or left where they may cause fires. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 14.5-20. - Dogs. 
    No person shall bring any dog or dogs into any village park unless the same are on leashes and kept on leashes while in the park. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Cross reference- Dogs generally, § 4-36 et seq. 
Sec. 14.5-21. - Hunting. 
    No person shall hunt game within the boundaries of a park. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-22. - Bathing and swimming. 
    No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any waters, pools or lakes except at such times and in such places as the superintendent may designate or maintain as bathing areas and unless so covered with a bathing suit as to prevent indecent exposure of the person. No person shall dress or undress in any park or park approach except in such places as may be designated or maintained for that purpose. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-23. - Gambling. 
    No person shall bring into a village park, use or have in his possession while there, any implement, device or cards commonly used for gambling purposes. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-24. - Horseback riding. 
    No person shall use, ride or drive a horse in any park area except over bridle paths or other paths established for said purpose. No rider shall travel at a gait in excess of a trot while in the parks, to preserve the safety of the public and avoid endangering children at play. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-25. - Certain areas reserved for groups; permit required. 
    The village board or recreation department of the village shall designate buildings, shelters and locations within the parks and recreation areas of the village which may be reserved for the exclusive use by a group of persons. No person or persons shall occupy or use any such building, shelter or location unless such use has been authorized by the village through the issuance of a special permit. Application for such permit shall be made to the recreation department of the village and shall include such information and certification as required by the recreation department or the village board. Such application may be granted or denied under such circumstances and conditions as prescribed by the village board or recreation department. Such permit shall be in a form prescribed by the recreation department and shall be available for inspection by any village official or employee during the time the permit is operative. Such permit may provide for an exception to any applicable local laws and ordinances and in such a case shall state the terms and conditions under which said exceptions shall apply. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the village board, recreation department or police department of the village upon reasonable belief of a violation of any of the conditions under which the permit was issued. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-26. - Use of vehicles. 
    No person shall drive or cause to be driven along or over any road within any village park any vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, nor shall any person park or cause to be parked any vehicle at any point where a sign prohibiting parking has been erected pursuant to the direction of the village superintendent of parks. Snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motor scooters and bicycles with motors attached are strictly prohibited within the boundaries of any village park. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-27. - Authorization required for certain sales. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale within the village parks any property or privilege whatsoever unless authorized by the village board. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Cross reference- Peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants, etc., Ch. 16. 
Sec. 14.5-28. - Hours; exceptions. 
    No person shall enter or remain in a park, playground or recreation facility owned and/or maintained by the village between sunset and sunrise the following day except: 
(1)  Where a person is traveling to or from or participating in an event or activity under the direct supervision of the village. 
(2)  Where a person is traveling to or from or is participating in the use of a facility or location for which use the village has issued a special permit to allow the use thereof by said person during such hours. 
(3)  Where a person is using the village boat-launching facility for the purposes of boating or fishing. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Sec. 14.5-29. - Penalties for offenses. 
(a)  Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. 
(b)  Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this article shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(L.L. No. 3-1985, 10-8-85) 
Chapter 15 - OIL AND GAS DRILLING, WELLS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and development, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). Oil and Gas Solution Mining Law, Environmental Conservation Law, § 23-0101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Correction of unsafe conditions by village. 
    In the event the owner or occupant of any property shall fail, in the opinion of the village board, to keep an oil or gas well or any equipment connected therewith, in a safe condition, the village board may enter upon said premises, and put, or cause said well and equipment to be put in a safe condition, and the owner of the premises upon which said well is located, shall reimburse the village board for all sums expended by it for such purpose. Such sums may be assessed against the property benefitted thereby. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 2; Ord. of 5-17-49) 
State Law reference- Power of village to bring property into compliance with law and collect costs thereof, Village Law, § 4-414. Special assessment liens, Village Law, § 5-516. Collection of special assessments, Village Law, § 5-518. 
Secs. 15-2-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-16. - Required. 
    No person shall drill any well for gas or oil within the limits of the village or erect any derrick or building or other structure or place any machinery or equipment for such purpose without having obtained a permit issued on order of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 1) 
Sec. 15-17. - Application. 
    An applicant for the permit required by the provisions of this article shall file with the village clerk for presentation to the board of trustees a verified petition giving: 
(1)  The name, address and business of the applicant; 
(2)  The location of the proposed well; 
(3)  The kind and nature of the drill, derrick, machinery, equipment and power proposed to be used; and 
(4)  The kind and size of any buildings to be erected. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 1) 
Sec. 15-18. - Issuance. 
(a)  Before ordering the issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article, a public hearing shall be held by the board of trustees upon such notice as the board deems appropriate. The permit application may be referred to any village employee or department for recommendations. 
(b)  In granting its consent for such a permit, the board of trustees may impose conditions in the interest of public safety and health governing the drilling operation, the placing, maintenance and removal of buildings and equipment and may limit the hour during which such drilling may be done. 
(c)  Upon order of the board of trustees to do so the village clerk shall issue such a permit. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 1) 
Sec. 15-19. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Upon receiving the consent of the board of trustees a person shall obtain the permit required by the provisions of this article from the village clerk. Such permit shall expire six (6) months after the same is issued, and may be renewed annually thereafter, providing all laws have been complied with. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 2) 
Sec. 15-20. - Bond or insurance. 
(a)  Before a permit required by the provisions of this article is issued by the village clerk, the applicant shall file a bond with the village clerk in such penal sum as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the village against any loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue against the village because of any happening or circumstance arising from or in connection with drilling or the erection, installation and maintenance or operation of any building, structure, machinery or equipment used therefor. 
(b)  At such time as the well has been completed and all unnecessary buildings, structures, machinery or equipment have been removed and the premises placed in condition to be approved, the applicant or permittee in lieu of said bond may thereafter file with the village clerk a policy of public liability insurance in such sum as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution, indemnifying the village among others, against any loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue by reason of the use or maintenance of such gas or oil well. 
(c)  In the event the owner or occupant of any property shall fail to provide a bond or policy of insurance required by this section, the village board may procure such bond or policy and the owner of the premises upon which said well is located shall reimburse the village board for all sums expended by it for such purpose; such sums may be assessed against the property benefitted thereby. 
(Ord. of 12-8-44, § 2; Ord. of 5-17-49) 
Chapter 16 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 12; authorization required for certain sales in parks, § 14.5-27. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1, para. (ii) a. (11). Peddlers or hawkers generally, General Business Law, § 32 et seq.; transit merchants, General Municipal Law, § 85-a.; Door-to-Door Sales Protection Act, Personal Property Law, § 425 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  Charitable organization. 
a.  Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, educational, health, social service group, association or corporation which qualifies under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
b.  A fire company which is organized for the prevention and extinguishment of fires. 
(2)  Clerk. The clerk/treasurer. 
(3)  Contribution. The promise or grant of any money, credit, property, financial assistance, donation or any thing of value, including payments for literature, in excess to [of] the fair market value. 
(4)  Peddler. Any person, either principal or agent, who in any public street, sidewalk, road, place, right-of-way, or from any vacant property, whether publicly or privately owned, or by going from place to place or house to house, delivers or distributes, sells or offers for sale, barter, or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise, service or any other article or personal property of any nature or description whatsoever, either in his/her possession, or not in his/her position, either for immediate or for future delivery. 
(5)  Person. A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, society or any other entity of any kind. 
(6)  Solicitor. Any person, either principal or agent, who, in any public street, road or highway, or public place or from any vacant property, whether publicly or privately owned, or by going from place to place or house to house requests or accepts a contribution. 
Any person, either principal or agent, who goes upon the premises of any private property, who is not the owner or occupant of the property, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take offers for the sale of good, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-2. - Permit and exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the village without first obtaining a permit issued by the clerk, provided however that the following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(a)  Persons under nineteen (19) years of age shall not be required to register and obtain a permit in the event that they are soliciting for any purposes directly connected with a religious, charitable, benevolent, school, or service organization. 
(b)  Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made. 
(c)  Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such solicitation. 
(d)  Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable person, group, or organization, which has its principal place of activity/business in the village. 
(e)  Any person, corporation, partnership or association engaged in charitable, benevolent, veterans, religious, or school purposes. 
(f)  Sheriffs, trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods and merchandise according to law. 
(g)  Any person, honorably discharged from the armed forces of the United States who is handicapped as a result of injuries received while in the service of said armed forces and holder of a license granted pursuant to General Business Law, § 32. 
(h)  Peddling or soliciting by a political party or a political candidate. 
(i)  Peddling of milk or farm produce by farmers who produce such commodities. 
(j)  The delivery of newspapers. 
(k)  The delivery of flyers, brochures, leaflets and/or pamphlets for promotional, marketing and/or advertisement purposes, where said materials are dropped off without any contact with any person on the property. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09; L.L. No. 2-2010, § 1, 5-4-10) 
State Law reference- Exemption in subsection (b) required, General Business Law, § 35. 
Sec. 16-2.1. - Denial. 
    Upon the review of the application, the clerk may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers or the residents. 
(b)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application. 
(c)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or local law violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property, such conviction being entered within the five (5) years preceding the date of application. 
(d)  The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for fraud, deceit, larceny, [or] misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(e)  The applicant offers no proof of authority to serve as an agent. 
(f)  The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within the past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
(g)  The applicant did not answer all questions on the application and/or failed to answer the questions truthfully. 
(h)  Upon recommendation of the chief of police that such application should be denied. 
    The reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application and the applicant shall be notified that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the address on the application form. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-3. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect. 
State Law reference- Trespass, Penal Law, § 140.00 et seq. 
Sec. 16-4. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
Sec. 16-5. - Hours of operation. 
    Soliciting or peddling shall be prohibited before 9:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Secs. 16-6-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 16-21. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this village without first obtaining a license to do so. 
(b)  The license required by the provisions of subsection (a) shall be construed to be a permit within the meaning of General Municipal Law, § 85-a. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Authority to require permit from transient retail dealers in order to secure payment of tax, General Municipal Law, § 85-a. 
Sec. 16-22. - Application. 
    Applicants for a peddler's license shall file with the office of the village clerk a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the village which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, phone, cell phone of the applicant. 
(2)  Description of the business or activity to be conducted. Said description must include a statement as to whether money is exchanged as part of the solicitation, whether it be a purchase or down payment. 
(3)  Goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address and phone of the employer, or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is requested, not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced [or] where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the method of delivery. 
(7)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant taken within the last sixty (60) days from the date of application, and a copy of the applicant's driver's license. Said photographs are to be two (2) inches by one inch showing head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  Type of vehicle that will be used, if any, and its registration number. 
(9)  Proof of possession of any license or permit which under federal, state, or local law or regulations the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business or which, under any such law or regulation would exempt the applicant from licensing requirements of this article. 
(10)  Statement as to whether the applicant has ever been arrested. 
(11)  Statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation. 
(12)  If the applicant has been arrested, the applicant is to provide information as to the disposition of the arrest. Official proof of disposition will be required, at the request of the clerk. 
(13)  If the applicant has been convicted, the applicant must provide the dates, crime convicted and what court/location. Official proof of disposition will be required, at the request of the clerk. 
(14)  Statement as to whether the applicant has ever been classified as a sexual offender. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-23. - Driver's license. 
    At the time of filing his application for a peddler's license, the applicant shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the village clerk's office. 
Sec. 16-24. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a peddler's license. 
Sec. 16-25. - Fingerprints. 
    At the time of making application for a peddler's license, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department. 
Sec. 16-26. - Bond. 
    All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (COD) or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the clerk a bond in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
State Law reference- Authority to require bond to secure payment of tax on transient retail businesses, General Municipal Law, § 85-a. 
Sec. 16-27. - Fee. 
    A person desiring a peddler's license shall pay to the office of the village treasurer such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution; provided that if such peddler is conducting a transient retail business within the meaning of General Municipal Law, § 85-a, such person shall pay to the village treasurer such tax as is levied by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 16-28. - Service of process. 
    Before any peddler's license shall issue under this article, there shall also be filed with the office of the village clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the village clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on the behalf of such applicant; service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the village clerk. 
Sec. 16-29. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a peddler's license, the original shall be referred to the police department, which shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business character to be made as it deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The department shall complete its investigation within one week of receiving the application. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 1) 
Sec. 16-30. - Denial. 
    If, as a result of investigation, the police department believes that the applicant should be denied a permit, it shall so notate on the application its recommendation for disapproval and the reasons for same and return said application to the village clerk. The village clerk shall notify the applicant that his/her application is disapproved and that no peddler's license shall be issued. The clerk may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Location and/or time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers or their customers. 
(2)  The investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or local law violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property, such conviction being entered within the five (5) years preceding the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)  The applicant offers no proof of authority to serve as an agent. 
(6)  The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
    The disapproval and reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application and the applicant shall be notified that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 1; L.L. No. 4-2009, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-31. - Expiration. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-32. - Permit exhibition. 
    Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer or individual. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 4; L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-33. - Transfer prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permit holder to use or wear any permit or badge issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 4; L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-34. - Contents. 
    Each peddler's license issued under this article shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. 
Sec. 16-35. - Display. 
    Every peddler having a license issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the village shall display his license upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 1) 
Sec. 16-36. - Duration. 
    Every peddler's license issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such license be issued for a period of time in excess of twelve (12) months. 
Sec. 16-37. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the village clerk/treasurer if there is cause to believe that the holder of such license is violating any statute of the state or any provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon such revocation or suspension, the village clerk/treasurer shall cause notice to be served upon the holder of the peddler's license, specifying the grounds for the revocation of such license. The holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of trustees of the village, if requested, within fourteen (14) days following notice of revocation. The holder shall be afforded the opportunity at such hearing to present evidence and witnesses in his behalf in connection with his license. Following such hearing, the board shall render a determination of the license within twenty (20) days. Said determination shall be set forth in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. 
(Ord. of 6-15-31, § 5) 
Secs. 16-38-16-64. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-65. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector, code enforcement officers, police department and/or any other person so designated by the village board of trustees is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-66. - Reports. 
    The police department may require reports from any permittee hereunder at any time and at its sole discretion as it deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. The police may investigate and require reports from any organization or individual which it has cause to believe is violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-67. - Permit for temporary structure. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange any goods, merchandise, magazines, periodicals, service or any other article or thing whatsoever from a temporary structure unless such person has obtained approval for such temporary structure by the village board of trustees and upon payment of the permit fee as established by resolution. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 16-68. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the clerk, after notice for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions of the permit. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permit holder in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of peach or endanger the health safety or general welfare of the public. 
(L.L. No. 4-2009, § 1, 10-6-09) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building regulations, Ch. 7; oil and gas drilling, wells, etc., Ch. 15; sidewalks subspace, § 19-36 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- General grant of planning and zoning power, Village Law, § 7-700; Statute of Local Governments, § 10, para. 6, 7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDMARK PRESERVATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Landmark preservation authorized, Village Law, § 7-700. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-16. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the village to: 
(a)  Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks of historic and cultural significance in the village; 
(b)  Safeguard the village's historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by preserving landmarks of historic, cultural, and architectural significance; 
(c)  Stabilize and enhance property values; 
(d)  Foster civic pride in the legacy of achievements of the past; 
(e)  Strengthen the local economy; and 
(f)  Promote the use of landmarks of historic, cultural, and architectural significance for the education, pleasure, and general welfare of the people. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 1, 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-17. - Designation of landmarks. 
(a)  On its own initiative or at the request of any person, group or association, the landmarks preservation commission may designate buildings or structures within the village to be landmarks of historic, cultural, or architectural significance based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Buildings or structures associated with the lives of individuals significant in our national, state or local history; 
(2)  Buildings or structures associated with events significant in our national, state, or local history; 
(3)  Buildings or structures that represent the work of a master architect or designer, that possess high artistic value, or that represent a significant or distinguished entity, though whose components may lack individual or special distinction; 
(b)  In no event shall a building or structure be designated as a landmark until the commission has conducted a public hearing thereon, which hearing shall be held upon no less than seven (7) days' notice published in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. 
(c)  Within seven (7) days after designation of a landmark, the commission shall file a copy of such designation with the board of trustees. Within sixty (60) days of the designation by the commission, the board of trustees shall prepare a report with respect to the relation of such designation to the village master plan if any, zoning laws, projected public improvements, and any plans for renewal of the site involved. The said board shall within ninety (90) days of said designation approve, disapprove of the designation, or refer same back to the commission for modification. Any designation approved by the board shall become effective on and after the date of approval by the board. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 4 (a)-(c), 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-18. - Alteration of a landmark. 
(a)  After approval of designation by the board of trustees, no material change in appearance of a landmark shall be made or permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until an alteration permit shall have been obtained in accordance with the procedure provided herein. Applications for a building permit to construct, alter, repair, move, or demolish a designated landmark shall be made to the building inspector and shall state whether the building or structure is a designated landmark. Upon the filing of such application, the building inspector shall immediately notify the commission of the receipt of such application and shall transmit it together with accompanying plans and other information to the commission unless such application pertains solely to the interior of the structure. 
(b)  The landmarks preservation commission shall meet to consider plans within fifteen (15) days after notification by the building inspector of the filing, unless such time limit shall be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the commission. The applicant for the building permit may confer with the commission at such meeting regarding its decision. 
(c)  The review of the plans by the landmarks preservation commission shall be limited to the effect such planned changes shall have on the exterior features of the landmark which are visible by the public, and shall not include interior arrangements or modifications of the building or structure. 
(d)  The landmarks preservation commission shall approve the plans only if it finds that: 
(1)  The proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or affecting the exterior architectural features of the improvement upon which the work is to be done will not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the landmark; or 
(2)  The proposed change is consistent with the historic value and the spirit of the architectural style of the landmark; or 
(3)  The denial of a certificate of appropriateness would prevent the owner of the landmark from earning a reasonable return on his property subject to this article. 
(e)  Upon approval of the plans in accordance with the foregoing, the landmarks preservation commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness which is to be signed by the chairman, attached to the application for a building permit. The chairman shall also stamp all prints submitted to the commission signifying its approval. The application together with accompanying plans, information and the certificate of appropriateness shall then be transmitted to the building inspector forthwith. 
(f)  If the landmarks preservation commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons for such disapproval in writing and transmit same to the building inspector and to the applicant. The commission in its written disapproval may advise what alterations it would deem to be acceptable to it. The applicant may modify his plans accordingly and shall have the right to resubmit the application. 
(g)  The building inspector shall not issue an alteration permit until a certificate of appropriateness shall have been issued by the landmarks preservation commission. 
(h)  Demolition of a designated landmark shall be prohibited unless, after a hearing upon the application, the landmarks preservation commission finds that the prohibition of demolition prevents the owner of the property from earning a reasonable return. In the event that the landmark is found to be of unique value, the commission may, notwithstanding the showing of an absence of a reasonable return, deny permission to demolish; provided, however, that a denial of permission to demolish shall prohibit demolition for no more than one year from the date of application for a permit to demolish unless at the expiration of one year, adjustments have been made which allow for such a reasonable return. During that year, the commission shall endeavor to work out with the owner an economically feasible plan for the preservation of such landmark. 
(i)  Failure of the landmarks preservation commission to approve or disapprove of such plans within forty-five (45) days from the date of application for the building permit, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and commission, shall be deemed to constitute approval by the commission. Upon final issuance of the alteration permit, the building inspector shall from time to time inspect the construction, alteration or repair of the landmark and shall take such action as is necessary to insure compliance with the approved plans. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any designated landmark. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, §§ 4(d), 5, 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-19. - Removal of landmark status. 
    A petition for removal of landmark designation of a building or structure shall be directed to the board of trustees. The petition shall be referred to the landmarks preservation commission for its consideration and written recommendation to the board of trustees. The commission shall submit such recommendation within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the petition from the board of trustees. The board shall take final action upon the petition at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the recommendation of the commission. Granting of the petition seeking removal of landmark designation shall be by a four-fifths vote of the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 6, 8-7-79) 
Secs. 17-20-17-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDMARKS PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 17-31. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Kenmore Landmarks Preservation Commission. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 2, 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-32. - Members. 
(a)  The landmarks preservation commission shall consist of five (5) members, four (4) of whom must reside within the village. The fifth member may reside outside the village provided his primary place of business is located within the village. The commission shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  The mayor or his personal representative; 
(2)  The historian of the village; 
(3)  One member chosen from a list of three (3) persons nominated by the Tonawanda-Kenmore Historical Society; 
(4)  One member chosen from a list of three (3) persons nominated by the Kenmore Merchants Association; 
(5)  One at-large member who shall possess professional qualifications evidencing expertise in architecture, city planning, or conservation in general. 
(b)  Commission members in paragraphs (a)(3), (4) and (5) shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for terms of three (3) years, provided that one of the initial members be appointed for one year, one for two (2) years, and one for three (3) years. Subsequently, these members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years as terms expire. Members of the commission may be reappointed after their terms expire and their terms begin immediately. 
(c)  In the event that nominations are not submitted by the appropriate organization within sixty (60) days of receipt of request, the mayor shall proceed to fill the position in the same manner as the at-large position. A vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be filled by a person appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 2(a)-(d), 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-33. - Officers. 
    The commission shall elect from its membership annually a chairman and vice-chairman. The chairman shall preside over the commission. The vice-chairman shall in cases of absence or disability of the chairman perform the duties of the chairman. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 3, 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-34. - Meetings. 
(a)  The commission shall adopt rules which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings. Said rules shall further provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairman or by at least three (3) members of the commission. 
(b)  All commission members, including the chairman, shall have the right to vote. At least three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and any person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the commission prior to the rendering of a decision. 
(c)  The concurring affirmative vote of three (3) members shall constitute approval of plans before it for review or for the adoption of any resolution, motion or other action of the commission. 
(d)  The commission shall keep a record of all of its resolutions, proceedings and actions, which record shall be open to public view. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 3(a)-(d), 8-7-79) 
State Law reference- Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84 et seq. Open Meetings Law, Public Officers Law, § 95 et seq. 
Sec. 17-35. - Rules. 
    The commission may adopt such rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article as shall be necessary to its functions. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 3(e), 8-7-79) 
Sec. 17-36. - Functions. 
    The commission shall have the powers, duties and functions provided for it in this article. 
Sec. 17-37. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  In the event the landmarks preservation commission has less than three (3) duly appointed and confirmed members, the board of trustees shall assume all of the commission's powers, duties, and functions until such time as three (3) members are subsequently appointed and confirmed as set forth in section 17-32. 
(L.L. No. 7-2014, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Secs. 17-38-17-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS AND OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Driveways, § 25-73. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-51. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the village to care for the safety, health, comfort, and general welfare of the inhabitants, the protection of property and preservation of property values, and to restrict the parking of motor vehicles within certain areas of the village, and to provide for the convenience, safety and accommodation of the public by the adoption of minimum requirements for the construction and maintenance of driveways and off-street parking areas on lots facing or abutting on any street, avenue or roadway, or portion thereof, located within the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 1, 4-20-65, as amended, 2-1-72) 
Sec. 17-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected area shall mean all lots as shown on subdivision maps filed in the county clerk's office which either face or abut on any street, avenue or roadway in the village. 
    Driveway shall mean an area not more than ten (10) feet in width used primarily for the purposes of the ingress and egress of motor vehicles and not adjacent to an area used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Licensed area shall mean an area for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, and is still in effect. 
    Off-street parking area shall mean an area on lots fronting or abutting on any street, avenue or roadway in the village, for the standing of vehicles, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers and including gasoline stations and areas used for the display of motor vehicles for sale. 
    Period of construction shall mean the time during which a parcel of real property is being devoted to a new construction use and shall include demolition, leveling, and grading periods, as well as periods during which building construction is fully or partially under way. 
    Unlicensed area shall mean an off-street parking area for which no permit has been issued or in connection with which a permit has expired or been cancelled, or from which the sign required by section 17-55 has been removed. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 2, 10-19-65, as amended, 2-1-72; L.L. No. 2-1975, § 1, 7-1-75) 
Sec. 17-53. - Paving and drainage. 
(a)  Each driveway or off-street parking area shall be paved with not less than six (6) inches of concrete placed upon a solid base or with six (6) inches of asphaltic concrete, measured after each layer has been compacted with at least a three-ton roller and placed upon a solid base. 
(b)  Storm drainage facilities which, in the opinion of the board of trustees, are necessary for the proper drainage of the area, shall be installed, together with the proper catchbasins. 
(c)  The pavement shall be so pitched from the sidewalk that all surface water will run to the receivers. In case the paved portion is a driveway, it may be pitched to the street so long as it does not act as a drain for other portions of the property. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 6(a)-(c), 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-54. - Barriers. 
(a)  Each off-street parking area adjacent to a street shall have barriers at or within the lot lines on all sides of the parcel adjacent to streets. 
(b)  Barriers placed on the lot line shall be of metal, erected upon posts set in concrete to a depth of at least forty-two (42) inches. The barrier shall be of the beam rail type and the bottom of the rail shall be at least twenty (20) inches and not more than twenty-four (24) inches from the top of the parking area. 
(c)  In lieu of barriers on the lot line, barriers of concrete, wood or metal, at least eight (8) inches in height, may be placed not less than four (4) feet from the lot line and properly secured. 
(d)  Openings in the barriers shall be permitted to the width of authorized driveway curb cuts and opposite thereto and in the event a barrier shall be twenty (20) or more feet in length, then and in that event an opening of not to exceed three (3) feet for ingress and egress of pedestrians shall be permitted within each twenty (20) feet. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 6(d), 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-55. - Posting notice. 
(a)  Each off-street parking area shall be assigned an identifying number by the village which shall continue during the existence of the off-street parking area and shall be identical to the permit number. 
(b)  The owner or occupant shall post a sign procured from the village upon an appropriate standard at each entrance to and exit from the off-street parking area reading as follows: 
(1)  If not a temporary permit: 
"LICENSED OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, NO. _____". 
(2)  If the permit is temporary: 
"TEMPORARY OFF-STREET PARKING AREA PERMIT, TEMPORARY NO. _____." 
The first sign for each area shall be furnished by the village without cost. The owner or occupant shall maintain said sign in proper condition and shall replace same upon notice from the village by procuring said replacement from the village and pay therefor the cost thereof as from time to time established by local law or resolution of the board of trustees. All signs shall remain the property of the village and may be removed by the village upon the expiration of a permit or upon cancellation by the board of trustees as herein provided. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 7, 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-56. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked in any unlicensed off-street parking area. 
(b)  In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration displayed on a motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle in the place where such violation occurred. 
(c)  A violation of the provisions of subsection (a) shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), as may be designated from time to time by the police court of the village pursuant to General Municipal Law, § 372. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, §§ 4, 8, 10, 10-19-65) 
Cross reference- Parking on private property, § 21-49; entrance or exits from off-street parking lots, § 21-50; parking at municipal building, § 21-51; metered parking, § 21-66 et seq. 
Sec. 17-57. - Suspension of article and issuance of temporary permits. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended by the board of trustees and a temporary permit issued for a particular off-street parking area which was in use on October 19, 1965. The board may impose conditions upon the issuance of said temporary permit and set a time within which certain improvements must be completed and a date within which there must be full compliance with the provisions of this article. A temporary permit may be cancelled by the board of trustees upon five (5) days' notice to the licensee, given either personally or by certified or registered mail for a violation of any of the terms of the temporary permit or of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, or of any other village law, the board of trustees may, at the request of an owner of land located in a business use district, grant a temporary permit for off-street parking for all or a portion of such land located in a business use district during a period of construction involving such land or a portion thereof; such temporary permit to be granted on such terms and conditions as to the board may appear just and proper including a waiver of some or all of the minimum requirements imposed by sections 17-53 and 17-54. No such temporary permit shall be granted except upon receipt by the board of a letter of intent from the owner certifying the intention to complete the construction project planned for the site at a date certain. Such temporary permit may be renewed by the board from time to time, provided that the total term of such permit and any extensions or renewals thereof, shall not exceed one year. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 5(d), 10-19-65; L.L. No. 2-1975, § 2, 7-10-75) 
Secs. 17-58-17-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 17-71. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lots in the affected area to use or permit the use of an off-street parking area without first having secured a permit therefor from the board of trustees as herein provided. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 3, 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-72. - Application. 
    The owner or occupant of any lot in the affected area desiring to establish or continue an off-street parking area, shall make application for a permit upon forms to be furnished by the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 5(a), 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-73. - Fee. 
    There shall be no fee for a permit for an off-street parking area. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 5(a), 10-19-65) 
Sec. 17-74. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Off-street parking area permits shall expire on the first day of August of each year, except that temporary permits may be issued by the board of trustees for shorter periods and upon such conditions as the board of trustees may impose. 
(b)  Applications for the renewal of permits shall be filed at least sixty (60) days before their expiration date. 
(L.L. No. 1-1965, § 5(b), (c), 10-19-65) 
Secs. 17-75-17-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF A VILLAGE PLANNING BOARD 

Sec. 17-85. - Purpose. 
    A need has been shown for the establishment of a planning board in the village to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. This local law is enacted to establish the planning board of the village and the procedures under which it will operate. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-86. - Establishment. 
    A village planning board is hereby established to compose, establish, develop, enact and enforce a comprehensive plan for the growth and development of this village, and the use of property located therein. A more complete statement of purposes and authority of this board is set forth herein. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-87. - Authorization. 
    The village board of trustees (hereinafter called the "trustees") hereby authorizes the establishment of a village planning board (hereinafter called "board") consisting of five (5) voting members. The board, established pursuant to Village Law, § 7-718, shall have all the powers and duties set forth therein, in addition to any powers provided herein. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-88. - Board members. 
    Board members and the board chair shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the trustees. Such members of the board shall complete any training and education courses required by resolution by the trustees or the board. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-89. - Alternate members. 
    The mayor shall have the right to appoint, subject to the approval of the trustees, two (2) alternate members (first and second) to the board. Such alternate members shall have all the requirements for eligibility of regular board members. Alternate members shall enjoy the same rights and privileges as regular board members, including the right to participate in all discussions; provided, however, that an alternate member shall be entitled to vote only when a regular board member is not present or is disqualified from voting. When a board member will not be voting, the board chair shall authorize such regular member's voting authority to the first alternate and in his/her absence to the second alternate. Any further reference herein to board member shall include any alternate, unless otherwise indicated. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-90. - Membership eligibility and ineligibility. 
(a)  Eligibility. Board members shall be residents of the village and/or shall own and/or operate a business within the village. All members will be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Ineligibility. Board members who, during their term, relocate their permanent place of residence outside the village, or, in the case of owners and/or operators of businesses within the village, who cease to operate and/or own said business in the village may, at the discretion of the mayor, remain until completion of the appointed term. 
No person who is a trustee or a member of the zoning board of appeals or housing authority shall be eligible for membership on the board. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-91. - Terms of members. 
    The terms of board members shall be for five (5) years and so fixed that the term of one board member shall expire at the end of each official village year. At the expiration of the term of each member, his or her successor shall be appointed for a term not to exceed five (5) years in order to structure the terms so that no more than one term expires each official village year. Successors shall then be appointed for terms which shall be equal in years to the number of board members. Alternate members shall be appointed for one- or two-year terms and shall be staggered to ensure that an experienced first alternate is on the board at all times. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-92. - Vacancies in office. 
    Vacancies occurring other than by the expiration of terms of office shall be filled only for the remainder of an unexpired term. If a board member vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of a term, the board, acting through its chair, shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of such vacancy, propose to the mayor, a list of candidates to fill said vacancy and within sixty (60) days after the date, one or more candidates to fill the new member vacancy. The mayor shall either appoint a new member from the board's candidate list, or the mayor's own candidate, which shall be subject to the approval of the trustees. Any vacancy in the position of the alternate board member shall be filled in the same manner. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-93. - Removal of members. 
    Once appointed, board members may only be removed for cause. The mayor, subject to the approval of the trustees, shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, for cause. Cause for removal shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to the training and education as established by resolution of the trustees; 
(b)  Noncompliance with meeting attendance requirements established by resolution of the trustees; 
(c)  Failure to comply with the residency requirements set forth herein; 
(d)  Failure to disclose conflicts of interest; 
(e)  Physical or mental impairment affecting the board member's ability to perform; 
(f)  Failure to comply with the applicable village law covering ethics of village officers; and 
(g)  Such other causes established by law. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-94. - Coordination with trustees, other boards and village officials. 
    The board shall coordinate its reviews and decisions with the building inspector, code enforcement official, clerk/treasurer, attorney, and other officials designated by the board of trustees on a regular basis. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-95. - Compensation. 
    Board members shall serve without compensation. Reimbursement for authorized travel, subsistence and out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of a member's duties may be made from one of the board's dedicated accounts. 
    Board members seeking authorization for expenditures and reimbursements must make his/her/their request(s) in writing. Said request will be approved by the chair, and the clerk treasurer, and is to then be submitted to the trustees for approval. In the case of the chair, authorization for expenditures and reimbursements must be in writing from the mayor. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-96. - Chair duties. 
    All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair, or in his or her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-97. - Rules and regulations. 
    The board may, after public hearing, recommend to the trustees regulations relating to any subject matter over which the board has jurisdiction. Adoption of any such regulations by the trustees shall be by local law. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-98. - Meetings. 
    All board meetings shall be in public, subject to the requirements and provisions of the New York State Open Meetings Law (Public Officers Law, § 100 et seq.), including the advertisement and posting of legal notices. All board actions subject to a formal vote shall be conducted during public sessions and recorded by the board secretary. All public meeting sessions of the board in which formal board business is to take place must be attended by a quorum of the board which shall consist of three (3) voting members. All board voting with respect to ministerial meeting matters (i.e., to adjourn, to end, to enter into executive session) shall be by the vote of a simple majority of those members attending. All voting by the board on fiscal matters (i.e., appropriations, fees, expenses, income, payments), as well as all other actions requiring same shall be by a vote of a majority plus one (four (4)) of the board. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-99. - Reporting. 
    The board chair shall submit monthly reports to the mayor and an annual report to the mayor and trustees summarizing board activities and finances. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-100. - Report on referred matters; general reports. 
(a)  The trustees may, by resolution, provide for the reference of any matter or class of matters to the board before final action is taken thereon by the trustees or any other office, officer or board of the village having final authority over said matter. The trustees may further stipulate that final action thereon shall not be taken until the board has submitted its report thereon, or has had a reasonable time, to be fixed by the trustees in said resolution, to submit the report. 
(b)  The board shall have the full power and authority to make studies, investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations relating to the planning and development of the village as it seems desirable, providing the total expenditures of the board shall not exceed the appropriations provided therefore. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-101. - Board appropriations and fees. 
    The trustees hereby authorize the board to establish and impose fees and to collect its expenses from applicants seeking board actions and to make payments therefore as the board may see fit for such expenses. The board shall have the power and authority to engage and employ experts, clerks, and a secretary and to pay for their services, and to provide for such other expenses as may be necessary and proper; provided, however, that such costs and expenses shall not exceed the board's fees and expense revenues, as supplemented by any appropriation made by the trustees. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 17-102. - Effective date. 
    This local law shall be effective immediately upon filing with the secretary of state. 
(L.L. 3-2002, § 1, 3-20-02) 
Secs. 17-103-17-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 17-150. - Legislative and local authority; purpose. 
(1)  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Village of Kenmore in Village Law, § 7-725(a) and Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10. 
(2)  Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to define the procedures for the village planning board review of development proposed throughout the village to ensure that the design elements are in compliance with the protection of the health, safety and overall welfare of the community. The intent of site plan review is to evaluate site plans and require changes consistent with minimizing conflicts which may result between the site layout and design of proposed uses and natural site conditions and features and/or existing or planned adjacent uses. Site plan review is also responsible for ensuring that development complies with clearly calculated planning goals and policies such as are provided in the village's comprehensive plan and other area-specific planning documents. 
(b)  These regulations provide site plan review submission requirements and evaluation criteria to allow the village planning board to make a fair and informed decision as to whether the development, as proposed, is in compliance with concern for the health, safety and welfare of the environment, village residents and adjacent uses. 
(3)  Village planning board authority to review site plans. The mayor and the board of trustees of the village authorize the village planning board, with the advice of the village building inspector, to review and approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove site plans on a village-wide basis. In this regard, the village planning board, with the advice of the village building inspector, is authorized to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to a proposed site plan. Upon approval of said site plan, any such conditions must be met in connection with the issuance of permits by applicable village officials. 
(L.L. 4-2002, § 1, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 17-151. - Applicability. 
(1)  Uses requiring site plan approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit in any zoning district or a permit for a change of to an unpermitted use or that would result in an increase in a nonconforming use or approval of a special use, the planning board shall require site plan review in accordance with the provisions of this article. Site plan review is required for all new land use activities, including new structures, new uses to unpermitted uses, expansions of existing structures, and new special uses, except for those specifically exempted in the following section. 
(2)  Exempted uses. The following land use activities are exempted from the site plan review requirements of this article: 
(a)  Construction of a single one- or two-family dwelling on an approved building lot, including residential subdivisions, meeting the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Permitted accessory structures to one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Ordinary repair or maintenance or interior alterations to existing structures or uses. For industrial or commercial structures, this exemption is limited to alterations that do not substantially change the nature or use. 
(d)  Exterior alterations or additions to one- and two-family dwellings, except where green space is significantly diminished under the proposed addition. 
(e)  Incidental landscaping or grading. 
(f)  Expansions of legally existing structures or uses that do not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
    Notwithstanding the exemptions listed above, the village planning board may review site plans and approval thereof, upon referral of the building inspector, at his or her discretion. 
(3)  Existing uses and structures. This article does not apply to uses and structures that are lawfully in existence as of the date this article is adopted [August 6, 2002]. Any use that would otherwise be subject to this article, which has been discontinued for a period of six (6) months or more, shall be subject to review pursuant to the terms herein defined before such use is resumed. Any use or structure shall be considered to be in existence; provided that such use or structure has started prior to the effective date of this article and is fully constructed and completed within one year after the effective date of these regulations. 
(4)  Uncertain applicability. Any person uncertain of the applicability of the provisions of this article to a given land use activity may apply in writing to the village planning board for a written jurisdictional determination. 
(L.L. 4-2002, § 1, 8-6-02; L.L. No. 4-2008, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 17-152. - Procedures. 
(1)  Site plan review and approval process. The applicant shall prepare the site plan and apply to the village building department or clerk treasurer, who shall refer the application, when complete in all respects, to the planning board for review and approval and to the village building department for advice. 
(2)  Procedure for site plan approval. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt (or within up to sixty-two (62) additional days if necessary) of the complete site plan from the village clerk/treasurer, the village planning board shall render a decision on the site plan. The time period in which the planning board must render a decision on the site plan may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the village planning board. 
(b)  Approval. Upon approval, or approval with conditions, the planning board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the site plan and shall immediately file a copy of the site plan in the village clerk/treasurer's office. At this time a building permit may be issued if the project conforms to all other applicable requirements. A copy of the written statement of approval shall be mailed to the applicant. The written statement shall contain a list of modifications or conditions if required. 
(c)  Disapproval. Upon disapproval of the site plan, the decision of the village planning board shall immediately be filed with the village clerk/treasurer and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant by certified mail along with a letter stating the reasons for disapproval. 
(d)  A site plan approval by the village planning board, shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of such approval. The applicant may request an extension of time to initiate the required site improvements, provided that the applicant can show reasonable cause for the inability to initiate such improvements within the one-year period. If the application extension is not approved, the village planning board shall give reasons why this extension was not granted. 
(L.L. 4-2002, § 1, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 17-153. - Content of the site plan. 
(a)  Any person, before applying for a building permit, change of use or special use permit, or before undertaking any new land use activity at any location within the village for which this article requires site plan review, shall submit a site plan together with supporting information to the village planning board for review and approval in accordance with the requirements, standards and procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  All such site plan maps and accompanying reports shall be prepared by a civil engineer or surveyor licensed to practice in the state. Such plans and information shall be of sufficient detail to permit adequate review by an architect, civil engineer, surveyor, land planner or other competent person. The site plan shall be drawn at a scale of fifty (50) feet to one inch or larger. The village planning board may, at its discretion, waive any proposed site plan submission requirements which are not relevant to the proposed use and site, except that the village planning board may not waive any requirement that a stormwater pollution prevention plan be submitted. Generally, the preliminary site plan shall include, but is not limited to the following information: 
A.  Legal data. 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of record. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, firm or organization preparing the map and/or survey. 
(3)  The date, north point and written graphic scale. 
(4)  Sufficient description or information to define precisely the boundaries of the property. All distances shall be in feet and tenths of a foot. 
(5)  The locations, names and existing widths of adjacent streets and curb lines. 
(6)  The locations and owners of all lands within two hundred (200) feet of all site boundaries, as shown on the latest tax records, and the tax map identification numbers. 
(7)  The location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements, setbacks, reservations and areas dedicated to public use within or adjacent to the property, to include public infrastructure as well as parks, walkways, accesses and permanent open space. 
(8)  A complete outline of existing deed restrictions or covenants applying to the property. 
(9)  Existing zoning within five hundred (500) feet of the site's perimeter. 
(10)  Tape location map and the distance to the nearest public street right-of-way intersection. 
B.  Existing structures, utilities, communications facilities and other features. 
(1)  The size and location of uses and outlines of all existing structures, drawn to scale, on and within one hundred (100) feet of the lot line. 
(2)  Paved areas, sidewalks and vehicular access between the site and public streets. 
(3)  Traffic flow patterns within the site, entrances and exits, loading and unloading areas and curb cuts on the site and within two hundred (200) feet of the site boundary. The village planning board, may, at its discretion, require a detailed traffic study for large developments or those in heavy traffic areas to include: 
(a)  The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic intervals. 
(b)  The projected traffic flow pattern, including vehicular movements at all major intersections, likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site. 
(c)  The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and private ways in relation to existing road capacities and intersection levels of service. Existing and proposed daily and peak hour traffic volume as well as road capacities and intersection levels of service shall also be given. 
(4)  The locations, dimensions, grades and flow directions of existing sewers, drainage ditches, culverts and water lines, as well as other communication facilities or underground and above ground utilities within or adjacent to the property. 
(5)  Other existing development, including fences, retaining walls, landscaping and screening. 
(6)  Historic or archaeological resources on or adjacent to the site. 
C.  Proposed development. 
(1)  The location and size (in acres or square feet), type of construction and exterior dimensions of proposed building or structural improvements. In all cases, the relationship of various uses and buildings to one another and their scale must be clearly shown. (Note: Elevations and/or sections illustrating front, rear, and side profiles drawn to the same or larger scale as the site development plan may be required by the village planning board. The elevations and/or sections shall clearly delineate the bulk and height of all buildings and other permanent structures included in the proposal and the height and dimension of all signs.) 
(2)  The location and design of all uses not requiring structures, such as off-street parking and loading areas and solid waste storage areas. 
(3)  The location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed outdoor lighting. 
(4)  The location, size, design and materials for all proposed outdoor signs. 
(5)  The location and arrangement of proposed means of access and egress and on-site circulation, including sidewalks and other pedestrian access, driveways, fire lanes and other emergency zones or other paved areas. Profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing width of the roadways, location and width of sidewalks and construction materials. 
(6)  A landscaping plan showing location, type and size of all proposed plantings, including trees, shrubs and ground coverings, as well as a planting schedule. The dimensions of any required landscape screening or buffer areas shall be clearly marked. 
(7)  The descriptions of the water supply system, including location and size of all proposed water lines, valves and hydrants, and of all sewer lines and alternate means of water supply, storm and sanitary sewer. 
(8)  An outline of any proposed easements, deed restrictions or covenants. 
(9)  Any contemplated public improvements on or adjoining the property. 
(10)  Any proposed new grades, indicating clearly how such grades will meet existing grades of adjacent property. 
(11)  The location of outdoor storage and the waste receptacles and proposed screening for such. 
(12)  The location and construction materials of all existing or proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences. 
(13)  The location, design and construction materials of all energy generation and distribution facilities, including electrical, gas and solar energy. 
(14)  If the site plan indicates only a first stage, a supplementary plan shall indicate ultimate development. 
(15)  The percentage of the site dedicated to the provision of open space and the location and development of all proposed buffer areas, including indication of proposed vegetative cover. 
(16)  Any setbacks or other dimensional information required by this chapter. 
(17)  A record of application and approval status of all necessary permits from federal, state, county and local agencies. 
(18)  The estimated project construction schedule. 
(19)  An estimate of the total cost of the proposed site improvements which shall be confirmed by the appropriate building department officials. 
D.  [Additional information required by checklist.] Any other information required by the most current checklist prepared by the village building department in order to conduct its review or information requested by the village planning board. 
E.  An environmental assessment form. 
F.  [Information needed to determine conformity.] Any other information deemed by the village planning board to be necessary to determine conformity of the site plan with the spirit and intent of this article and the village comprehensive plan or other adopted planning studies. 
G.  Stormwater management information. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed development under article VI of chapter 17, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP in accordance with subsection 17-158B. 
(L.L. 4-2002, § 1, 8-6-02; L.L. 1-2008, §§ 3, 4, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-154. - Site plan review guidelines. 
(a)  Factors for consideration during the site plan review. The village planning board's review of a preliminary site plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following considerations: 
(1)  The adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation, including intersections, road widths, channelization structures and traffic controls. 
(2)  The adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation, including separation of pedestrians from vehicular traffic, sidewalks, linkages, control of intersections with vehicular traffic and pedestrian convenience. 
(3)  The location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street parking and loading areas. 
(4)  The location, arrangement, size, design and general site compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs. Such consideration may include compatibility of construction materials, design and theme relationship of uses by type and scale. 
(5)  The adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise deterring buffer between the proposed use and adjoining uses or properties between uses on the site. 
(6)  In the case of an apartment complex or multiple dwellings, the adequacy of usable open space for playgrounds and informal recreation. 
(7)  The protection of adjacent properties from noise, glare, unsightliness or other objectionable features. 
(8)  The adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas susceptible to flooding, ponding, or erosion. 
(9)  The preservation and compatibility with natural features and surrounding uses. 
(10)  The overall impact on the neighborhood, including compatibility of design and effect of the neighborhood. 
(11)  Conformity with the village comprehensive plan and other plans which the village uses as a guide for appropriate development. 
(12)  If a stormwater pollution prevention plan is submitted in accordance with subsection 17-153(b)G., compliance of the SWPPP and site plan with the requirements of article VI of chapter 17. 
(b)  Standards for review and design. The village planning board, in reviewing site plans, shall consider the standards set forth below: 
(1)  All buildings in the plan shall be integrated with each other and with adjacent buildings and shall have convenient access to and from adjacent uses. 
(2)  Individual buildings shall be related to each other and to structures and open spaces in the surrounding area in architecture, design, mass, materials, placement and connections to harmonize visually and physically. 
(3)  Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings, where appropriate, based on visibility, shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to treatment given to street frontages of these same buildings. 
(4)  The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take advantage of the natural topography of the project where site appropriate. 
(5)  All buildings shall be arranged to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities, wherever possible, and shall be oriented to preserve visual and auditory privacy between adjacent buildings. 
(6)  All buildings shall be accessible to emergency vehicles. 
(7)  Landscaping shall be an integral part of the entire project area and shall buffer the site from and/or integrate the site with the surrounding area, as appropriate. 
(8)  Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover and shade trees and shall combine with appropriate walks and street surfaces to provide an attractive development pattern. Landscape materials selected should be appropriate to the growing conditions of the village's environment. 
(9)  Wherever appropriate, existing trees shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape design plan. 
(10)  There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and loading space. Such circulation activities should be segregated wherever possible. 
(11)  Roads, pedestrian walks and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall site design, be properly related to existing and proposed buildings and be appropriately landscaped. 
(12)  Buildings and vehicular circulation areas shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between are not necessarily exposed to vehicular traffic. 
(13)  Landscaped, paved or appropriately surfaced and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent buildings. 
(14)  The materials and design of paving, light fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good appearance, easily maintained and indicative of their function. 
(15)  Lighting shall be adequate to provide safety and security. Lighting shall generally illuminate only the site in question and shall definitely not negatively impact adjacent uses. 
(16)  Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness. 
(17)  Parking facilities shall be designed with regard for orderly management, topography, landscaping and ease of access and shall be developed as an integral part of the overall site design. 
(18)  Any above-grade loading facility shall be screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness. 
(19)  Off-street parking and loading requirements required in this chapter shall be satisfied. 
(20)  Drainage of the site and surface waters flowing therefrom shall not adversely affect adjacent properties or public roadways. 
(21)  All site improvements, where required, shall comply with the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act and with all other applicable laws, rules and ordinances. 
(22)  If a stormwater pollution prevention plan is submitted in accordance with subsection 17-153(b)G., the development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the performance and design criteria and standards set forth in article VI of chapter 17. 
(L.L. 4-2002, § 1, 8-6-02; L.L. No. 1-2008, §§ 5, 6, 1-15-08) 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 17-155. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below: 
    Agricultural activity. The activity of an active farm including grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural products, cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities. 
    Applicant. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a land development activity. 
    Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area. 
    Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clearing. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
    Design manual. The state stormwater management design manual (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most recent version or its successor, including applicable updates, which serves as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and practices. 
    Developer. A person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Erosion control manual. The New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004), most current version or its successor, commonly known as the Blue Book. 
    Grading. Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Impervious cover. Those surfaces, improvements and structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks driveways, etc.). 
    Industrial stormwater permit. A state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
    Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development activity. Construction activity including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or construction activity disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or more in the aggregate, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
    Landowner. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Licensed professional. A landscape architect or professional engineer licensed to practice his or her profession in New York State. 
    Maintenance agreement. A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    NYSDEC. The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
    Phasing. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Pollutant of concern. Sediment or a water quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development activity. 
    Project. Land development activity. 
    Recharge. The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
    Sediment control. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Sensitive areas. Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species. 
    SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity, Permit No. GP-02-01. A permit under the state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land. 
    SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02. A permit under the state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards. 
    Stabilization. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Stop-work order. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Stormwater. Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage. 
    Stormwater management. The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment. 
    Stormwater management facility. One or a series of stormwater management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of controlling stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management officer (SMO). an officer or employee designated by the village board to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs), forward the plans to the board of the village which is reviewing an application for a construction activity requiring submission of a SWPPP, and inspect stormwater management practices. 
    Stormwater management practices (SMPs). Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan for controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction activities. 
    Stormwater runoff. Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Surface waters of the state. Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the state and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. 
    Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of the state. 
    Village. The Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Village board. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waterway. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-156. - Findings; purpose. 
A.  Findings. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Such stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species; 
(3)  Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat; 
(4)  Improper design and construction of stormwater management practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation; 
(5)  Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow; 
(6)  Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the waters of the village; 
(7)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from land development activities; 
(8)  The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety; and 
(9)  Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards governing stormwater management and site design will produce development compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in subsection A. This article seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives: 
(1)  Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised; 
(2)  Require land development activities to conform to the substantive requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity, Permit No. GP-02-01, or as amended or revised; 
(3)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
(4)  Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land development activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(5)  Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(6)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and ensure that these management practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-157. - General provisions. 
A.  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all land development activities. 
B.  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review under this article: 
(1)  Agricultural activity; 
(2)  Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject to this article; 
(3)  Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five (5) acres and are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility; 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary by the SMO; 
(5)  Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the village on or before the effective date of this article; 
(6)  Land development activities for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this article; 
(7)  Cemetery graves; 
(8)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(9)  Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or natural resources; 
(10)  Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing flowers, vegetables or other plants primarily for use by that person and his or her family; and 
(11)  Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing structure. 
C.  Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-158. - Procedure. 
    The procedures applicable to all land development activities subject to review under this article are as follows: 
A.  The village shall designate an SMO who shall accept and review all SWPPPs. The SMO may: 
(1)  Review the SWPPPs; 
(2)  Upon approval by the village board, engage the services of a registered professional engineer to review the SWPPPs, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by the village board; or 
(3)  Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the SWPPPs comply with the requirements of this article. 
B.  For all land development activities subject to review and approval by the village planning board under site plan, regulations, the applicant or developer shall be required to submit an SWPPP that complies with the requirements of this article to the SMO, and the land development activity shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this article. 
(1)  Initial review by SMO. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an SWPPP, the SMO shall forward the SWPPP, together with his or her written recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP, to the board of the village which is reviewing the application for approval of a land development activity requiring submission of a SWPPP. A recommendation of approval shall only be given if the SWPPP complies with the requirements of this article. In making a recommendation to approve with modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in writing. 
(2)  Review by final reviewing body. The board of the village which is reviewing the application for approval of a land development activity shall review the SWPPP and recommendation of the SMO and shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP. Such reviewing body shall not act to approve the SWPPP unless it complies with the requirements of this article. If the reviewing body acts to approve with modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the reasons for the decision shall be stated in writing. In order to be approved, the applicant shall revise a SWPPP that has been approved with modifications or disapproved in accordance with the recommendations of the reviewing body and shall submit the revised SWPPP to such body for review. 
C.  For all land development activities not subject to review by the village planning board as provided in subsection B., the applicant or developer shall be required to submit an SWPPP that complies with the standards contained in this article to the SMO. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an SWPPP, the SMO shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP. Approval shall only be given if the SWPPP complies with the requirements of this article. In approving with modifications or disapproving the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in writing. In order to be approved, an applicant shall revise an SWPPP that has been approved with modifications or disapproved in accordance with the recommendations of the SMO and shall submit the revised SWPPP to the SMO for review. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-159. - Stormwater pollution prevention plans. 
A.  Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed and no land development activity shall be commenced until the SMO or the board of the village reviewing an application for approval of a land development activity requiring submission of an SWPPP has received an SWPPP that complies with the specifications in this article. 
B.  Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans. 
(1)  All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and erosion and sediment controls: 
(a)  Background information about the scope of the project, including the location, type and size of the project. 
(b)  Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a general location map. The site map should be at a scale of no smaller than one inch to one hundred (100) feet. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the land development activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s); 
(c)  Description of the soil(s) present at the site; 
(d)  Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the erosion control manual, not more than five (5) acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP; 
(e)  Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff; 
(f)  Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill prevention and response; 
(g)  Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project close-out; 
(h)  A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s), size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice; 
(i)  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins; 
(j)  Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control measures; 
(k)  Implementation schedule for stating temporary erosion and sediment control practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration that each practice should remain in place; 
(l)  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the erosion and sediment control practice; 
(m)  Name(s) of the receiving water(s); 
(n)  Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of the site; 
(o)  Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable; and 
(p)  Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site. 
(2)  Land development activities meeting condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity and water quality controls (post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in subsection B.(3) as applicable: 
Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on NYSDEC's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the impairment. 
Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five (5) or more acres. 
Condition C. Stormwater runoff from land development activity disturbing between one and five (5) acres of land during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single family residences and construction activities at agricultural properties. 
(3)  SWPPP requirements for condition A, B or C (post-construction stormwater runoff controls): 
(a)  All information in subsection B.(1); 
(b)  Description of each post-construction stormwater management practice; 
(c)  Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management practice; 
(d)  Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the stormwater management system for the applicable design storms; 
(e)  Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions with pre-development conditions; 
(f)  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each post-construction stormwater management practice; 
(g)  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each post-construction stormwater management practice; 
(h)  Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer of title to the property; 
(i)  Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with section 17-161; and 
(4)  The SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed professional and must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the requirements in this article. 
C.  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
D.  Contractor certification. 
(a)  Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards." 
(b)  The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. 
(c)  The certification statement(s) shall be included with and become part of the SWPPP for the land development activity. 
E.  [On-site records.] A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-160. - Performance and design criteria for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control. 
    All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance and design criteria: 
A.  Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this article: 
(1)  The design manual; and 
(2)  The erosion control manual. 
B.  Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with the technical standards set forth in subsection A., the applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to such technical standards. 
C.  Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the state. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-161. - Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater facilities. 
A.  Maintenance and inspection during construction. 
(1)  The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced by fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  For land development activities meeting condition A, B, or C in subsection 17-159B.(2), the applicant shall have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every seven (7) days and within twenty-four (24) hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inches of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site log book. 
B.  Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the county clerk after approval by the counsel for the village. 
C.  Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  [Maintenance.] A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this article. 
(2)  [Procedures.] Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new maintenance personnel. 
(3)  [Discharges.] Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with section 17-160. 
(4)  Maintenance agreements. The village shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the county clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the "sample stormwater control facility maintenance agreement" attached to this article as appendix A. The village, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 17-162. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Notwithstanding any other enforcement provisions set forth in this Code, the following provisions shall govern the administration and enforcement of this article. 
A.  Construction inspection. 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control inspection. The SMO may require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this article and may either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements of this article and the SWPPP as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the SMO at least forty-eight (48) hours before any of the following, as required by the SMO: 
(a)  Start of construction; 
(b)  Installation of sediment and erosion control measures; 
(c)  Completion of site clearing; 
(d)  Completion of rough grading; 
(e)  Completion of final grading; 
(f)  Close of the construction season; 
(g)  Completion of final landscaping; and/or 
(h)  Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas. 
If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the SMO. 
(2)  Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is responsible for conducting inspections of SMPs. All applicants are required to submit "as-built" plans for any SMPs located on site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(3)  Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater management practices. 
(4)  Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this article as are necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(5)  Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is made between private property and the public storm water system, the landowner shall grant to the village the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in subsection A.(3). 
B.  Performance guarantee. 
(1)  Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development activities related to compliance with all conditions set forth by the village in its approval of the SWPPP, the village may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the village as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the village based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the village, provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a one year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to village. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from liability. 
(2)  Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the village with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the village may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs. 
(3)  Recordkeeping. The village may require entities subject to this article to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this article. 
C.  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Notice of violation. When the village determines that a land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner, developer, and/or applicant. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(a)  The name and address of the landowner, developer, and/or applicant; 
(b)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(c)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(d)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(e)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(2)  Stop-work orders. The village may issue a stop-work order for violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the village confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(3)  Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to the provisions of this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(4)  Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(5)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this article, the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said building or land. 
(6)  Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the village may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
D.  Fees for services. The village may require any person undertaking land development activities regulated by this article to pay a fee, as set by the village board from time to time, for review of SWPPPs and related inspections. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Secs. 17-163-17-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL INCENTIVE BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 1-2009, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2008, added Art. V, consisting of §§ 17-155-17-157, to the Code. Inasmuch as Arts. V and VI, which included §§ 17-155-17-157, already existed, the new provisions have been redesignated as set out herein at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 17-175. - Establishment; members. 
    An industrial and commercial incentive board for the village consisting of three (3) members is hereby established. The board of trustees shall appoint the members and designate one of them chairperson by resolution. 
(L.L. No. 1-2009, § 1, 2-3-09) 
Sec. 17-176. - Reports. 
    The industrial and commercial incentive board shall, within a time to be fixed by the board of trustees, present a report and plan to the board of trustees concerning the following: 
(a)  The various types of business property which should be granted eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad valorem levies authorized by Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b. 
(b)  Limiting the applicability of the exemption to specific divisions and major groups as defined in the standard industrial classification manual published by the United States Government. 
(c)  Whether the exemption shall be computed in the manner specified in subdivision 2 or 12 of Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b. 
(d)  Specific geographic areas of the village within which the exemption should be offered. 
(e)  Reduction of the per centum of exemption otherwise allowed pursuant to Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b. 
(f)  The minimum value of construction, alteration, installation or improvement required to qualify for the exemption. 
(g)  Other actions deemed desirable to improve the economic climate within the village. 
(h)  Other factors as the board may direct. 
(L.L. No. 1-2009, § 1, 2-3-09) 
Sec. 17-177. - Considerations of the board. 
    In developing the plan and report to the board of trustees, the board shall consider the planning objectives of the village and the areas thereof within which exemptions pursuant to Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b shall be offered, the necessity of the exemption to the attraction or retention of business, the creation or retention of permanent private-sector jobs, the need to allow the exemption to provide employment opportunities and broaden the tax base and other factors the board deems relevant. 
(L.L. No. 1-2009, § 1, 2-3-09) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUBDIVISION OF LAND 

Sec. 17-178. - Title. 
    The official name of this local law and this document shall be the "Village of Kenmore Subdivision Regulations" hereinafter referred to as the "subdivision regulations" or "regulations." 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Sec. 17-179. - Purpose and intent. 
    Article is designed to regulate the subdivision of land in the village where it is appropriate and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The board of trustees finds and determines that these subdivision regulations are necessary to protect and safeguard the village and its residents with respect to subdivision developments (and resubdivisions) in the village which, once accepted, will become a permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the community which the future community will, out of necessity, be forced to adhere. Therefore, this legislation is intended to accomplish the following: 
(a)  To create a process for designating subdivisions. 
(b)  To ensure adequate space for business owners, residents, and visitors. 
(c)  To preserve and enhance the character of the neighborhoods in the village by: 
(1)  Promoting the best use of land and ensuring orderly development and redevelopment of land to obtain harmonious and stable residential and nonresidential areas. 
(2)  Promoting the best interest of the business and residential districts. 
(3)  Promoting the scope and vision of the comprehensive plan for the village. 
(4)  Ensuring the design and installation of high-quality improvements and infrastructure is in compliance with the specifications and standards established by the village. 
(5)  Avoiding, minimizing, or mitigating natural hazards and protecting natural resources. 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Sec. 17-180. - Impermissible actions. 
(a)  In order to maintain the character of the village, and to ensure public health, safety, and welfare within the village is maintained, there shall be no subdivision of land in the village without planning board approval. A subdivision, as provided for herein, shall mean the creation of new parcels through (1) dividing a parcel into two (2) or more separate parcels; (2) combining two (2) or more separate parcels into one or more parcels; (3) boundary line adjustments, which create two (2) new parcels of different dimensions; and (4) the resubdivision of land. 
(b)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plot of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision regulations and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
(c)  In accordance with § 7-732 of the village law of the State of New York, no plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the Erie County clerk's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed in these regulations and is in full compliance with them. 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Sec. 17-181. - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall govern all subdivision and resubdivision of land lying within the village limits of the village. 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Sec. 17-182. - Delegation of authority. 
    By the authority of § 7-728 of the village law of the State of New York, the planning board of the village is hereby authorized and empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, and to approve preliminary plats, within that part of village. 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Sec. 17-183. - Application. 
(a)  All completed applications for a subdivision or resubdivision ("applications") are to be submitted to the village clerk who will then submit the applications to the planning board for review. 
(b)  The planning board shall have the sole discretion and authority to approve or deny applications. 
(c)  Applications shall be designed to be in agreement with objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and in general compliance with the plan for the area. 
(d)  Applications shall be considered pursuant to Village Law §§ 7-728-7-732. 
(L.L. No. 7-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Chapter 18 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-1; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; water, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Sewers, Village Law, § 14-1400 et seq.; police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1., para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of public works of the village, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. I, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall affect only the village. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. II, § 1, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-3. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or cause to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village, any human excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except as herein provided, it shall hereafter be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. If application is made to the superintendent for a temporary-type toilet facility, and if said applicant has theretofore obtained the approval of the county health department, the superintendent may consent to the usage of the same for a temporary period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the village is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. III, 11-10-70) 
State Law reference- Requiring sewer connections, Village Law, § 14-1438. 
Sec. 18-4. - Measurement and tests. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(b)  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids and analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. II, § 9, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-5. - Damaging sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. VI, § 1, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-6. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a), the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failing of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 18-67. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. VII, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-7. - Violations. 
    This section shall not apply to violations of article V, which shall be enforced as provided for therein. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter except section 18-5 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a), shall be guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by reason of such violation. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. VIII, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2008, § 3, 1-15-08) 
Secs. 18-8-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 18-21. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. 
(c)  Issuance of the required permit shall be subject to payment of any fees required pursuant to section 18-51 of the Village of Kenmore Municipal Code. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2016, § 1, 3-1-16) 
Sec. 18-22. - Cost of and liability for connection. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 3, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-23. - Separate building sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 4, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-24. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 5, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-25. - General installation standards and methods. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 6, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-26. - Elevation of building sewer at building line; use of lifting devices. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer or the building drain may be hung on the cellar wall and shall not be less than four (4) inches in size. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 7, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-27. - Connections from sources of ground or surface water. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 8, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-27.1. - Sump pumps. 
    Any sump pump system installed shall be connected to an operational underground bubbler system properly connected to the storm drain or French drain and in full compliance with all other applicable state and local laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(L.L. No. 6-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 18-28. - Connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(b)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, §§ 9, 10, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-29. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 11, 11-10-70) 
Cross reference- Excavations generally, § 19-21 et seq. 
Sec. 18-30. - Persons authorized to do work. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Code which may be construed to require work to be performed by a licensed plumber, any owner of property subject to this chapter who is required to perform work to comply with this chapter may perform such work himself or have such work performed by a member of his immediately family, provided: 
(a)  Such work does not involve connecting with a public sewer; and 
(b)  Owner submits to the superintendent a sketch showing the exact location of the work and a written description of the work signed by the owner and giving his address; and 
(c)  Owner pays a filing fee as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution to village treasurer; and 
(d)  The owner obtains written approval by the superintendent of such plans before commencing work; and 
(e)  The owner notifies the superintendent of completion of work and submits to inspection of completed work by superintendent. 
The superintendent shall maintain a permanent record of work performed pursuant to this section. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. IV, § 12, 11-10-70) 
Secs. 18-31-18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 18-46. - Generally. 
    A scale of annual charges are hereby established and imposed in the village for the use of its sanitary sewer system or any part or parts thereof. Such charges shall be as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system shall be computed quarterly and shall be based upon a rate of one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed on the premises connected with and served by the sanitary sewer system or such part or parts thereof. 
(L.L. No. 2-1979, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-79) 
Sec. 18-47. - Due date and billing. 
    Sewer rents shall be due and payable quarterly and shall accompany the water bill to the premises connected with and served by the sewer system or such part or parts thereof. 
(L.L. No. 1-1972, § 3, 4-15-72) 
Sec. 18-48. - Penalty for late payment. 
    Penalties for the late payment of sewer rents shall be ten (10) percent of the sewer bill for bills paid later than sixty (60) days following the due date of each quarter. 
(L.L. No. 1-1972, § 4, 4-15-72; L.L. No. 2-1972, 6-27-72; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 2, 3-27-79) 
Sec. 18-49. - Collection remedies. 
(a)  Unpaid sewer rents together with the penalties prescribed by this article shall be a lien upon the real property connected with and served by the sewer system and such a lien is prior and superior to every other lien or claim except the lien or an existing tax or water rent. 
(b)  The board of trustees may bring and maintain an action in the name of the village for the foreclosure of such liens for such sewer rents, or such board may certify to the village clerk the amount of any such lien, which has not been paid at the time and in the manner prescribed by this article, with a description of the real property affected thereby, and the board of trustees may include such amount in the annual tax levy and shall levy the same upon the real property in default. 
(L.L. No. 1-1972,§ 5, 4-15-72) 
Sec. 18-50. - Establishment of sewer rents. 
    The Village of Kenmore hereby establishes and imposes sewer rents for the use of the sewer system or any part or parts thereof applicable both to users located within the village and to users located outside of the village and establishes and imposes such sewer rents as an annual charge on real property within the village using such sewer system as follows: All sewer rents imposed and collected in the village are charged at a rate of one dollar eighty-three cents ($1.83) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed on said premises effective December 1, 1995, to be reflected in the quarterly bills issued as of March 1, 1996; and at a rate of one dollar ninety cents ($1.90) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed on said premises effective June 1, 1996, to be reflected in the quarterly bills issued as of September 1, 1996; and at a rate of one dollar ninety-eight cents ($1.98) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed on said premises effective June 1, 1997, to be reflected in the quarterly bills issued as of September 1, 1997; at a rate of two dollars six cents ($2.06) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed on said premises effective June 1, 1998, to be reflected in the quarterly bills issued as of September 1, 1998. 
(L.L. No. 4-1995, § 2, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-51. - Permit, tap-in, and connection fees. 
    The village board of trustees is hereby authorized to set a schedule for tap-in and/or connection fees that shall be payable before authorization is given to tap-in and connect to the sewer. The fee shall be set by resolution and placed on the village's fee schedule. 
(L.L. No. 2-2016, § 2, 3-1-16) 
Secs. 18-52-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED AND HARMFUL DISCHARGES 

Sec. 18-61. - Stormwater, surface water, etc. 
(a)  No person shall hereafter discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Stormwater and all other drainage containing no pollutants, as defined in section 18-69, shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or combined sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, provided that such waters do not contain pollutants, as defined in section 18-69, or to a combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2008, § 4, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-61.1. - Inspection of sump pump and footing drains upon transfers of property. 
(a)  No person shall transfer title to another person nor accept from any other person the transfer of title to any structure or parcel of land upon which a structure is located unless and until the building inspector or other authorized agent of the village shall have inspected the sump-pump system, footing drains, yard drains and downspouts on the structure or parcel of land and issued a certificate of compliance stating that the same is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The sump-pump system shall not be determined to be in compliance unless it is connected to an operational underground bubbler system properly connected to the storm drain or a French drain, and in compliance with all other applicable state and local laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to transfers of property pursuant to the Federal Bankruptcy Act, transfers in connection with a partition, transfers in trust in connection with estate planning where a beneficiary of the trust continues to reside in the structure, transfers of remainder interests only where the transferor retains a life estate, or transfers to a mortgagee or other lien holder pursuant to a foreclosure. Said certificate shall be valid for a two-year period from date of issuance. 
(L.L. No. 3-1989, § 1, 6-6-89; L.L. No. 7, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-02; L.L. No. 6-2004, §§ 2, 3, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 18-61.2. - Waiver of certificate of compliance for inspection of sump pump and footing drains upon transfer of property. 
(a)  The building inspector or other authorized agents of the village may temporarily waive the requirement of a certificate of compliance as a prerequisite to transfer of title, as specified in section 18-61.1, provided that the purchaser: 
(1)  Shall have filed with the building department a written guaranty to correct any deficiencies to the sump pump system, footing drains, yard drains and downspouts within a period of time to be specified by the building inspector or other authorized agents of the village; and 
(2)  Shall have provided a sum, to be determined by resolution of the board of trustees, which shall be held in escrow, and which sum shall be returned to the purchaser if the corrections are completed within the time specified in the guaranty, but which sum shall be forfeited to the village if needed corrections are not completed within the time specified by the written guaranty. Said sum shall initially be set at one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(b)  In the event that the needed corrections are not completed within the time specified in the written guaranty, the temporary waiver issued by the building inspector or other authorized agent of the village shall immediately expire and such funds in escrow shall be forfeited to the village. 
(L.L. 7-2002, § 3, 10-1-02) 
Sec. 18-62. - Harmful items totally prohibited. 
    In addition to the discharge prohibitions set forth in article V, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewers. 
(c)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(d)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 3, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2008, § 5, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-63. - Items superintendent may regulate-Designated. 
    In addition to the discharge prohibitions set forth in article V, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(a)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(b)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(c)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(d)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(e)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(f)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(g)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(h)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(i)  Materials which exert or cause: 
(1)  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
(2)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
(3)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(4)  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(j)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 4, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2008, § 6, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-64. - Items superintendent may regulate-Authorized regulations. 
    In addition to the remedies set forth in article V, if any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 18-63, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(a)  Reject the wastes, 
(b)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
(c)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(d)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 18-68. 
    If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 5, 11-10-70; L.L. No. 2-2008, § 7, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-65. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 6, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-66. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 7, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-67. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 8, 11-10-70) 
Sec. 18-68. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial, business or commercial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(L.L. No. 2-1970, Art. V, § 10, 11-10-70) 
ARTICLE V. - STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 18-69. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    303(d) list. A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by NYSDEC as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to improve within the next two (2) years. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and any amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity. Any activity requiring authorization under the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity, Permit No. GP-02-01, as amended or revised, including construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Construction activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Design professional. State-licensed professional engineer or licensed architect. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connection. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4, including, but not limited to: 
A.  Any conveyance which allows any nonstormwater discharge including treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connection to the storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
B.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in section 18-71. 
    Individual sewage treatment system. A facility serving one or more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Environmental Conservation Law, Article 17. 
    Industrial activity. Activities requiring the SPDES multisector general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, Permit No. GP-0-06-002, as amended or revised. 
    MS4. Municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system. A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm sewers): 
A.  Owned or operated by the village; 
B.  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
C.  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
D.  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2. 
    Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    NYSDEC. The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, association, organization, corporation, district, municipality or other entity. 
    Pollutant. Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water, any of which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in contravention of water quality standards. 
    Pollutant of concern. A sediment or a water quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development activity. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02. A permit under the state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards, as amended or revised. 
    Special conditions. 
A.  Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that applies where the village has been notified that the discharge of stormwater authorized under their MS4 permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the village must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards. 
B.  303(d) listed waters. The condition in the village's MS4 permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water. 
C.  Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the village's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a waterbody or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the village was required to modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
D.  The condition in the village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any waterbody or watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the village must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the village must, within six (6) months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
    State pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by NYSDEC that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. 
    Stormwater. Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage. 
    Stormwater management officer (SMO). An employee or officer of the village appointed by the village board of trustees to enforce this article. The SMO shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the state shall require for code enforcement personnel. 
    TMDL. Total maximum daily load. 
    Village. The Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Village board. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Kenmore, Erie County, New York. 
    Total maximum daily load. The maximum amount of a pollutant to be allowed to be released into a waterbody so as not to impair uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant. 
    Wastewater. Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with pollutants and has been or will be discarded. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-70. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02. The objectives of this article are: 
A.  To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02; 
B.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge nonstormwater wastes; 
C.  To prohibit illicit connections, activities, and discharges to the MS4; 
D.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; and 
E.  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-71. - General provisions. 
A.  Applicability. This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
B.  Responsibility for administration. The SMO shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the village. 
C.  Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-72. - Prohibition of illicit discharges and connections and failing individual sewage treatment systems. 
A.  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except as provided below. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article, unless NYSDEC or the village has determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising ground water, uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm sewers, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of this article. 
(3)  Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition of illicit discharges shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4. 
B.  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
C.  Prohibition against failing individual sewage treatment systems. No person shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  The backup of sewage into a structure; 
(2)  Discharges of treated or untreated sewage; 
(3)  A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system; 
(4)  Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert; 
(5)  Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in this section; or 
(6)  Contamination of off-site groundwater. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-73. - Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater. 
A.  Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those types of activities that: 
(1)  Cause or contribute to a violation of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit; or 
(2)  Cause or contribute to the village being subject to a special condition. 
B.  Such activities include improper management of pet waste, failing individual sewage treatment systems, or any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization. 
C.  Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that cause or contribute to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or contributes to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit authorization. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-74. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
A.  Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified an illicit discharge or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in section 18-73, the village may require implementation of BMPs to control those illicit discharges and activities. 
(1)  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. 
(2)  Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in section 18-73, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4. 
(3)  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article. 
B.  Individual sewage treatment systems: response to special conditions requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of pollutants. 
(1)  Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as follows: 
(a)  Inspect septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge accumulation. Septic tanks shall be pumped out whenever the bottom of the scum layer is within three (3) inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or when the top of the sludge is within ten (10) inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary fee; 
(b)  Avoid the use of septic tank additives; 
(c)  Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals; and 
(d)  Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers, sanitary napkins, trash and other such items. 
(2)  Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows: 
(a)  To the maximum extent practicable, in accordance with 10 NYCRR appendix 75A. 
(b)  A design professional licensed to practice in New York State shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that involves: 
i.  Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location not previously approved for such; 
ii.  Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the same location; 
iii.  Use of alternate system or innovative system design or technology. 
(c)  A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the design professional to the municipality at the completion of the repair or replacement system. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-75. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-76. - Suspension of access to MS4. 
A.  Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of people, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to people. 
B.  Suspension due to the detection of an illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to reoccur. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to the premises terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior approval of the SMO. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-77. - Access and monitoring of discharges. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article. 
B.  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records as may be required to implement this article. 
(3)  The village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The village has the right to require the facilities subject to this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  An unreasonable delay in allowing the SMO access to a facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if the person denies the SMO reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(6)  If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-78. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the village in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notification in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within three (3) business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-79. - Enforcement. 
A.  Notice of violation. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he or she may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(2)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(3)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(4)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(5)  That the village will seek civil remedies or criminal penalties, including the imposition of a criminal fine, as provided in subsection B.; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
B.  Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-80. - Corrective measures. 
A.  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, then the SMO shall request the owner's permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
B.  If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-81. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-82. - Alternative remedies. 
A.  Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be given alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon recommendation of the village attorney and concurrence of the SMO, where: 
(1)  The violation was unintentional; 
(2)  The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter; 
(3)  Environmental damage was minimal; 
(4)  The violator acted quickly to remedy violation; and/or 
(5)  The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution. 
B.  Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Attendance at compliance workshops; 
(2)  Storm sewer stenciling or storm sewer marking; and/or 
(3)  River, stream, or creek cleanup activities. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-83. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Sec. 18-84. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(L.L. No. 2-2008, § 2, 1-15-08) 
Chapter 18.5 - SNOWPLOWING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Deposits of snow or ice in public areas, § 19-2; sidewalks, gutters and motor vehicle ways to be kept clear of snow, ice, garbage, etc., § 19-3. 

Sec. 18.5-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Vehicle. Any vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, licensed to operate on the highways of the state and used to plow snow, but the term shall not include a vehicle used solely by a person, firm or corporation to plow snow within the confines of his or its own property, whether owned or leased. 
(L.L. No. 3-1986, § 1(1), 10-7-86) 
Sec. 18.5-2. - Permit-Required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow or cause or allow the same to be plowed by the use of any vehicle within the village, unless a permit therefor, as hereinafter prescribed, issued by the village clerk, is in full force and effect and such permit is prominently displayed by being affixed to the vehicle so as to be readily visible from the exterior thereof. 
(L.L. No. 3-1986, § 1(2), 10-7-86) 
Sec. 18.5-3. - Permit-Application, fee; issuance, term of permit. 
(a)  Application, contents. Application for such permit shall be made to the village clerk by the owner of the vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by the village clerk, which forms shall contain the owner's name and address, the vehicle identification number, the New York State license number attached thereto and such additional information as the village clerk shall require. The village clerk may require such documents and information as may be reasonably necessary to verify the facts stated in such application. 
(b)  Fee; issuance and term of permit, transferability. The applicant shall, at the time of filing of his application, pay a permit fee which shall be established by the board of trustees. If such application or applications shall be approved by the village clerk, a permit or permits shall be issued to the applicant. Such permits shall commence November 1 and expire October 31 in each year and shall be in such form as the village clerk shall prescribe. Such permits shall not be transferable to another owner. 
(L.L. No. 3-1986, § 1(3), 10-7-86; L.L. No. 1-2010, § 1, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 18.5-4. - Permit-Revocation; penalties for offenses. 
(a)  The village board may, following a hearing before such village board, revoke the permit or permits granted to any person, firm or corporation under the authority of this chapter for failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter or any law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to snowplowing or snow removal. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this chapter, any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. 
(c)  Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this chapter shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(L.L. No. 3-1986, § 1(4), 10-7-86) 
Chapter 19 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-1; bicycles, Ch. 6; public intoxication, § 13-1; possession of open containers of alcohol in public, § 13-2; bonfires in streets, § 13-6; abandoned vehicles, junked vehicles, etc., § 14-16 et seq.; driveways and off-street parking, § 17-51 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; traffic, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23; light poles generally, § 25-246 et seq. 
State Law reference- Streets, sidewalks and public grounds generally, Village Law, § 6-600 et seq. Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1., para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Construction, maintenance, etc., of sidewalks, curbs, etc. 
(a)  The owners of real property fronting or abutting on any street shall install at their own expense, and pursuant to specifications therefor, approved by the board of trustees, concrete walks adjacent to the property owned by them, and shall be responsible for and keep same in repair except that the board of trustees may by resolution determine that certain concrete walks shall be installed or repaired wholly at the expense of the village, or partly at the expense of the village, and the owner of the adjoining land. Such resolution shall be effective for sixty (60) days after the adoption thereof, and the owner of the adjoining property shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of said walk after said period. 
(b)  The board of trustees may construct and repair cross-walks upon the streets within the village. It may also construct and repair sidewalks, curbs and gutters upon such a street wholly at the expense of the village, or of the owner or occupants of the adjoining land or partly at the expense of each, and may prescribe the manner of doing such work, and the kind of materials to be used therein. If a sidewalk, curb or gutter is so required to be constructed or repaired, wholly at the expense of the owner or occupants of the adjoining land, a notice specifying the place and manner, and the time, not less than ten (10) days, in case of a new walk, or not less than twenty-four (24) hours in case of repairs within which the sidewalk, curb or gutter is required to be constructed or repaired shall be served upon the owner as appears from the assessment records of the village assessor, at the address appearing in such records. If an owner shall not construct or repair the sidewalk, curb or gutter as required by the notice, the board of trustees may cause the same to be so constructed or repaired, and assess the expense thereof upon the adjoining land. If a sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed or repaired at the joint expense of the village and the owner, the board of trustees may cause the same to be constructed or repaired and assess upon the adjoining land the proportion of the expense chargeable against the same. The failure of the village to notify the owner of the necessity of making such repairs shall not relieve the owner of the obligation of making same. All grading done on sidewalks, curbs or gutters laid or repaired by the owner of the adjoining land shall be in accordance with the specifications and under the direction and supervision of the superintendent of public works. Assessments shall be made and collected and the taxes levied as provided by the village law. The board of trustees may issue bonds of the village to defray the expense of any such work or improvement payable by it. 
(L.L. No. 1-1955, § 1, 11-1-55) 
State Law reference- Special assessment liens, Lien Law, § 5-516; collection of special assessments, Lien Law, § 5-518. 
Sec. 19-2. - Deposits of snow or ice. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pile, dump, or deposit snow and/or ice on the streets, sidewalks, or public areas of the village. Public areas shall include all municipally-owned property, including parking lots. 
(b)  The mayor or his delegate may authorize exemptions from the prohibitions of subsection (a) when and to the extent warranted by snow emergency conditions. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be applied to government employees engaged in snow removal duties. 
(L.L. No. 1-1978, §§ 1-3, 1-3-78) 
Cross reference- Snowplowing, Ch. 18.5. 
Sec. 19-3. - Sidewalks, gutters and motor vehicle ways to be kept clear. 
(a)  Every owner, tenant, and/or occupant of any land of premises abutting on a highway and/or sidewalk within the village shall maintain and keep the sidewalk abutting on, in front of or passing over such land and/or all curb cuts, aprons, ramps, driveways, and/or motor vehicle ways lying in between such sidewalk and the street nearest thereto in good repair and free and clear of snow, ice, dirt, garbage, and/or any other material, substance of obstruction to pedestrians and/or traffic. For purpose of snow and ice removal, such sidewalk shall be cleared to a minimum width of two (2) feet for the entire length thereof. 
(b)  In the event that such snow and/or ice is frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without material difficulty or injury to the pavement, such owner or occupant shall cause sufficient sand, salt, sawdust or other suitable material to be spread thereon so as to provide a safe path. As soon thereafter as weather permits, such owner or occupant shall thoroughly remove snow and ice. 
(c)  Failure to clear snow and/or ice from the sidewalks and/or curb cuts, aprons, ramps, driveways and/or motor vehicle ways within a period of twelve (12) hours, not including the period [between] 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., after the snow ceases to fall and/or ice to form shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(d)  The owner and/or occupant shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions hereof. Said responsibility shall include liability for injuries that result from failure to maintain, repair, and keep said walkway in a safe condition for usage and/or to remove snow, ice or other obstructions therefrom. 
(L.L. No. 1-2002, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-02; L.L. No. 4-2011, § 1, 4-5-11) 
Cross reference- Snowplowing, Ch. 18.5. 
State Law reference- Notice to village of defects, dangerous conditions, etc., and liability of village for same. Village Law, § 6-628. Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05; Village Law, § 20-2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Sec. 19-4. - Permit to place building materials on street, sidewalk, etc. 
(a)  No person, firm, business or corporation shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited, any stone, brick, wood, dirt, or other material, substance or obstruction, in or on any street, sidewalk or public ground in the village without a permit from the board of trustees. 
(b)  No person, firm, business or corporation shall plow, shovel, sweep, heap up or in any other manner deposit or place snow, ice, slush or any other material or substance on any street or any other public place. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 12; L.L. No. 4-2011, § 2, 4-5-11) 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference- Obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, Penal Law, § 240.20. 
Sec. 19-5. - Enforcement. 
    Officers of the police department, building department, code enforcement officers, and any other such persons designated by the board of trustees may be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(L.L. No. 1-2002, § 3, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-6. - Severability. 
    If any provision of any section of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered, and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section of this article or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of each section of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(L.L. No. 1-2002, § 4, 2-5-02) 
Secs. 19-7-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing generally, § 7-61 et seq.; excavation for sewer work, § 18-29. 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate excavations, Village Law, § 6-632, subdiv. 1. 

Sec. 19-21. - Fees. 
    Persons who open or excavate in streets shall pay to the office of the village treasurer, prior to commencement of the work, such fees as are now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(G), 3, 6-1-76; L.L. No. 7-1976, § 2, 10-26-76) 
Sec. 19-22. - Barricades and lights. 
    Any person making or causing to be made, any excavation in any streets or sidewalks in the village shall properly guard or barricade such excavation at all times, and install and maintain at night, proper and sufficient warning lights to warn travelers. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, §§ 14, 15) 
Sec. 19-23. - Restoration. 
    Upon the completion of any excavation in any street or sidewalk in the village, the person who did the work, or caused it to be done, shall refill and tamp the excavation and restore the street or sidewalk to its original condition. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 14) 
Sec. 19-24. - Removal of rubbish. 
    A person who makes, or causes to be made, any excavation in any street or sidewalk in the village shall remove all rubbish from the work site after the work is completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 14) 
Secs. 19-25-19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK SUBSPACE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate and prohibit street or sidewalk subspace, Village Law, § 6-632, subdiv. 1. 

Sec. 19-36. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "vault" shall mean any vault, coal hole or chute under or through the sidewalk in front of, or if a corner lot, on the side of any building in or adjacent to the sidewalk in a business use district. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § I; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-37. - Authorized. 
    The building inspector may, with the approval of the board of trustees, grant permission to the owner or occupant of any premises to construct or to continue to use one or more vaults. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-38. - Bond. 
    The owner of every building having such a vault opening in a basement shall file with the village clerk a bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state in such penal sum as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution conditioned that he will save the village harmless from any loss, damage or expense by reason of injuries which may be caused on account of the construction, maintenance or use of such opening. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § IV; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-39. - Specifications. 
    Each vault shall be constructed and/or maintained in accordance with plans and specifications therefor approved by the building inspector, which plans must show the size and location of such opening. An opening through the sidewalk into any such vault may be constructed for the passing of merchandise or other materials into or out of such vault. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § II; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-40. - Cover and other safety measures. 
(a)  Any opening for a vault shall be completely and securely covered at all times with a cover made of iron or steel, except when open for actual use to transfer merchandise or other materials into or out of such vault. Each cover of any such vault, coal hole or chute shall be so constructed that the top thereof shall be flush with the surface of the adjacent sidewalk, leaving no projection above the said surface. The cover shall be securely locked from the inside when closed. No such cover shall be left open while the opening which it covers is in use without a proper and substantial railing or guard around the same sufficient to prevent accident and shall not, except in an emergency, be left open for a longer time than is necessary for the actual transfer of the merchandise, other materials into or out of said vault, coal hole or chute. No cover shall be raised or removed from the inside unless there is present on the sidewalk adjacent to said opening, one or more persons to warn pedestrians and to prevent accidents. 
(b)  The building inspector shall require the opening into a basement for a vault to be properly guarded by the owner in a manner to prevent accidents or injuries to persons using the public street and the sidewalk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, §§ III, IV; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-41. - Repairs. 
    The owner or occupant of any premises who has constructed a vault or who uses a vault shall make such changes or repairs in such vault as are required by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § IV; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
Sec. 19-42. - Correction of violations by village. 
    If the owner of any premises shall construct or maintain a vault in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the village may fill such vault or make it to conform to the provisions of this article and collect the expense of the same from the owner of such premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § V; Ord. of 2-2-60) 
State Law reference- Power of village to bring property into compliance with law and collect costs thereof, Village Law, § 4-414. Special assessment liens, Village Law, § 5-516. Collection of special assessments, Village Law, § 5-518. 
Secs. 19-43-19-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS USE OF SIDEWALKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate the use of sidewalks, stores, house and other building fronts, Village Law, § 6-632, subdiv. 1; obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, Penal Law, § 240.20. 

Sec. 19-56. - On or near Delaware Avenue. 
(a)  No person conducting any business on Delaware Avenue or within a distance of one hundred (100) feet therefrom shall place or permit to be placed any merchandise for sale, service or exhibition upon or over the sidewalk adjacent to said premises between the building line as established by the zoning ordinance and the street line. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any business conducted upon Delaware Avenue or the area one hundred (100) feet therefrom whose building is set back of the building line as established by the zoning ordinance may apply for a license to exhibit merchandise for sale upon or over the sidewalk in the area between the front of the said building and the building line. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the board of trustees specifying the merchandise proposed to be exhibited, and such other information as shall be required. Accompanying the application must be a survey made by a licensed surveyor showing the area between the building and the building line. Prior to making such application the sidewalk shall be conspicuously marked, showing the area to be covered by the license, which marking shall be maintained by the licensee during the life of the license. The license shall be issued by the board of trustees pursuant to a resolution, and shall expire one year from the date of issue. Any license may be revoked by the board of trustees for failing to keep the sidewalk property marked or for displaying merchandise other than that set forth in the application or for permitting merchandise to encroach upon a restricted area. Licenses revoked cannot be renewed for a period of six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 6-22-54, § 1) 
Sec. 19-57. - Use of other streets. 
(a)  Except within a distance of three (3) feet from the building within which merchandise is offered for sale, no goods, wares or merchandise shall be placed nor be permitted on or over any sidewalk, and then only in instances where such goods, wares and merchandise are placed upon a suitable stand which shall not be less than one foot or more than four (4) feet above the level of such sidewalk. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply to all business streets which are not controlled by the provisions of section 19-56 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-22-54, § 2) 
Secs. 19-58-19-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to license, regulate or prohibit parades, Vehicle and Traffic Law, §§ 1604, 1640, subdiv. (a), para. 12; Sunday parades, General Business Law, § 14. 

Sec. 19-71. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "parade" shall mean any parade, march or procession upon any street. 
Sec. 19-72. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
Sec. 19-73. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, without a parade permit issued by the board of trustees. 
Sec. 19-74. - Permit applications. 
(a)  A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the village clerk on forms provided by such officer. Such application shall be filed not less than seven (7) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the village clerk a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the board of trustees shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(c)  The village, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than seven (7) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
Sec. 19-75. - Standards for permit issuance. 
    The board of trustees shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great number of police officers of this village to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this village; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of this village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
Sec. 19-76. - Notice of permit denial. 
    If the board of trustees disapproves the application for a parade permit, the village clerk shall main to the applicant within three (3) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of such action. 
Sec. 19-77. - Alternative permit. 
    The board of trustees, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action of the board of trustees, file a written notice of acceptance with the village clerk. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
Sec. 19-78. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the board of trustees shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
Sec. 19-79. - Carrying permit. 
    The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
Sec. 19-80. - Revocation of permit. 
    The board of trustees, or a village officer or employee designated by it shall have the authority, after a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
Sec. 19-81. - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
    A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable state and village laws. 
Chapter 20 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Village finances generally, Village Law, § 5-500 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Liens on certain fire insurance proceeds. 
(a)  If the village claims a lien against the proceeds of a policy of fire insurance insuring the interest of an owner and issued upon real property located in the village, there shall be released or returned to the insured any amounts to which it would otherwise be entitled to claim provided that the insured agrees with the village in writing to restore the affected premises to the same or improved condition that it was in prior to the time that the lien against proceeds provided for in General Municipal Law, § 22 arose, subject to such conditions as the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of subdivision 3 of General Municipal Law, § 22. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) the terms "lien" and "real property" shall have the meanings assigned to them in General Municipal Law, § 22. 
(L.L. No. 2-1978, § 3, 1-16-78) 
Sec. 20-2. - Publicity fund established by tax on property. 
(a)  The board of trustees of the village is hereby empowered to raise a sum of money by tax upon the taxable property of the village, for the purpose of publicizing the advantages of the village as a place to reside and conduct business. 
(b)  The sum of money so raised will not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), except upon a vote of the qualified voters of the village qualified to vote on a proposition. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the board of trustees of the village is hereby empowered to submit such a proposition to the voters if such amount proposed shall be in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(L.L. No. 1-1986, §§ 1-3, 5-6-86) 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 1-1986, §§ 1-3, adopted May 6, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of the local law as § 20-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 20-3. - Pro rata veterans' exemption adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to adopt a pro rata veterans' exemption in the village. 
(b)  Exemption granted. If the ratio between the exemption granted under Real Property Tax Law § 458, and to total assessed value of the real property for which such exemption has been granted increases or decreases due only to a full value assessment in the village, the amount of the exemption under Real Property Tax Law, § 458, heretofore or hereafter granted shall be increased or decreased in the same proportion as the total assessed value has been increased or decreased. 
(L.L. No. 4-1985, §§ 1, 2, 10-29-85) 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 4-1985, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 29, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of the local law as § 20-3 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 20-4. - Handicapped improvement exemption. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this local law is to exempt from real property taxes certain improvements on real property owned by physically disabled persons, as authorized by Real Property Tax Law, § 459, as amended. 
(b)  Application; use of improvement. An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvements if such improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by: 
(1)  A resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled, or 
(2)  A member of the resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real property. 
(c)  Date of applicability. This local law shall apply to improvements constructed prior or subsequent to the effective date of this local law but shall apply only to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after June 1, 1989, effective in the 1990-1991 tax year and thereafter. 
(L.L. No. 2-1989, § 1, 5-2-89) 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 2-1989, adopted May 2, 1989, amended the Code by adding a chapter thereto, but did not specify the manner of inclusion. The editor has codified § 1 of L.L. No. 2-1989 as § 20-4 at his discretion. 
Sec. 20-5. - Alternative veterans' exemption. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to increase the maximum real property tax exemption for veterans owning real property in the village. 
(b)  Exemption increase. As authorized by Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a(2)(d)(ii), the maximum real property tax exemptions allowable for veterans established by Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a(2)(a), Veterans; Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a(2)(b), Combat Veterans; and Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a(2)(c), Disabled Veterans; are hereby increased to eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00), twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00), and sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), respectively. 
(c)  Severability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this section or application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have rendered invalid. 
(L.L. No. 1-1997, § 1) 
Cross reference- Pro rata veterans' exemption, § 20-3. 
Sec. 20-6. - Exemption for Cold War veterans. 
(a)  Qualified residential real property owned by a Cold War veteran, as defined in Real Property Tax Law, § 458-b, or spouse of a Cold War veteran, or unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War veteran shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of fifteen (15) percent of the assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall in no event exceed twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) or the product of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of Kenmore, whichever is less. 
(b)  Where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the United States Veterans Affairs or the United States Department of Defense due to a service-connected disability, the qualifying residential real property will be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value multiplied by fifty (50) percent of the disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or the product of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) multiplied by the current equalization rate for the village. 
(c)  Qualified residential real property is property that is used exclusively for residential purposes and is the primary residence of the Cold War veteran, or his or her unremarried surviving spouse, unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization for up to five (5) years. In the event any portion of such property is not used exclusively for the applicant's residence, said portion shall be subject to taxation but the remaining portion shall be entitled to the exemption provided herein. 
(d)  This exemption applies to village taxes, but does not extend to special assessments or special district charges. 
(e)  Pursuant to Real Property Tax Law, § 458-b(iii), this exemption shall apply to qualifying owners of qualifying real property for so long as they remain qualifying owners. 
(f)  In the event a Cold War veteran is receiving an exemption under Real Property Tax Law, § 458 or § 458-a, at the time of application, he or she is not eligible for this exemption as well. 
(g)  Application for such exemption shall be filed with the assessor of the Town of Tonawanda on or before the taxable status date on a form as prescribed by the state board. 
(L.L. No. 5, 2008, § 1, 12-12-08; L.L. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Secs. 20-7-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX ON UTILITY SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; water, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Utility tax, Village Law, § 5-530; Tax Law, § 186-a. 

Sec. 20-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross income shall mean and include receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser in the village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends, and royalties, derived from sources within the village other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the village whatsoever; provided, however, that the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated within the village, and in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the village. 
    Gross operating income shall mean and include receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in the village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
    Person shall mean persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock associations, co-partnerships, estates, assignee of rents, and any person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations and associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and excepting a corporation organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of leasing from a city in this state a waterworks system designed to supply water at cost to users thereof for discharge, either before or after industrial use, into a river within such city in order to improve the flow and condition of such river and thereby to provide a means to relieve such river from pollution. 
    Utility includes every person subject to the supervision of the state department of public service, except persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes, or wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 2, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 2; Village Law, § 5-530, subdiv. 1, 2. 
Sec. 20-22. - Imposed. 
(a)  A tax equal to one percent of its gross income from and after the first day of May, of each year is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the village which is subject to the supervision of the state department of public service, which has a gross income for the twelve (12) months ending May 31 in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Transportation Law, Article 7, and a tax equal to one percent of its gross operating income from and after the first day of May of each year is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in the village which has a gross operating income for the twelve (12) months ending May 31 in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the village, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law. 
(b)  Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the village, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 1, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Authority to impose tax, Village Law, § 5-530. 
Sec. 20-23. - Records. 
    Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its business and in such form as the village treasurer may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years, except that the village treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 3, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 3. 
Sec. 20-24. - Returns. 
    Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the 25th day of March, a return for the twelve (12) calendar months preceding such return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed herein is effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required by the foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly, on or before September 25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three (3) calendar months preceding each such return date, and in the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the village treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he may require to be included therein. The village treasurer, in order to insure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the village to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility company making the same, or of the owner or of a co-partner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 4, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 4. 
Sec. 20-25. - Payment. 
    At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the village treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the return is required to be filed. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 5, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 5. 
Sec. 20-26. - Assessment of tax by treasurer. 
(a)  In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the village treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within twenty (20) days after the same is required by notice from him, or if no return is made for any period, the village treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the village treasurer for a hearing, or unless the village treasurer, on his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the village treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the state, if application therefor is made within ninety (90) days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the village treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the supreme court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of the application, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such order. 
(b)  Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three (3) years from the date of the filing of a return, provided, however, that where no return has been filed as required by this article the tax may be assessed at any time. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 6, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Review of assessment made by village, Village Law, § 5-530, subdiv. 5, 6; limitation on assessments, Village Law, § 5-530, subdiv. 7. 
Sec. 20-27. - Billing to utility's customers. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 10, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 7. 
Sec. 20-28. - Collection by village; lien, etc. 
    Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the village's legal department, shall upon the request of the village treasurer, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the village treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty imposed by Tax Law, § 186-a is made a lien. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 11, 11-7-50) 
Sec. 20-29. - Power of village treasurer to make rules, administer oaths, etc. 
    In the administration of this article, the village treasurer shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath with reference to any matter within the line of his official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 12, 11-7-50) 
Sec. 20-30. - Secrecy of certain information and documents. 
(a)  Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the village treasurer, or any agent, clerk or employee of the village to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the village in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the state tax commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the state, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the village clerk may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the village attorney or other legal representatives of the village of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of subsection (a) shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the village he shall be dismissed from office, and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the village for a period of five (5) years thereafter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the village treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any village in the state information contained in returns filed under this article, provided such city or other village grants similar privileges to the village, and provided such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the village treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the state tax commission with any information contained in such returns. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 13, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05; Village Law, § 20-2006; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 4, para. b. 
Sec. 20-31. - Handling and use of funds. 
    All taxes and penalties received by the village clerk under this article shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-1950, § 14, 11-7-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Village Law, § 186-a, subdiv. 2. 
Secs. 20-32-20-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TERMINATION OF VILLAGE STATUS AS AN ASSESSING UNIT FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX PURPOSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 2-1986, § 1(1-5), adopted Aug. 5, 1986, amended the Code by adding thereto a new chapter, but did not specify a chapter number. For classification purposes, the substantive provisions of L.L. No. 2-1986 were codified herein as Art. III, §§ 20-41-20-45, at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 20-41. - Legislative intent. 
    The intent of the board of trustees of the village is to implement Real Property Tax Law, § 1402(3) providing for the voluntary termination of the village's status as an assessing unit, as now provided for in the village law and the real property tax law. It is also the intent of this article to abolish the position of assessor and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review of the assessments of real property located within the village. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1(1), 8-5-86) 
Sec. 20-42. - Effective date of article. 
    On or after the effective date of this article, the village shall cease to be an assessing unit. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1(2), 8-5-86) 
Sec. 20-43. - Position of assessor abolished. 
    The position of assessor in the village is hereby abolished. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1(3), 8-5-86) 
Sec. 20-44. - Board of assessment review abolished. 
    The board of assessment review in the village is hereby abolished. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1(4), 8-5-86) 
Sec. 20-45. - Procedure for levying taxes. 
    On or after the effective date of this article taxes in the village shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the Town of Tonawanda, with the taxable status date of such Town of Tonawanda controlling for village purposes. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1(5), 8-5-86) 
Secs. 20-46-20-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD AND NONHOMESTEAD BASE PROPORTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 5-1986, § 1(1-4), adopted Dec. 16, 1986, amended the Code by adding thereto a new chapter, but did not specify a chapter number. For classification purposes, the substantive provisions of the local law were codified herein as Art. IV, §§ 20-71-20-74 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 20-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to adopt the provisions of Real Property Tax Law, § 1903 relating to homestead and nonhomestead base proportions. 
(L.L. No. 5-1986, § 1(1), 12-16-86) 
Sec. 20-72. - Adoption of provisions. 
    The village board hereby adopts Real Property Tax Law, § 1903. 
(L.L. No. 5-1986, § 1(2), 12-16-86) 
Sec. 20-73. - Establishment; application. 
    The homestead and nonhomestead base proportions shall be established by resolution of the village board in accordance with the provisions of Real Property Tax Law, Article 19, and the rules of the state board of equalization and assessment and shall apply to taxes levied on the final assessment roll completed and filed in 1986 and to taxes levied on subsequent rolls, on behalf of the village and its improvement districts wholly contained therein, until this article shall be repealed. 
(L.L. No. 5-1986, § 1(3), 12-16-86) 
Sec. 20-74. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the secretary of state and when the state board of equalization and assessment certifies the Village of Kenmore as an approved assessing unit pursuant to Real Property Tax Law, § 1902. 
(L.L. No. 5-1986, § 1(3), 12-16-86) 
Secs. 20-75-20-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR DISABLED PERSONS WITH LIMITED INCOME 

Sec. 20-81. - Authority. 
    This article is authorized pursuant to Real Property Tax Law, § 459-c. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 1, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-82. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this local law is to provide real property tax exemptions to disabled persons with limited incomes owning real property in the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-83. - Amount of exemption. 
    Effective as hereinafter provided, there shall be an exemption from taxation for general village purposes to the extent of the percentage of assessed valuation provided in the following schedule, determined by the maximum income exemption eligibility level also provided in the following schedule up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation of real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, or real property owned by a husband, wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereinafter defined, is limited by reason of such disability: 
Annual Income Percentage of Assessed Valuation Exempt From Taxation $12,025.00 or less 50% $12,025.01 to $13,024.99 45% $13,025.00 to $14,024.99 40% $14,025.00 to $15,024.99 35% $15,025.00 to $15,924.99 30% $15,925.00 to $16,824.99 25% $16,825.00 to $17,724.99 20% $17,725.00 to $18,624.99 15% $18,625.00 to $19,524.99 10% $19,525.00 to $20,424.99 5%  
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 3, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-84. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Income tax year shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is filed, the calendar year. 
    Person with disability shall mean one who has a physical or mental impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drug use, which substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major life activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working, and who: 
(a)  Is certified to receive social security disability insurance (SSDI), or supplemental security income (SSI) benefits under the Federal Social Security Act; or 
(b)  Is certified to receive railroad retirement disability benefits under the Federal Railroad Retirement Act; or 
(c)  Had received a certification from the state commission for the blind and visually handicapped stating that such person is legally blind. 
    Sibling shall mean a brother or a sister, whether related through half blood, whole blood or adoption. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 4, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-85. - Required proof. 
    An award letter from the Social Security Administration or the railroad retirement board or a certification from the state commission for the blind and visually handicapped shall be submitted as proof of disability. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 5, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-86. - Computation of exemption. 
    Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total amount assessed, provided that no parcel may receive an exemption for the same tax purpose pursuant to both this article and Real Property Tax Law, § 467. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 6, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-87. - Real property held in trust. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the provisions of this article shall apply to real property held in trust solely for the benefit of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible for a real property tax exemption pursuant to this article. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 7, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-88. - Conditions for exemption. 
    No exemption shall be granted: 
(a)  If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making application for exemption exceeds the sums stated in this local law. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum, except where the husband or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife is absent from the property due to divorce, legal separation or abandonment, then only the income of the spouse or ex-spouse residing on the property shall be considered and may not exceed such sum. Where title is vested in siblings, their combined income may not exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a loss from the sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or earnings and net income from self-employment; but shall not include a return of capital, gifts, inheritances or moneys earned through employment in the foster grandparent program. In computing net rental income and net income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property held for the production of income. 
(b)  Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided, however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article. 
(c)  Unless the real property is the legal residence and is occupied, in whole or in part, by the disabled person; except where the disabled person is absent from the residence while receiving health-related care as an inpatient of a residential health-care facility, as defined in Public Health Law, § 2801, provided that any income accruing to that person shall be considered income for purposes of this article only to the extent that it exceeds the amount paid by such person or spouse or sibling of such person for care in the facility. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 8, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 20-89. - Application. 
(a)  Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner or all of the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the state board, to be furnished by the assessor's office, and shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner required or prescribed on such forms and shall be filed in the assessor's office on or before the taxable status date (June 1); provided, however, that proof of a permanent disability need be submitted only in the year an exemption, pursuant to this article, is first sought or the disability is first determined to be permanent. 
(b)  At least sixty (60) days prior to the taxable status date, the assessor shall mail to each person who was granted an exemption pursuant to this article on the latest completed assessment roll an application form and a notice that such application must be filed on or before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the exemption to continue to be granted. Failure to mail such application form or the failure of such person to receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 9, 3-16-99) 
Secs. 20-90-20-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SECTION 485-b TAX INCENTIVE FOR ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 20-100. - Purpose. 
    The board of trustees finds that it is in the best interest of the village to encourage businesses to improve existing properties and to build new buildings within the business districts. The board of trustees has reviewed the recommendations of the village tax incentive advisory committee and approves its findings. This local law will allow eligible businesses to receive tax incentives, amortized over a ten-year period, for new buildings and/or improvements. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Sec. 20-101. - Authority. 
    This article is authorized pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Sec. 20-102. - Eligibility. 
    Tax incentives under Real Property Tax Law, § 485-b - Business Incentive Exemption - will be allowed for the following: 
(a)  Businesses located in the general and restricted business districts. 
(b)  Such incentive will be available only to businesses with the following standard industrial code (SIC) numbers: 
a.  44 - 45 Retail, specifically 442 - 445, 448, 451 - 453. 
b.  52 Finance and insurance, specifically: 
i.  5221 Depository credit intermediation. 
ii.  52311 Investment banking and securities dealing. 
iii.  52421 Insurance agencies and brokerages. 
c.  54 Professional, scientific, technical services. 
d.  62 Health care and social assistance: 
i.  Medical offices. 
e.  72 Accommodation and food services: 
i.  722 Food service and drinking places. 
(c)  For new buildings located in the restricted use district, Section 485-b tax incentives will be available regardless of whether the upper floor use is itself eligible for the Section 485-b tax incentive. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Sec. 20-103. - Exceptions. 
(1)  No incentive will be allowed for any business which has a drive-through. 
(2)  No incentive will be allowed for any business that will be utilizing franchise architecture. 
(3)  In the restricted use district, no incentive will be allowed for new businesses which do not include a useable space on the upper floor. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Sec. 20-104. - Effect on exemptions. 
    If a business facility receives an exemption in any tax year under this article, it shall not be eligible for any other exemption for that capital improvement in that tax year. No business shall be granted a tax exemption under this article for more than ten (10) consecutive tax years. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Sec. 20-105. - Application. 
    Application under this article shall be made to the assessor no later than March 1. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, 2-23-11) 
Secs. 20-106-20-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VETERANS; ALTERNATIVE EXEMPTION 

Sec. 20-120. - Legislative authority. 
    The village board finds that the New York State Legislature has enacted Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a.7 to entitle gold star parents to be eligible to receive the alternative veterans exemption. 
(L.L. No. 2-2014, § 1, 1-21-14) 
Sec. 20-121. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Gold star parent means a parent of a child who died in the line of duty while serving in the United States armed forces during a period of war. 
    Qualified residential property means property owned by a qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided however, that in the event any portion of the property is not used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this section. 
(L.L. No. 2-2014, § 1, 1-21-14) 
Sec. 20-122. - Scope of exemption. 
(a)  A gold star parent owning qualifying residential real property shall be eligible for a tax exemption to the extent provided by such Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a, provided he/she/they use(s) such property as his/her/their primary residence. 
(b)  The additional exemption provided for in Real Property Tax Law, § 458-a, subdivision 2(c) shall not apply to the real property owned by the gold star parent. 
(c)  Application for such exemption shall be filed with the assessor of the village on or before the taxable status date on a form as prescribed by the state board. 
(L.L. No. 2-2014, § 1, 1-21-14) 
Secs. 20-123-20-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SECTION 485-a TAX INCENTIVE FOR ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 20-133. - Purpose. 
    The board of trustees finds that it is in the best interest of the village to encourage businesses to improve existing properties and to build new buildings within the business districts. This local law will allow eligible businesses to receive tax incentives, amortized over a ten-year period, for new buildings and/or improvements. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 20-134. - Authority. 
    This article is authorized pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law, § 485-a. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 20-135. - Eligibility. 
    Tax incentives under Real Property Tax Law, § 485-a - Business Incentive Exemption - will be allowed for the following: 
(a)  Businesses located in the general and restricted business districts. 
(b)  Such incentive will be available only to businesses with the following standard industrial code (SIC) numbers: 
a.  44 - 45 Retail, specifically 442 - 445, 448, 451 - 453. 
b.  52 Finance and insurance, specifically: 
i.  5221 Depository credit intermediation. 
ii.  52311 Investment banking and securities dealing. 
iii.  52421 Insurance agencies and brokerages. 
c.  54 Professional, scientific, technical services. 
d.  62 Health care and social assistance: 
i.  Medical offices. 
e.  72 Accommodation and food services: 
i.  722 Food service and drinking places. 
(c)  For new buildings located in the restricted use district, Section 485-a tax incentives will be available regardless of whether the upper floor use is itself eligible for the Section 485-a tax incentive. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 20-136. - Exceptions. 
(1)  No incentive will be allowed for any business which has a drive-through. 
(2)  No incentive will be allowed for any business that will be utilizing franchise architecture. 
(3)  In the restricted use district, no incentive will be allowed for new businesses which do not include a useable space on the upper floor. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 20-137. - Effect on exemptions. 
    If a business facility receives an exemption in any tax year under this article, it shall not be eligible for any other exemption for that capital improvement in that tax year. No business shall be granted tax exemption under this article for more than twelve (12) consecutive tax years. 
    This law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the secretary of state. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15; L.L. No. 4-2016, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 20-138. - Application. 
    Application under this article shall be made to the assessor no later than March 1. 
(L.L. No. 3-2015, 12-1-15) 
Chapter 21 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycles, Ch. 6; abandoned and junked, etc., vehicles, § 14-16 et seq.; parades, § 19-71 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- General authority of village to regulate traffic, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Traffic Ordinances" of the Village of Kenmore. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, § 1; Ord. of 10-19-48) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hospital zone shall mean that portion of any street adjacent to a hospital, infirmary or home for the aged designated by ordinance as a place for the parking of a motor vehicle for the loading or unloading of passengers incidental to the operation of said hospital, infirmary or home for the aged. 
    Parking meter zones shall mean such streets or parts of streets where parking meters are installed, operated or maintained. 
    Parking space shall mean that part of any street designated by the board of trustees as a place for the standing of vehicles except areas included within parking meter zones. 
    Public assembly zone shall mean a curb area not exceeding sixty-five (65) feet in length, measured from approximately the center of any side or front entrance to any place of public assembly and marked by "no parking" signs. 
    School crossing shall mean and include that portion of a street or streets at intersections, designated by the police department, as points of crossing for school children, and being within the bounds of the interior lines of the crossing walks as extended. The term "interior lines" means the lines of the sidewalks located the farthest from the adjacent parallel curb. 
    School crossing sign shall mean and include movable signs, bearing the words "School Crossing-Stop" or other words similar thereto, erected on street standards, and placed between the curb lines of any street within the village. 
(b)  Words or phrases not defined in subsection (a) or in section 1-2 of this Code shall have the meanings assigned to them by the state Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 48, § 2; Ord. of 10-19-48; Ord. of 9-4-56, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-57, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1974, § 3, 3-19-74) 
State Law reference- Definitions generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 100 et seq. 
Sec. 21-3. - Truck routes. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle having a total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of five (5) tons, or permit the same to be operated on any streets within the village, except those streets or portions of streets designated by local law or resolution. However, where local deliveries of merchandise or other property are to be made to properties which do not abut a designated truck route, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent such delivery to such properties along the streets from which such vehicles are excluded. 
(L.L. No. 1-1979, § 1(2), 2-20-79) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for truck routes, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (a) 10. 
Sec. 21-4. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every offense. 
(Ord. of 6-22-54) 
State Law reference- Authority of village to provide for penalty for violation of traffic regulations, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1800, subdiv. (c); limitation on penalties, Penal Law, §§ 55.10, 70.15 and 80.05. 
Secs. 21-5-21-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-21. - Traffic-control signs, signal devices and markings. 
(a)  The location and existence of all traffic-control devices which were in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and shall be considered to have been placed or erected by authority of the board of trustees. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) the term "traffic-control devices" shall mean signs, signal devices or markings which: 
(1)  Designate through highways and order stop signs, flashing signals or yield signs erected at specified entrances thereto or designate any intersection as a stop intersection or a yield intersection and order like signs or signals at one or more entrances to such intersection; 
(2)  Prohibit, restrict or regulate the operation of vehicles on any controlled-access highway or the use of any controlled-access highway by any vehicle, device moved by human power or pedestrian; 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations; 
(4)  Authorize angle parking on any roadway; 
(5)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, allocate the center lane exclusively for traffic moving in a specified direction; 
(6)  Designate any highway or separate roadway thereof for one-way traffic; 
(7)  Exclude trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer combinations or trucks in excess of any designated weight from designated highway; 
(8)  Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles; 
(9)  Designate no-passing zones and no changing lane zones and indicate such zones in accordance with the standards, minimum warrants and sign or marking specifications established by the state department of transportation; 
(10)  Designate safety zones; 
(11)  Establish a system of truck routes upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds are permitted to travel and operate and exclude such vehicles and combinations from all highways except those which constitute such truck route system; 
(12)  Prohibit, regulate or restrict the operation or the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any bridge or in any tunnel, or the use of any bridge or tunnel by any vehicle, device moved by human power or pedestrian; 
(13)  Prohibit and regulate the operation and the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in cemeteries and in public parks; 
(14)  Exclude all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of any designated length from designated highways or establish a system of truck routes upon which such vehicles and combinations are permitted to travel and operate and exclude such vehicles and combinations from all highways except those which constitute such truck route system; 
(15)  Establish maximum speed limits other than the fifty-five (55) miles per hour statutory maximum speed limit, or establish minimum speed limits; 
(16)  Regulate the crossing of any roadway by pedestrians; 
(17)  Designate preferential use lanes for specific types or classes of vehicles; 
(18)  Are parking meters; or 
(19)  Otherwise regulate, guide or warn traffic. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply only to traffic-control devices which conform to, or are not inconsistent with, the manual and specifications for uniform traffic-control devices adopted by the state department of transportation. 
(d)  Every person shall obey the instructions of any traffic-control device applicable to him placed in accordance with the provisions of law, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle by law. 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1680 et seq. When devices are required, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1683. Obedience to devices, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1110, subdiv. (a). 
Secs. 21-22-21-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic violations bureau generally, General Municipal Law, § 370 et seq. 

Sec. 21-31. - Required. 
    The police court is hereby authorized to establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the court in the disposition of charges in relation to traffic violations pursuant to the General Municipal Law, Article 14B. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 49, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-48) 
State Law reference- Authority for traffic violations bureau, General Municipal Law, § 370. 
Sec. 21-32. - Jurisdiction. 
    The traffic violations bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of traffic laws, rules and regulations when such offense does not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding, or the commission of a misdemeanor or felony. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 49, § 2; Ord. of 6-1-48) 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction, General Municipal Law, § 371. 
Sec. 21-33. - General procedures. 
    The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau: 
(1)  It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty; provided such violators waive a court appearance either in person or by written power of attorney. 
(2)  It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail received from all persons who must, or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(3)  It shall keep a record of all the violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding twelve (12) months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the bureau. 
(4)  If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer within a designated time, the bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against him and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the court. 
(5)  No appearance shall be accepted from any person who has been guilty of three (3) or more parking violations within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(6)  The bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports to the police justice of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and of all fines collected by the bureau and simultaneously transmit all sums collected to the police justice or acting police justice. 
(7)  The bureau shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the police justice. 
(8)  Nothing contained in this division shall authorize the traffic violations bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in court to answer, to explain or to defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. of 6-1-48, § 4) 
State Law reference- Procedures generally, General Municipal Law, § 371; records and additional functions, General Municipal Law, § 373. 
Sec. 21-34. - Notices. 
(a)  The village shall provide suitable serially numbered forms for notifying violators to appear and answer charges of traffic infractions and of violating traffic laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Such a notice required by this article shall be in substantially the following form: 
"BRING OPERATOR'S LICENSE WITH YOU. NO._____ Summons Issued _______ 
POLICE COURT OF KENMORE, NEW YORK 
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU 
TO (Print) ___________ 
ADDRESS (Print) ___________ 
You are hereby summoned to appear in the Police Court of the Village of Kenmore, Municipal Building, Kenmore, New York, to answer to charges made against you by Officer _______ for violating _______, and upon your failure to appear at Traffic Violations Bureau, 20 Nash Road, Kenmore, New York, not later than 24 hours before the return date (See other side) case will then be placed on the Calendar for 8:00 P.M. on _______ 19___, and if you fail to appear, you are liable to the maximum penalty for the violation hereinbefore referred to. 
WITNESS the Honorable Judge of the Police Court of Kenmore, New York. 
Registration No. _______ Docket No. _____. 
Operator's License No. _______ Disposition _____. 
_____
Police Officer" 
And on the rear of said notice the following shall be printed: 
"If you wish to plead guilty and submit to a fine, you may appear before the Clerk of the Traffic Violations Bureau, Police Headquarters, 20 Nash Road, Kenmore, New York, not later than 24 hours before the return date." 
"If you wish to plead not guilty you must appear at the date and hour specified in this notice." 
(Ord. of 6-1-48, § 6) 
State Law reference- Authority of village to prescribe form of notice, General Municipal Law, § 371. 
Sec. 21-35. - Form for power of attorney. 
    The power of attorney for appearance at the traffic violations bureau shall be in substantially the following form: 
"I, the undersigned, hereby appoint _______ of _______ my attorney, for me and in my name to appear before the Traffic Violations Bureau of the Village of Kenmore, New York, and to pay the fine prescribed for the violation with which I am charged, and in writing waive a hearing in court, plead guilty to the charge, and authorize the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea for me and pay such a fine into court. 
Dated ___ day of _______ 19___. 
Witness ___________" 
(Ord. of 6-1-48, § 7) 
State Law reference- Authority of village to prescribe form of power of attorney, General Municipal Law, § 371. 
Secs. 21-36-21-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Driveways and off-street parking, § 17-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate stopping, standing or parking, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (a), para. (6); stopping, standing and parking generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-46. - School crossings. 
    Every driver in charge of any vehicle proceeding along any street in this village, upon approaching a school crossing, shall bring said vehicle to a complete stop, adjacent to said crossing, and shall not proceed into or through same until directed so to do by any police officer stationed at said crossing, or in the event there is no police officer present, shall not proceed until said crossing is free of pedestrians. 
(Ord. of 10-19-48, § 6) 
State Law reference- Authority of village to prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (a), para. 6. 
Sec. 21-47. - Vehicle repairs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make repairs to any vehicle in any street or public place in the village, except in an emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 1916, Ch. 48, § 12; Ord. of 10-19-48) 
Sec. 21-48. - Use of bus stops. 
    No owner, driver or person in charge of any vehicle shall stop or park such vehicle in any bus stop, except a motor vehicle operated upon a regular route for the transportation of passengers for hire pursuant to a franchise granted by the village. 
(Ord. of 1-5-65) 
Sec. 21-49. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle upon any publicly or privately owned premises or property, parking areas or parking lots, without the consent and permission of the owner or lessee of such premises. 
(b)  To effectuate such prohibition on such premises a conspicuous sign or signs shall be posted at the entrances to such parking lot or parking area informing the public as to the permitted conditions of parking thereon. A sign as hereinafter described shall be deemed substantial compliance with this section: 
PARKING RESTRICTED 
(6 inches) 
EXCEPT FOR (LIST PERSONS OR 
CONDITIONS PERMITTED) ONLY 
(4 inches) 
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT 
(6 inches) 
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW 
(2 inches) 
POLICE ENFORCEMENT 
(2 inches) 
    Such sign shall be at least three (3) feet high by four (4) feet wide with red lettering of a size not less than above indicated upon a white background. The words "police enforcement" and "under penalty of law" on such a sign shall be construed, among other things to mean a request by the owner or lessee that the police or special patrolmen shall enforce the provisions of this section against persons parking, standing, storing or leaving vehicles on such premises without the consent of the owner or lessee and that the police are authorized to enter upon such premises to enforce the provisions of this section. Such sign shall state the conditions of parking or the persons authorized by the owner or lessee to use said premises for parking or both; and persons not included within such authorization or violating the regulations and conditions set out on said sign shall be deemed to be using said premises unlawfully without the authority and consent of the owner or lessee. 
(c)  This section may be enforced by the police or special patrolmen in the same manner as provided for the enforcement of traffic or parking laws including the use of tags, summonses and towing, and any other procedure authorized by law. 
(d)  Proof of ownership of a vehicle shall be presumptive evidence in an action for enforcement of this section that the owner parked or caused his vehicle to be parked on such premises. 
(e)  If such premises adjoin or abut upon a building or structure whose entrances or exits open upon such parking area, no vehicle shall be left parked, standing, or placed in such a manner as to obstruct such entrances or exits, and a clear unobstructed passage shall be maintained and left open from such entrances or exits, to the street of public right-of-way; such passageway shall be equal in width to the width of said entrances or exits in each instance, but in no case shall be less than five (5) feet wide, and shall permit persons to enter and leave such building or structure with safety. A sign attached to such building or structure at the place of such entrances or exits shall inform users of such parking areas as to such restrictions, and failure to obey the regulations herein contained shall be deemed an offense. 
(f)  No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as to block a driveway adjacent to or servicing any building within a business use district. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 48, § 12; Ord. of 6-22-54) 
Cross reference- Abandoned, etc., vehicles, § 14-16 et seq.; parking restrictions for off-street parking lots, § 17-56. 
Sec. 21-50. - Use of off-street parking lots generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to enter any off-street parking lot owned or operated by the village at a driveway marked "Exit" or to leave an off-street parking lot using a driveway marked "Entrance" or to operate a motor vehicle in the driveway area of any off-street parking lot in a direction counter to signs indicating the legal direction of the traffic flow. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 52, § 2; Ord. of 2-15-62) 
Cross reference- Parking restrictions for off-street parking lots, § 17-56. 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate parking on municipal property, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (b). 
Sec. 21-51. - Parking at municipal building. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle standing in the parking area at the rear of the municipal building at the corner of Delaware Avenue and Delaware Road, except cars owned by the Town of Tonawanda or the village, or cars owned and operated by officials or employees of the village or such town while used in the official business of said municipalities. 
(Comp. Ords. 1918, Ch. 48, § 5(3); Ord. of 10-19-48) 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate parking on municipal property, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (b). 
Sec. 21-52. - Official parking zone map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of areas within the village in which parking is prohibited, regulated or restricted shall be shown on the parking zone map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This map shall be available for public inspection at all times and posted in the village clerk-treasurer's office. 
(b)  The location and existence of all parking zones as marked and designated on the parking zone map which were in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified, and shall be considered to have been placed and designated by the authority of the board of trustees. 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in parking zone boundaries or locations, or in the manner in which parking is prohibited, regulated or restricted, such changes shall be entered on the parking zone map after a resolution has been adopted by the board of trustees. 
Sec. 21-53. - Parking in municipal lots. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked in a municipal lot for more than two (2) consecutive hours, except as specified in this statute. 
(b)  A resident of the village may purchase a permit allowing a motor vehicle owned by and registered to, the resident allowing the motor vehicle to be parked in a municipal lot for more than two (2) consecutive hours overnight parking between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during the winter parking ban, or at such other time as the board of trustees may designate by resolution. Such parking privilege shall be limited to areas designated for such purpose by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(c)  The permit issued pursuant to subsection (b) shall be obtained from the clerk of the village and shall be valid for twelve (12) months beginning November 1 and ending October 31. 
(d)  The board of trustees, by resolution, shall set the fee for the parking permit and the rules and regulations governing its use. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued for any of the following: 
(1)  Motor vehicles with more than two (2) axles; 
(2)  Recreational vehicles; 
(3)  Motor vehicles requiring a commercial driver's license for operation; 
(4)  Motor vehicles used in connection with a business; 
(5)  Trailers; 
(6)  Motor vehicles that are longer than the length of the parking space; and 
(7)  Motor vehicles parked for storage. 
(f)  The recipient of a parking permit shall be required to obey the rules and regulations that have been duly promulgated by the board of trustees with respect to this permit. Upon violation of a rule or regulation, the parking permit may be revoked. Upon revocation, no refund of the fee shall be made. 
(g)  Violators of this statute shall be subject to issuance of a parking ticket. The police department of the village is authorized to remove any vehicle that is parked in violation of the statute. 
(L.L. No. 9-2010, § 1, 10-19-10; L.L. No. 8-2018, § 1, 11-20-18) 
Secs. 21-54-21-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERED PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to provide for metered parking, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (a) 9; authority of village to regulate parking on village property, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (b). 

Sec. 21-66. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the village to use parking meters as a means, but not as an exclusive means, for the enforcement of local laws, rules and regulations, governing or restricting the parking of vehicles in the streets and public places of the village, and for the convenience and accommodation of traffic. In furtherance of said purpose, parking meters will be placed on the sidewalk portion of various streets, and in metered parking lots. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 2, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-67. - Definition. 
    As used in this division the words "metered parking lot" shall mean a parking lot owned or leased by the village and operated and maintained by it for the convenience of the public in the parking of motor vehicles and for which use a charge is made and collected through the use of parking meters. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 3, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-68. - Zones. 
    Parking meter zones are hereby established on every public highway and public street in the village. Parking meter zones are hereby established in every public parking lot owned and operated by the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 4, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-69. - Parking spaces. 
    Lines or marks shall be placed on the curb or on the street adjacent to or alongside of each parking meter to designate the space for which the meter is to be used, and the operator when parking a vehicle alongside of or next to any parking meter shall park it within the lines or markings so established, and with the front wheels of such vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park such a vehicle in such a way that it will not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 8, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-70. - Use of meters required; maximum parking time. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking meter zoning or metered parking lot adjacent to parking space during the hours of parking meter operation unless the appropriate fee is immediately deposited in such meter. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking meter zone or metered parking lot during the hours of parking meter operation while such meter is displaying a signal indicating the expiration of the time period associated with the deposit of fees. 
(c)  No person shall cause or permit any vehicle to be parked in a parking meter space for a period in excess of two (2) hours. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to such penalty as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Such penalty shall increase as specified by such local law or resolution if it is not paid within seventy-two (72) hours of the offense or within ten (10) days of the offense. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 6, 3-19-74; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 2, 6-1-76) 
Sec. 21-71. - Use of slugs. 
    No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any slug, button, or any other device or substance as substitutions for coins of United States currency. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 7, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-72. - Tampering with meters. 
    No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed pursuant to this division. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 9, 3-19-74) 
Sec. 21-73. - Use of funds. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets, and also for the cost of providing for and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones hereby created, and to cover the cost of the installation, operation, purchase, control and use of such parking meters. 
(L.L. No. 1-1974, § 10, 3-19-74) 
State Law reference- Use of parking meter funds, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640, subdiv. (a), para. 9. 
Secs. 21-74-21-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING RESTRICTIONS BASED ON SIZE 

Sec. 21-85. - Legislative intent. 
    The board of trustees finds that there is a danger in allowing certain vehicles to be parked on the street. Larger vehicles parked on the street can obstruct the view of drivers, pedestrians, emergency vehicles, and children thereby creating an unsafe condition and increasing the likelihood of accident of injury. In addition, the size of such parked vehicle can create difficulty for persons exiting driveways by partially blocking part of the driveway apron. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 21-86. - Definitions. 
    The term "vehicle" as referred to in this division, shall refer to any car, van, sport utility vehicle (SUV), recreational camper, truck, pickup, boat, and/or jet skis, vehicle transport carriers or trailers and any other motor vehicle. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 21-87. - Application. 
    The provisions of this section [division] shall apply in all instances, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle in order to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 21-88. - Manner of parking. 
(a)  Whenever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding such space. 
(b)  Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing or parked upon a highway where there are no adjacent curbs shall be stopped, standing or parked parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic. 
(c)  No vehicle, with or without attached transport device or trailer, with a combined length of more than twenty-one (21) feet ten (10) inches, including bumper and load, or wider than seven (7) feet, ten (10) inches, inclusive of the driver-side mirror or safety devices, or higher than seven (7) feet, two (2) inches, as measured from the underside of the tire to the top of the vehicle, transport device or trailer, including any racks or attachments to the top of the vehicle, transport device or trailer, shall park upon any street within any residential district in the village. 
(d)  No trailer of any description, regardless of size, without an attached motorized vehicle, shall park upon any street within any residential district in the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 21-89. - Exception. 
    The provisions in section 21-88 shall not apply, even if such vehicles are otherwise legally parked, in the following instances: 
(a)  Vehicles parked because of an emergency or at the direction of a police officer. 
(b)  Vehicles engaged in official business of the village, fire apparatus, ambulances and other emergency vehicles, vehicles owned by a public utility and parked in connection with official business of such public utility, or vehicles used by contractors for properly permitted work performed at a residential home provided that such vehicles are not parked between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Vehicles engaged in the making of pickups and/or deliveries or providing services in or upon any property adjacent to the street where said vehicle is parked, provided such parking, does not to exceed thirty (30) minutes or that a duly licensed and authorized operator of such vehicle is readily available. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 21-90. - General restrictions. 
    The standing or parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all streets and highways within the village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., beginning November 15 of each year and ending March 15 of the next succeeding year. 
    The mayor, may authorize a change in the start or end dates to address weather or other emergency conditions. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04; L.L. No. 8-2016, § 1, 10-18-16) 
Sec. 21-91. - Emergency no parking. 
    The village may prohibit the parking of vehicles on any street, avenue, or property where such parking would interfere with snow or ice removal, repairs to the street, or any other emergency. Such restrictions may be imposed where danger to the public is determined to exist. Posting of printed notices and/or notification to the press and/or notification on village social media will constitute sufficient notice to the public. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1, 5-4-04; L.L. No. 8-2016, § 2, 10-18-16) 
ARTICLE IV. - REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR NONPAYMENT OF PARKING TICKETS 

Sec. 21-92. - Authorization to remove motor vehicle. 
(a)  When three (3) or more parking tickets have been issued to the owner of a motor vehicle by the police department of the village, the chief of police shall cause to be sent to the registered owner by ordinary mail at the address contained in the records of the state department of motor vehicles, or the address shown on the vehicle's registration if it is not registered in New York, a notice stating that the motor vehicle is subject to being removed pursuant to this article unless the parking tickets and any fines, interest and surcharges are paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice. 
(b)  At any time after the expiration of the seven (7) days, the police department of the village is hereby authorized to cause to be removed any motor vehicle the owner of which has been sent the notice required by subsection (a), that is parked or operated on any public highway or municipal parking lot or other property owned or under the control of the village. 
(L.L. No. 2-2012, § 1, 2-21-12) 
Sec. 21-93. - Procedure after removal. 
    After a motor vehicle has been removed pursuant to the authorization of section 21-92, the police department shall cause it to be stored in a secure lot until it is redeemed or deemed abandoned pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1224. 
(L.L. No. 2-2012, § 1, 2-21-12) 
Sec. 21-94. - Manner of recovery by owner. 
    The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to section 21-92 shall not be entitled to recover possession of it until all unpaid parking tickets issued to the owner have been paid, together with any penalties, interest and surcharges. 
(L.L. No. 2-2012, § 1, 2-21-12) 
Sec. 21-95. - Disposition of motor vehicle. 
    If the possession of a motor vehicle falling within this article is not recovered by the owner pursuant to section 21-94 within thirty (30) days of its removal, the motor vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and be subject to the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1224. 
(L.L. No. 2-2012, § 1, 2-21-12) 
Chapter 22 - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Hedges, trees, etc., § 25-201 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police power of village, Village Law, § 4-412, subdiv. 1; Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1., para. (ii) a. (11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 22-16. - Removal by owner, required. 
    Any tree, or its branches or roots, no matter where situated, which is in such a dangerous condition that it constitutes a public nuisance, or endangers life and property, or is a menace to the public, or to the streets, sidewalks and underground or aboveground improvements, shall be removed or trimmed upon the order of the building inspector, or the police. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 1) 
Sec. 22-17. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  If, in the opinion of the police or the building inspector, a tree must be removed or trimmed, a written notice shall be served, either personally or by registered or certified mail upon the owner, occupant or person having charge of the property where the tree is located, to comply with the order of trimming or removal. Pursuant to the order, the tree must be removed or trimmed within the time limit set forth in the notice. 
(b)  The time limit shall be set by the police or building inspector in accord with their judgment as to the gravity of the situation. The person receiving the notice may, within three (3) days of receipt of said notice, demand in writing a hearing before the board of trustees, which hearing shall be scheduled no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board after receipt of the written demand. After the hearing is closed, the board may issue an order directing removal or trimming and designate the time limit which it considers appropriate to the case. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 22-18. - Removal by village. 
    Any tree which is not trimmed or removed pursuant to the order of the police, the building inspector, or the board of trustees within the time limits expressed in said order, may be trimmed or removed by the village or its designees; in which event, the expense thereof shall be assessed against the real property described in the notice or the order and shall constitute a lien thereon, all in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 4) 
State Law reference- Power of village to bring property into compliance with law and collect costs thereof, Village Law, § 4-414. Special assessment liens, Village Law, § 5-516. Collection of special assessments, Village Law, § 5-518. 
Chapter 23 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23-1-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to regulate taxicabs, General Municipal Law, § 181. See also Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1604. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-16. - Legislative findings. 
    It is hereby found and declared that the taxicab business in the village provides an important part of the transportation facilities of the village, and the service rendered by said business is a matter of public concern and interest. A study and survey of the business points to the conclusion that the public cannot properly be served and the business itself cannot operate in an orderly and appropriate manner without regulation of the business. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 1) 
Sec. 23-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fleet operator shall mean a person owning and operating five (5) or more taxicabs. 
    Owner shall include any person, firm, corporation or association owning and operating one or more taxicabs. 
    Taxicab is a passenger automobile with a seating capacity in the interior thereof of seven (7) or less passengers, which carries or offers to carry passengers for hire. 
    Taximeter is a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab may be mechanically calculated either for the distance traveled or waiting time or both and upon which such charge is indicated by means of figures. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 2; Ord. of 9-2-58, § 1) 
Sec. 23-18. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall have no application to vehicles while in use at funerals, christenings and weddings. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 23) 
Sec. 23-19. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  No person shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than the maximum rates applicable from time to time in the City of Buffalo except that any person desiring to charge taxicab rates less than the rates from time to time in effect in the City of Buffalo shall be permitted to do so, but before charging such lesser rates the schedule to be charged shall be filed with the mayor and the chief of police at least fifteen (15) days before such rates are put into effect. A copy of the legal rates shall at all times be displayed in each vehicle in such a manner that it is easily visible from the rear seat of the cab. 
(b)  Upon demand, the driver of a taxicab shall furnish to the passenger a receipt for the fare paid, showing the name and badge number of the driver. 
(c)  All disputes as to lawful rate of fare shall be determined by the police officer in charge of the police station nearest to the place where the dispute arises or occurs; and a failure to comply with such determination, provided it be in accordance with the rate herein fixed, shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 18) 
State Law reference- Display of taxicab rates, General Business Law, § 396-p. 
Sec. 23-20. - Taximeters. 
(a)  No taximeter shall be operated from either rear wheel of a taxicab and the figures thereon shall be illuminated and visible to the passenger from the rear seat of the vehicle. No taximeter shall be operated unless the taximeter and the speedometer is in proper working condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to change the size of the front wheels or tires of a taxicab or the gears operating the taximeters, or to change said instrument from one vehicle to another without a reinspection and approval of the mayor. No person shall use, or permit to be used, a taximeter on which the seal has been broken, nor unless its cover and gears are intact. No taxicab driver shall operate a taxicab in which the seal on the taximeter has been removed or broken. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 16, 22(5)) 
State Law reference- Taximeters generally, General Business Law, § 392-f. 
Sec. 23-21. - Vehicular color scheme. 
(a)  If it shall appear that the color of a taxicab is so similar to the color design of other taxicabs as to be liable to deceive the public, then the mayor is authorized to withhold a license to the owner thereof or to revoke or suspend the license thereof until the color of said taxicab has been changed or altered so as not to resemble the color design of any other taxicab operated under separate ownership and so as not to deceive the public. Any applicant for a license for a taxicab of more than one color shall be entitled to use the color design thereof, provided that such applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the mayor that such applicant was using such color design upon his taxicabs as of December 20, 1955, or in case of a new design that the same is not being used by any other taxicab owner. 
(b)  After being licensed, no color design of any taxicab shall be changed without the written approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 6) 
Sec. 23-22. - Removal of vehicle from service. 
    If the owner of a taxicab desires to take such vehicle out of service, he shall notify the police department that it is being removed from service giving the license number, and the village license number of said taxicab, and such owner shall notify the police department when said taxicab is again placed in service. During said period no passengers shall be carried for hire in such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 15) 
Sec. 23-23. - Record of trips. 
    Each taxicab driver shall keep a record upon forms approved by the mayor of the point of origin and point of destination of all trips made and the charge made therefor, and shall file the same with the owner of the taxicab; such records shall be preserved for at least sixty (60) days and shall be made available for inspection by any police officer during said period. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 13) 
Sec. 23-24. - Form and record of licenses. 
    Every license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be countersigned by the village clerk who shall keep a record thereof and the amount of the fee paid therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 19) 
Sec. 23-25. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the village clerk-treasurer if there is cause to believe that the holder of such license is violating any statute of the state relating to taxicabs, or any provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon such revocation or suspension, the village clerk-treasurer shall cause notice to be served upon the holder of the taxicab license, specifying the grounds for the revocation of such license. The holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of trustees of the village, if requested, within fourteen (14) days following notice of revocation. The holder shall be afforded the opportunity at such hearing to present evidence and witnesses in his behalf in connection with his license. Following such hearing, the board shall render a determination on the license within twenty (20) days. Said determination shall be set forth in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 15) 
Secs. 23-26-23-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of village to license taxicabs, General Municipal Law, § 181. See also Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1604. 

Sec. 23-36. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall use any motor vehicle as a taxicab within the village unless a license issued therefor by the mayor shall be in full force and effect. 
(b)  No person shall drive or operate upon the streets of the village, any passenger automobile with a seating capacity in the interior thereof of seven (7) or less passengers, and registered as an omnibus by the state which such vehicle has placed upon or in it the words "taxi" or "taxicab," or words of similar import, or a taximeter, or unusual or distinctive lights unnecessary for the operational use, or any other distinctive or unusual equipment, device, design, color, numbers or lettering, liable to deceive the public that such vehicle is licensed as above provided, unless such vehicle is duly licensed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 3; Ord. of 9-2-58, § 2) 
State Law reference- Omnibusses, Transportation Corporation Law, § 60 et seq. 
Sec. 23-37. - Application. 
    Application for a taxicab license shall be made to the mayor by the owner in writing under oath upon forms to be furnished by the village which shall show: 
(1)  The owner's name and address; 
(2)  The motor number and make of the vehicle; 
(3)  The year manufactured; 
(4)  The state license number attached to the vehicle; 
(5)  The size of the tires; 
(6)  The make, type and number or other descriptive designation of the taximeter; 
(7)  An accurate and complete statement of the color of the taxicab, and if more than one color, a description of the color design thereof; 
(8)  The business name under which the taxicab will be operated; and 
(9)  Such other information as the mayor deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 23-38. - Restrictions on business name. 
    If it shall appear from the application for a taxicab license that any corporate or assumed name intended to be used is so similar to a name already in use that it is liable to deceive the public or to create confusion, or in the event it shall appear that said corporate or assumed name is misleading as to the actual ownership of said taxicab, then and in that event the mayor is authorized to withhold a license to the applicant or to revoke or suspend the license. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 6) 
Sec. 23-39. - Issuance. 
    The mayor shall cause the taxicab described in the taxicab license application to be inspected and the taximeter attached thereto to be tested or may require a certificate issued by an approved testing agency certifying that said meter is in working condition and correct. If the vehicle is in proper condition for the safe transportation of passengers and if it complies with all of the provisions of this article, the vehicle's taximeter shall be sealed by the police department and the mayor may then issue a license for such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 4) 
Sec. 23-40. - Fee. 
    No person shall be issued a taxicab license until he pays to the office of the village treasurer such license fees as are now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 10, 19; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(H), 3, 6-1-76) 
Sec. 23-41. - Term. 
    All licenses required by the provisions of this division shall be issued annually for a period beginning June 1 and expiring on May 31 of the following year. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 7) 
Sec. 23-42. - Renewal. 
    Applications for renewal of taxicab licenses shall be filed not later than May 1 of each year and if the application for renewal is not made prior to said time, the holder will be deemed to have abandoned said license. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 8) 
Sec. 23-43. - Transfer. 
    In case of the sale or disuse for taxicab purposes of any licensed taxicab, the holder of the taxicab license may have the same transferred to another vehicle owned by him with the approval of the mayor, and the payment of such transfer fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 9) 
Sec. 23-44. - Display of plate. 
    The mayor shall assign a number to each taxicab licensed and the village shall furnish to the owner a plate bearing such number which must be affixed in a conspicuous place adjacent to the rear license plate. No plate attached to a taxicab shall be transferred from one vehicle to another except as otherwise herein permitted. Immediately upon the disuse of the vehicle for taxicab purposes or upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of said license, the plate assigned shall be returned to the mayor. Upon proof by affidavit that a license plate has been lost or stolen, a replacement plate may be issued upon the payment of such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. Any plate found or recovered for which a substitute has been issued, shall be immediately returned to the mayor. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 5, 14) 
Secs. 23-45-23-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Power of village to license, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, subdiv. 1., para. (ii) a. (11). 

Sec. 23-61. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab without a license issued by the mayor. No owner of a taxicab shall permit a person who does not have such a license to operate a taxicab unless such vehicle is taken out of service. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 11, 15) 
Sec. 23-62. - Persons eligible. 
    Any person whose record for observance of local traffic laws and the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law with respect to the operation of motor vehicles, who does not have a criminal record and who holds a chauffeur's license issued by the state, shall be entitled to a taxicab driver's license until revoked or suspended as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 11) 
Sec. 23-63. - Fee. 
    No person shall be issued a taxicab driver's license until he pays to the office of the village treasurer such license fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, §§ 17, 19; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(H), 3, 6-1-76) 
Sec. 23-64. - Term. 
    Taxicab driver's license shall expire on May 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 17) 
Sec. 23-65. - Badge and display of license. 
    Taxicab driver's licenses shall be issued by the mayor who shall give to each licensed driver a badge showing the number assigned to such driver, which badge shall be conspicuously worn by such driver at all times when on duty. The badge shall remain the property of the village, and shall be surrendered upon the expiration, revocation or suspension of the driver's license. Security in such sum as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution may be required for the return of each badge, and a duplicate identification card, to replace a lost, stolen, destroyed or misplaced card may be issued upon the payment of such sum as now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. The license must be in the possession of the licensee at all times he is on duty, and must be exhibited to any person on request. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 12) 
Sec. 23-66. - Form. 
    Each taxicab driver's license shall provide a space where the police department shall enter a record of all the acts of any nature pertaining to the conduct of such persons as a driver and such record shall be given consideration in relation to the renewal, suspension or revocation of the driver's license. The erasure or obliteration of any official entry made upon a driver's license shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 12-20-55, § 13) 
Chapter 24 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of L.L. No. 3-1987, adopted June 2, 1987, repealed former Ch. 24, §§ 24-1 and 24-2, which derived from L.L. 11-1953, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1953, and L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 2(K), 3, adopted June 1, 1976. Section 2 of L.L. No. 3-1987 enacted a new Ch. 24 which was codified herein as Arts. I-VIII, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 18; tax on utility services, § 20-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Water generally, Village Law, § 11-1100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the [following] words and phrases shall be deemed to have the meanings listed below. All other terms shall have the meanings normally ascribed to them in regular usage. 
    Applicant shall mean any person as defined herein, making a request for any service to be rendered or furnished by the village pursuant to this chapter and in whose name such service will be rendered and charged. 
    Cross-connection shall mean a physical connection through which a supply of potable water could be contaminated or polluted by another supply system or structure containing water of either unknown potability or known to be not fit for domestic consumption. 
    Customer shall mean any person, as herein defined, to whom service is furnished pursuant to this chapter. 
    Owner shall refer to the person, as herein defined, who has legal or equitable title to the premises to which water service may be rendered pursuant to this chapter. 
    Person shall mean every individual, firm, association or corporation. 
    Plumber shall mean an individual or corporation who, pursuant to chapter 7 of the Code of the village, is duly licensed by the village to conduct the trade, business, or calling of plumbing, as defined by such chapter. 
    Private fire protection system shall include water mains, pipes, hydrants, sprinklers, storage facilities, and other facilities installed on private premises for the purpose of private fire protection. 
    Public fire protection system shall mean appropriate production, distribution, and storage facilities and other facilities installed in a public street or right-of-way and used for public protection of premises from fire. 
    Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
    Water hammer shall mean a concussion or sound of moving water against the sides of a containing pipe or vessel on a sudden change in flow which may be measured at any public hydrant or meter by any two (2) successive pressure changes of over twenty (20) pounds per square inch (20 psi) each which occur within one minute of time of each other. 
    Water office shall mean the office of the clerk-treasurer of the village. 
    Water service connection shall mean a pipeline, with its appurtenances, that branches off or connects a water main with a meter and shall include the tap attached to such water main. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-2. - Applicability. 
    The rules, regulations, procedures, rates, charges and fees herein prescribed shall be applicable to the supply of water and the furnishing of services and facilities by the village within the limits of the village, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-3. - Limitation of village's liability. 
    The village reserves the right, at any time without notice, to shut off the water in mains for the purposes of making repairs or extensions, or for other purposes; the village shall not be liable for any loss, cost or expense arising from an interruption, or failure in the supply of water or from an increase or deficiency in water pressure, or by the bursting or breaking of any main or any damages caused thereby. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-4. - Village may control use of water in emergencies. 
    The village reserves the right to restrict, curtail or prohibit the use of water for any purpose, upon the determination of the water office or village board that such action is essential to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare as in periods of drought or other emergency. Upon such determination the village board, by resolution, may fix the times when water may be used for all or particular purposes and prescribe any other measures to be taken by the water office or the customers. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.4), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-5. - Forms. 
    Copies of all forms required in connection with this chapter shall be on file at the water office. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.5), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-6. - No service until charges and arrearages paid. 
    No water service will be provided by the village to any applicant until all amounts due from the applicant including, but not limited to, water use charges and fees have been paid. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.6), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-7. - Inspection. 
    All pipes, meters and fixtures shall, at all reasonable hours, be subject to inspection by the water office or its duly authorized agents. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.7), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-8. - Remote read-box. 
    Any provision relating to water meters shall be applicable to the remote read-boxes connected to water meters, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.8), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-9. - Applicable laws. 
    All materials and installation specifications will be governed by chapter 11 and chapter 7 of this Code, the state Health Code, all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations where applicable, and the general specifications as adopted by the village. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(1.9), 6-2-87) 
Editor's note- Chapter 11 was repealed in its entirety by L.L. No. 4-1987, adopted July 7, 1987. See the editor's note Ch. 11 title. 
Sec. 24-10. - Violation; penalties generally. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for each such violation, or by both fine and imprisonment, except when a punishment is expressly prescribed in such provision. Unless otherwise provided, each day of which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation for purposes of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(11.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-11. - Penalty for unauthorized turning on of water. 
    Any person turning on or off the water on any main or service pipe, reservoir, or hydrant, excepting hydrants in cases of fire, without permission or order from the village shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for each such violation, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(11.2), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-12-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONNECTIONS AND SERVICE 

Sec. 24-21. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a connection to the water main of the village and/or for water service shall be made to the village in person by the owner of the premises for which services are desired or his duly authorized agent. The applicant shall furnish maps or drawings or further information as may be required by the village. No connection or service shall be provided until the applicant has complied with the rules and regulations provided in this local law and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and has paid all applicable fees, charges and arrearages. 
(b)  A separate application shall be made for each premises or part thereof to which water service is to be separately metered. A new application must be made on any change in ownership at the premises to which service is furnished or in the type of service furnished as described in the existing application. 
(c)  The receipt of an application shall not obligate the village to provide or perform the service requested. The village shall not be obligated to extend a main in any street. On acceptance of the application by the village, the applicant shall become a customer of the water office and shall be responsible for payment for all applicable rates and charges and shall comply with the rules and regulations of the water office. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-22. - Water service connection-Must be proper. 
    No water services shall be provided unless the water office determines that proper and technically appropriate water service connections exist at the premises to be served for the type of services desired. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-23. - Water service connection-Installation. 
(a)  Whenever a new tap to the village main is required, the village shall install such tap upon payment of requisite fees. All other installation of water service connections is the responsibility of the owner. 
(b)  A separate curb box and curb stop outside the building shall be required for each premises or part thereof where the water delivered is to be individually metered to a customer. 
(c)  When application for a new tap is made and disconnecting the previous water service connection is required by the water office, the applicant shall be responsible for such disconnection and for the fee for inspection of such disconnection in accordance with this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-24. - Water service connection-Maintenance; facilities; owner's liability. 
    The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the water service connection and all distribution lines and apparatus beyond the meter and liable for any loss, cost or expense arising from its use including, but not limited to, the malfunction or improper installation or design of such connection or facilities. Any person who performs water service maintenance, repair or installation work will be held liable for the violation of any of this chapter or rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto by journeyman, plumbers or others in their employ. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.4), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-25. - Responsibility for leaks in service line. 
    When leaks occur in the service pipes at any point beyond the main including the ferrule or tap, they must be repaired by the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent. If such leaks are not repaired by such person within forty-eight (48) hours after notice of leak by the village, water service to such premises shall be shut off until the leaks are repaired and, if repaired by the village, the expense incurred shall be charged against the owner of the premises. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.5), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-26. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Cross-connections. Cross-connections are hereby prohibited. In addition to the penalty imposed for such a violation, the customer shall be liable for any loss, cost or expense arising from the prohibited cross-connection. 
(b)  Water hammer. 
(1)  Water hammer, as defined herein, where such condition would cause a hazard to the village water distribution system in the determination of the village and is under the control of the customer, is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  Upon the determination of the existence of water hammer the village shall deliver written notice thereof to the person causing the condition which notice shall contain an order requiring such customers to install water hammer elimination devices within a reasonable time specified in the notice. A licensed professional engineer or registered architect shall sign and seal the design and supervise the installation of such devices. Such design and installation shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. In addition to the penalty imposed for such a violation the customer shall be liable for any loss, cost or expense arising from the prohibited cross-connection or water hammer. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices. 
(1)  No water service shall be commenced or continued to any premises having a cross-connection where potential contamination of the public water supply is determined by the water and sewer department to exist unless an air gap, reduced-pressure-zone device, double-check-valve assembly or equivalent protective device has been installed by the customer. 
(2)  The customer shall submit plans for any installation of a protective device or devices to the village and the state for approval. 
(3)  No air gap, reduced-pressure-zone device, double-check-valve assembly or other protective device shall be installed unless it has been determined by the commissioner of health of the state to be sufficient for the degree of hazard posed by the service connection. 
(4)  All devices installed pursuant to this subsection shall be tested at time of installation and at least annually. Testing shall be conducted only by backflow prevention device testers certified by the state. Testing shall be the responsibility of the customer or the responsibility of the village at the customer's expense, as the village board may direct. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.6), 6-2-87; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 1, 5-7-91) 
Sec. 24-27. - Village reserves right to refuse service. 
    The village may refuse service to any customer where there exists any condition on the premises and/or in the water service connection which may be detrimental to the village water supply. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, prohibited cross-connections and water hammer. The village may refuse service when it is not satisfied that all the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to water service will be complied with by the applicant. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(2.7), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-28. - Discontinuance of water service; reasons. 
    Water service may be discontinued by the village for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  For misrepresentation, in application, as to property or fixtures to be supplied, or the use to be made of the water supply. 
(2)  For the use of water on any property for a purpose other than that described in the application. 
(3)  For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, meters or otherwise. Use of running water to prevent freezing is hereby deemed a willful waste of water. 
(4)  For failure to maintain connections, service lines or fixtures owned by the village in good order. 
(5)  For nonpayment of charges, rates or fees for water supplied or services rendered by the village where such nonpayment exceeds sixty (60) days from the date such amounts were due. 
(6)  For cross-connecting pipes carrying water supplied by the village with any other source of supply, or with any apparatus which may endanger the quality of the village's water supply. 
(7)  For refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purpose of reading, repairing, testing or removing meters or observing water pipes and other fixtures. 
(8)  For the furnishing or receiving of a supply of water from another premises. 
(9)  For damaging any service pipe, curb stop cock, or any other appliance of the village used in controlling and regulating the water supply. 
(10)  For failure to maintain the water meter in good order. 
(11)  In case of abandonment of premises. 
(12)  In order to make necessary repairs, connections or the like. 
(13)  For failure to install water hammer elimination devices pursuant to an order issued under the authority granted in section 24-25(b)(2). 
(14)  For violation of any other rule or regulation as prescribed in this local law. 
(15)  Upon the request of the owner (see section 24-29). 
(16)  For failure to purchase a water meter and establish a water account. 
(17)  For other good cause. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(3.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-29. - Discontinuance upon request of customer. 
(a)  Notice. Any customer may discontinue water service by giving the village notice to such effect at least three (3) days prior to the date on which such discontinuance is intended to take effect. 
(b)  Final termination; sealing meter. If such request is for a final termination of service in the customer's name then the request will be presumed to include one for sealing the meter at the premises in question. The village water office will seal the meter in question at the time of final reading of the meter unless the office receives in person a request that the meter not be sealed by the next customer requesting service through such meter. Such request must be submitted in conjunction with a new application for service for the premises in question. 
(c)  Customer to provide personnel access. The customer must provide village personnel access to the indoor meter between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(3.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-30. - Manner of cutting off water supply. 
(a)  Water service shall not be considered discontinued unless the meter or service connection is sealed in a manner satisfactory to the village. 
(b)  Where two (2) or more premises have been supplied with water through one service pipe under the control of one curb stop and one of the customers violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the village reserves the right to shut off the water to the premises ahead of the meter and remove the meter and/or seal the water service connection at the meter of the customer in violation. Where neither meter removal nor line sealing is practicable, water service to the entire building so serviced is subject to water service shut-off until such time as the violation(s) is (are) cured. 
(c)  Water services not to be used in a new structure will be discontinued at the main and shut off by the owner's licensed plumber, prior to demolition of existing structure. 
(d)  A permit fee will be paid to the water office for such inspection of disconnection. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(3.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-31. - Persons authorized to turn off water. 
    No plumber, owner or other person shall turn the water on or off at any tap or curb stop, or disconnect or remove the meter or otherwise shut off a water supply without the consent of the water office. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(3.4), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-32. - Restoration of service. 
(a)  Application. When service has been discontinued for reasons other than emergency, the village will renew services on proper application, when conditions under which the service was discontinued are corrected or made immaterial, and on the payment of all applicable charges and fees. (Where service has been discontinued upon the request of the customer pursuant to section 24-29, such customer shall be required to pay the charge for new service as provided under section 24-93.) A customer whose service has been disconnected at one location owned by him may not have service renewed at another location until all the charges of the village for water service to such customer have been paid and all the applicable rules and regulations of the water office complied with. 
(b)  Breaking, removing seal. No person shall break or remove a seal placed on a water service line unless so authorized in writing by the water office. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(3.5), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-33. - Temporary service-During construction. 
    The service of water to a premises prior to occupancy will be provided to builders, contractors, developers and owners for water usage during construction or for the service of water in display houses prior to sale, upon the payment of the necessary fee and deposit as prescribed in section 24-93. Such service will only be provided upon payment and display of a building permit issued by the village office for such construction. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(5.1), 6-2-87) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 24-34. - Temporary service-Service from hydrant. 
    An applicant may be permitted to take water from a village hydrant upon approval of the village office, who may elect to estimate the quantity of water taken instead of having a meter installed. In addition to the charge for water, the applicant will be required to pay a permit fee as prescribed in section 24-93 of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(5.2), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-35-24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - METERS 

Sec. 24-41. - Property owners to purchase meters. 
    All water meters, both industrial and domestic, shall be purchased from the water office, at purchase price set by village board resolution, by the owner of the premises which is to be furnished water. Meters shall remain the property of the owner and shall be treated as a fixed appurtenance to the premises on which it is located. Except as provided in article VIII, for meters purchased prior to the effective date of this chapter, the village shall not repurchase water meters from customers. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(4.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-42. - Installation. 
(a)  The village reserves the right to stipulate the size, type and make of meter to be used to record the consumption of water by any customer. An individual meter shall be required for each premises and for each separate service connection to a premises. The village shall designate the location of the meter on the customer's premises. The village reserves the right to install a remote read-box on the premises of the customer. All costs arising from water meter and/or remote read-box installation shall be borne by the customer. 
(b)  Upon receipt of payment of the purchase price and a proper application, the village will furnish and install meters and meter couplings, five-eighths inch, three-fourths inch, two (2) inches, one and one-half (11/2) inches, and one inch, and will charge a fee for such service as provided in section 24-93. (Any meter size over two (2) inches will be purchased from the village but installed by the customer.) The customer will provide and install all the necessary piping, fittings, valves and pipe couplings to receive the meter. 
(c)  The water office may order the installation of suitable equipment to prevent backflow which may cause damage to the meter, or other damage to the village's distribution system. Installation must be completed within such reasonable time as provided in the order. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(4.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-43. - Maintenance of meters and accessories thereto. 
(a)  All meters and meter couplings purchased by the customer shall be subject to inspection by the village. The customer will be responsible for damages due to freezing, hot water, tampering or other external causes. In cases of damage the village will repair the meter, if necessary, replacing it with another meter, and the cost of such repair or replacement shall be borne by the customer, except that the village shall bear costs attributable to ordinary wear and tear on meters of two (2) inches or smaller. 
(b)  It will be the obligation of the customer to maintain and, when necessary, to repair the facilities required to be installed in outside meter pits. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(4.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-44. - Meter testing. 
(a)  Meters shall be made accessible to the village at all reasonable times, and the village reserves the right to remove and test any meter at any time, and to substitute another meter in its place. 
(b)  In case of a disputed account involving the question as to the accuracy of the meter, such meter shall be tested by the village upon request of the customer. The fee for testing meters will be as provided in section 24-93. In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an error in registration to the prejudice of the customer in excess of four (4) percent, the fee for testing will be foregone. Prior bills will be adjusted to correct such registration and a credit for such adjustment will be applied to the customer's subsequent bill. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(4.4), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-45. - Meter for temporary service. 
    A lease of a meter from the village will be made for a temporary service not to exceed thirty (30) days or such other time as stipulated by the water office. The amount of deposit, as provided in section 24-93, will be refunded by the village without interest when the meter is returned and provided that the same is found to be in proper condition for reuse after inspection and test. Where such temporary use results in damage to the meter the cost of repairing the damage will be deducted from the deposit. In addition, any outstanding charges for water use by such temporary service customer will be deducted from the deposit and credited to the outstanding account. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(4.5), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-46-24-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; use of fire hydrants, § 8-3. 

Sec. 24-61. - Public fire protection; use of hydrants. 
(a)  No hydrant shall be used for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fires, periodic testing of the fire protection system or periodic drills by a fire department unless a permit for special use is filed with the water office and the fee paid. 
(b)  Proper fire officials shall notify the village within twenty-four (24) hours after the use of a village hydrant for public fire protection to enable the village to inspect the hydrant and determine whether it has been returned to its proper operating condition. A hydrant user's failure to return a hydrant to its proper operating condition shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(6.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-62. - Private fire protection-Application procedure. 
(a)  The following procedure shall apply for all applications for private fire protection or large service hydrants: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit three (3) copies of the plumbing schematics or plan, showing the proposed service location and size. The schematics or plan shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or registered architect. 
(2)  All applications and plans submitted shall contain such information as required by the water office. 
(3)  If a combination fire and domestic service is requested, the necessary requirements will be as follows: 
a.  Approval in writing from a qualified representative of a fire rating organization or underwriter. 
b.  Verification that the necessary pressures will be available to the fire system when the domestic service is being used at peak capacity. 
c.  Proper installation of certified detector check fitting at prescribed location as not to be affected by domestic flow. 
d.  Proper check system or backflow prevention devices on domestic service. 
e.  Disinfecting methods as mandated by the state health department, bureau of water supply, and necessary pressure testing of system. 
f.  All work to be done by a qualified sprinkler company and work on domestic service to be done by a licensed plumber. 
g.  Other criteria as promulgated by the water office. 
(b)  Upon receipt of written application and payment of all applicable fees for private fire protection service made by owner or occupant of any property abutting on the street, the village will install the water service connection tee and valve at the expense of the applicant. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(7.1), 6-2-87) 
Cross reference- Plumbing, § 7-61 et seq. 
Sec. 24-63. - Private fire protection-Installation of private hydrant. 
    If a hydrant is installed on a private fire protection service line, such hydrant shall be located on the owner's or occupant's property and installed by him at his expense. However, the village reserves the right to approve the type of hydrant and the manner of installation before service is approved. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(7.2), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-64-24-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BILLING AND PAYMENT FOR SERVICE 

Sec. 24-71. - Service to be billed to owner of premises. 
(a)  Except as provided in article VIII, all charges for water service including water rents shall be billed and mailed to the owner of the premises to which water is furnished at the owner's address. 
(b)  The village shall be notified in person of any change in ownership at premises to which water services are furnished, which notice shall be the responsibility of the new owner. Failure to provide such notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Upon receipt of proper notice, the village will take final reading in accordance with section 24-29. No adjustment of bills as between old and new customers will be made by the village. The village will only provide a final bill when property ownership is transferred. 
(c)  Upon notice of discontinuance of service in accordance with section 24-29 and recording of a final reading the village will prepare a final bill. A refund for the amount of excess payment resulting from an overestimated prior billing will be given to the old owner. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(8.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-72. - Terms of payment. 
(a)  All bills for water furnished by meter shall become due and payable in three-month billing cycles as determined by the village office. 
(b)  The quantity recorded by the meter shall be considered the amount of water used by the customer, which amount shall be conclusive on both the customer and the village, except as hereinafter provided. Where the meter has been tested and is discovered to have malfunctioned or have registered inaccurately, the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the meter in a corresponding past period when in order, except where it appears that there has been a change of customer or change in the use of water, equitable adjustment shall be made in the determination of the village. In all cases where a meter is found to be defective, the village shall immediately replace the same with a meter that has been tested and properly adjusted. 
(c)  Where a reading cannot be obtained an estimated bill may be rendered to a consumer. The quantity may be adjusted in the same procedure as used for a meter malfunction. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(8.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-73. - Penalty for late payment. 
    In case any water bill or charge provided for in and by these rules shall not be paid within sixty (60) days following the due date of the bill, a ten-percent penalty will be charged. Failure to pay any bill dated prior to January 1 of a particular year, including penalty charges, by March 1 of that year will result in the arrears being applied to the owner's tax levy, in accordance with the Village Law of the state. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(8.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-74. - Allowance for excessive bill due to leakage. 
    In order to encourage prompt repairs to leakage, pipes or fixtures, the village may, under certain conditions, grant allowances for apparently excessive bills resulting from leakage beyond the meter. Granting of an allowance shall be in the sole discretion of the village and shall not exceed one-half of the excess due to leakage over the normal usage for the period. The village board shall be the sole judge in determining the amount of excess resulting from the leakage. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(8.4), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-75. - Water service through no meter. 
    If an owner fails to notify the village that a meter should be installed and uses water supplied by the village which passes through no meter, he shall be required to pay three (3) times the monthly minimum charge for the service for each thirty-day period or part thereof that water has been used at the premises. The period of time during which water has been so used shall be calculated from the date of issue of the certificate of occupancy or the date of sale, whichever is earlier, to the date the meter is installed. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(8.5), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-76-24-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RATES, FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 24-91. - Water rents. 
(a)  Water rents shall be established by resolution of the village pursuant to Village Law, § 11-1118. All billings shall be calculated for each payment as of the regularly scheduled meter reading date or, in the case of a voluntary discontinuance of service, as of the date of the final reading. 
(b)  In the event a meter reading cannot be made, and/or a timely reading card is not submitted by the customer, usage may be estimated and a bill will be prepared based on such estimated reading. Estimates made by the village shall be conclusively binding on the customer. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(9.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-92. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees for water taps shall be established by resolution of the village board. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(9.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-93. - Miscellaneous charges. 
    Charges for the following services or permits shall be established by resolution of the village board: Charge for new service, charge for inspection and disconnection of abandoned water service, permit for use of hydrant, charge for water testing, charge for temporary meter. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(9.3), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-94. - Costs of equipment. 
    Costs for meters, sleeves, valves, taps and other equipment or appliances related to village water service shall be established by resolution of the village board. A listing of such costs shall be available at the office of the clerk-treasurer during normal business hours. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(9.4), 6-2-87) 
Secs. 24-95-24-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 24-101. - Damage to equipment or buildings. 
    No person shall damage any equipment or buildings belonging to the village water system, tamper with meters, divert water from mains, use water without permission, or cut or tap into any water pipe or main. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(10.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-102. - Curb-stop handling. 
    No person may use the curb-stop to turn on or off the water supply or use any main controls unless such person has been authorized to do so by the village office. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(10.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-103. - Licensed plumber to make attachments or alterations. 
    No person shall make any attachment to or connect with the pipes of the village or make any additions to or alterations or any tap, pipe, cock or other fixture connected with the village water supply and mains unless licensed as a plumber by the village pursuant to chapter 7 of this Code, except that an individual owner of the premises in question may make such attachments, additions or alterations to facilities other than the village main or corporation stop at the main, provided that an inspection by the village is conducted pursuant to chapter 7 of this Code. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(10.3), 6-2-87) 
Cross reference- Plumbers, § 7-71 et seq. 
Secs. 24-104-24-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSITIONAL PERIOD 

Sec. 24-111. - Ownership of meter and billing of service may temporarily remain in name of lessee. 
    On the effective date of this chapter where service is in the name of, and a meter purchased prior to such effective date is owned by, the occupant of the premises being serviced, which occupant is not necessarily the owner of the premises, such meter ownership and billing procedure shall continue until there is a change of occupancy of such premises. When the owner or non-owner occupant vacates the premises and notifies the village of discontinuance of water services, the village will purchase the meter owned by the occupant at the price originally paid by the owner of such meter less the cost of placing meter in good condition and repair. At such time, if service is to be continued or renewed an application for service must be completed by the owner of such premises in accordance with section 24-21, and a meter purchased from the village in accordance with section 24-41. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(12.1), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-112. - Village will repurchase meters from property owners as of effective date upon change of ownership. 
    Where a property owner in whose name water service is being furnished and who has purchased a water meter from the village prior to the effective date of this chapter transfers property ownership and notifies the village of discontinuance of water service, the village will purchase the water meter possessed by such owner at the price originally paid by the owner of such meter less the cost of placing meter in good condition and repair. At such time, if service is to be continued or renewed, an application for service must be completed by the prospective owner of such property in accordance with section 24-21 and a meter purchased from the village in accordance with section 24-41. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(12.2), 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-113. - Responsibility for arrearages. 
    Notwithstanding the continued billing of service to the non-owner of the premises being serviced under this article, all arrearages shall become a lien attached to the property in question in accordance with the Village Law of the state. 
(L.L. No. 3-1987, § 2(12.3), 6-2-87) 
Chapter 25 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Oil and gas, drilling, wells, etc., Ch. 15; planning development, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Zoning generally, Village Law, § 7-700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Kenmore, New York. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. I, § I) 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Accessory structure: A subordinate structure located on the same lot with the principal structure, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. Where an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory structure shall be considered part of the principal structure. 
    Accessory use: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property, located on the same lot therewith. 
    Antique, precious metal, and/or jewelry exchange shop: A store that purchases antiques, precious metals, and/or jewelry from customers and offers these items for sale to the general public. This definition specifically excludes pawn shops, collateral loan brokers, or any other establishment lending funds using personal property as collateral, which are not permitted in the village. This definition also specifically excludes any type of exchange shop where anything other than antiques, precious metals, and/or jewelry is purchased from customers. 
    Apartment house: A multiple dwelling as the same is defined in the Multiple Residence Law of the state. 
    Building: Anything upon a lot, resting upon a support or foundation with doors or windows, and shall include verandas, bay windows, piazzas and porches. 
    Building line: A line running through a lot parallel with a street line between which line and the street line, buildings may not be built or structures erected, except as otherwise herein provided. 
    Collateral loan broker: This term shall have the meaning set forth in General Business Law, § 52. Collateral loan brokers are not permitted within the village. 
    Commercial garage: A business devoted primarily to the sale of new automobiles under a franchise from a manufacturer, together with used cars taken in exchange in the usual course of business, with the conditioning and repair of motor vehicles sold by the proprietor, together with occasional services to others. 
    Consignment store: An exclusively indoor sales establishment whose primary service is to receive a new or used retail product from a secondary party who entrusts the establishment to reimburse the second party, or trustee, upon the sale of the consigned product. 
    Corner lot: A parcel of land having lot lines at the junction of two (2) or more streets or having lot lines on the same street forming an interior angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Family: One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage living or cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or not more than four (4) individuals who are not so related, living together as a single housekeeping unit. One "family" may include up to four (4) borders or lodgers when such persons are part of the single housekeeping unit. 
    Fence: A structure erected around, along, by, or on any open space, lot, driveway, sidewalk or yard which prevents or impedes passage in or out of or encloses in full or part such open space, lot, driveway, sidewalk or yard, or which separates in full or in part any such open space, lot, driveway, sidewalk or yard from another such area. "Fence" shall not include stakes connected by string, wire or some other material temporarily erected to protect newly seeded yards, shrubs, trees, or other plantings. 
    Floor area: The total horizontal area of a building as outlined by its exterior main walls, not including any space the habitation of which is prohibited by any law, built-in or attached garages, porches or terraces. 
    Gasoline station or gas station: A use of premises or buildings thereon for the sale or storage of motor fuel, except as same may be used or maintained in connection with or incidental to an agency for the buying and selling of new motor vehicles. 
    Ground floor area: The maximum horizontal area of a building at the ground level, excluding open porches, terraces and steps and attached or built-in garage areas. 
    Hedge: A row of shrubs or bushes serving as a fence, as defined above. 
    Height of a building: The perpendicular distance between the bottom of the first floor joist and the top of the main rafter plate. 
    Industry: This term includes storage, repair, manufacture and preparation or treatment of any article, substance or commodity, and includes the operation of public garages, automobile washeries and paint shops. 
    Length of a building: The longest dimension through the main portion of such building and at right angles to an outside wall of the same. 
    Lot: A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by one building and accessory buildings customary and incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required, by this chapter and such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be used in connection with such building. 
    Pawn shop: An establishment where personal property is received and for which money is advanced, with the right of privilege granted to the person to whom said money is advanced to reclaim such property upon repayment of said money, together with all legal charges incident thereto. This definition includes collateral loan brokers. Pawn shops are not permitted within the village. 
    Private garage: This term includes a garage building in or about which no business or industry connected directly or indirectly with motor vehicles is conducted, and in which not more than three (3) automobiles shall be housed. 
    Public garage: A business which does not sell new automobiles under a franchise from the manufacturer but which performs services on cars or parts thereof combined with incidental sales of merchandise. 
    Setback: The distance from the street line to the part of the structure nearest the street line, measured at right angles to the street line, not including cornices, or open piazzas, porches or entrance steps. 
    Store for retail sales: A sales establishment that sells goods or commodities in small quantities to consumers. This definition specifically excludes establishments that purchase items of personal property from customers. 
    Street line: The line which is the joint boundary line between a lot and street or highway right-of-way and is not to be confused with the curb line of the street. 
    Structure: Anything upon a lot, other than a building, sidewalk, or driveway. 
    Swimming pool: A permanent or semi-permanent enclosure, construction, or excavation capable of containing water of more than two (2) feet in depth, and designed or intended to be used or capable of use for swimming and bathing. 
    Temporary parking of a motor vehicle: The parking of a motor vehicle in an off-street parking district for a period of not more than eight (8) consecutive hours. 
    Use: The purposes for which a building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, is or are occupied, or if unoccupied, the purpose for which they may be occupied hereunder. 
    Width of a building shall be the distance between the main walls of the building at right angles to the length and measured through the widest part of the building. 
    Yard: The area on a lot generally unoccupied by any building and extending along the lot lines and in towards the buildings. A "front yard" extends along the front lot line the width of the lot and back to the front of the building. A "rear yard" extends along the rear lot line and to the rear of the building. A "side yard" extends along the side lot line between the front and rear yards. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. II, § 1; Ord. of 1-18-72; L.L. No. 6-1980, § 1, 6-5-80; L.L. No. 1-2015, § 2, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 25-3. - Districts-Designated. 
    The village is hereby divided into the following use districts: 
(1)  Residential use district no. 1; 
(2)  Residential use district no. 2; 
(3)  Residential use district no. 3; 
(4)  Restricted business use district; 
(5)  General business use district; 
(6)  Industrial use district; 
(7)  Professional office use district; 
(8)  Planned unit development districts; 
(9)  Educational use district. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. III, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 1, 5-4-76; L.L. 5-2006, § 1, 6-20-06; L.L. No. 3-2014, § 2, 2-18-14; L.L. No. 4-2014, § 1, 1-21-14) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish zoning districts, Village Law, § 7-702. 
Sec. 25-4. - Districts-Map. 
    The location and boundaries of the zoning use districts are established as delineated and shown on the zoning map dated March 6, 2018, which is attached to and forms a part of this chapter. The map designations are hereby declared to be a part thereof, and of this chapter. The original map is on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(L.L. 12-2006, § 1, 11-07-06; L.L. 3-2018, § 1, 3-6-18) 
Sec. 25-5. - Penalties. 
    Every person who commences, takes part in or assists in any violation thereof, or who constructs, maintains or uses any building, structure, or premises in, upon, or by which any provision of this chapter is violated, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XIII, § II) 
Secs. 25-6-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-21. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as providing minimum requirements adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the village. 
(b)  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal (except as herein stated), abrogate or impair existing conditions previously made, or permits previously issued, relating to the use of buildings or premises, or to impair or interfere with any easements, covenants, or agreements existing between parties; but wherever this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than are required by existing provisions of law, ordinances, regulations or permits, or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(c)  Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, or courts, or require a lower height of building of less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than required in any other local law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other local law, ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or require a lower height of building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of the lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of such local law, ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XII, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 25-22. - Enforcement officer. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XIII, § 1 
Sec. 25-23. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) voting members and two (2) alternates appointed by mayor with approval by the village board of trustees. The members of the board of appeals as now constituted shall continue in office until the expiration of their present terms. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years each. Vacancies shall be filled as provided for in the Village Law. 
(b)  Alternate members. Alternate members shall have all the requirements for eligibility of regular board members. Alternate members shall enjoy the same rights and privileges as regular board members, including the right to participate in all discussions; provided, however, that an alternate member shall be entitled to vote only when a regular board member is not present or is disqualified from voting. When a board member will not be voting, the board chair shall authorize such regular member's voting authority to the first alternate and in his/her absence to the second alternate. Any further reference herein to board member shall include any alternate, unless otherwise indicated. 
(c)  The board of appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the duties established under Village Law, § 7-712, and shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business consistent with such statute and this chapter. 
(d)  Membership eligibility and ineligibility. 
(1)  Eligibility. Board members shall be residents of the village and/or shall own and/or operate a business within the village. All members will be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Ineligibility. Board members who, during their term, relocate their permanent place of residence outside the village, or, in the case of owners and/or operators of businesses within the village, who cease to operate and/or own said business in the village may, at the discretion of the mayor, remain until completion of the appointed term. 
(3)  No person who is a trustee or a member of the planning board, or housing authority shall be eligible for membership on the board. 
(4)  Training. Board members are required to participate in a minimum of four (4) hours of training each calendar year and to provide proof of attendance to the clerk/treasurer. Failure to meet this training requirement may result in removal from the zoning board of appeals at the discretion of the mayor. 
(L.L. No. 6-2012, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-12) 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 6-2012, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 21, 2012, repealed the former § 25-23, and enacted a new § 25-23 as set out herein. The former § 25-23 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference- Function of zoning board of appeals under housing ordinance, § 11-46 et seq. 
Sec. 25-24. - Fee for petition to board of appeals. 
    Each petition for a hearing before the zoning board of appeals shall be accompanied by such fee as is now or hereafter established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X, § III) 
Secs. 25-25-25-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 25-36. - Continuance generally. 
(a)  Any nonconforming use now existing may be continued, but only to the extent, and upon the premises, and in the building or structure, where such nonconforming use now exists. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent an increase in the products so produced or business so conducted, provided that no additional structure or extension of any existing structure is erected. 
(b)  Structural changes within an existing building may be made, but in no case shall exceed in cost fifty (50) percent of its present assessed valuation. 
(c)  Any nonconforming building or structure which has been completely destroyed or partially destroyed to the extent at least of fifty (50) percent of its sound value, by means other than intent or design, may be rebuilt or repaired within one year thereafter and the nonconforming use thereof may be continued herein. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VII, §§ I, IV) 
Sec. 25-37. - Changes or discontinuance of use. 
    Except as otherwise provided no changes shall be made in any existing nonconforming use except such change shall be to a use permitted within the district wherein the same is located. On any premises situate in a residential use district no. 1, a residential use district no. 2, or a residential use district no. 3, any use which is not permitted in such use district shall cease if discontinued for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VII, § II; Ord. of 10-9-64) 
Sec. 25-38. - Temporary and conditional permits. 
    The board of appeals at its discretion may grant special permits for nonconforming uses within any district where in its opinion such district is sufficiently undeveloped to justify such nonconforming use; such special permits shall be of limited duration, and shall provide for the change to a conforming use at the expiration of such period. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IX, § II) 
Sec. 25-39. - Change of districts. 
    If by amendment to this chapter or to the zoning map, any area is transferred from one district to another district of more restricted use, any nonconforming use than existing within said area may be continued. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XI, § II) 
Secs. 25-40-25-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 25-51. - Authorized. 
    The provisions of this chapter and the boundaries on the zoning map, may be from time to time amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed after such public hearing and official notice as provided by statute. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XI, § I) 
State Law reference- Required notice and hearing, Village Law, § 7-706. 
Sec. 25-52. - Petition for amendment and action thereon. 
(a)  Whenever the owners of fifty (50) percent, or more in area in any zoning district, or a specified portion thereof, shall present their signed petition to the board of trustees requesting any amendment, supplement, alteration, or change in, or repeal of the regulations for such district, or specified portion thereof, it shall be the duty of the board of trustees to hold a public hearing or hearings thereon, and to give such notice thereof as shall be required by statute and, if, in the judgment of the village board it shall be deemed advisable, said board may in addition to such statutory notice cause written notice to be served, either by mail or personally, upon the owners of all lands within the district or specified portion thereof, which such proposed amendment, supplement, alteration, change, or repeal, shall relate to, and, in addition thereto, the owners of all lands in any direction within one hundred (100) feet of such district or specified portion thereof; and it shall be sufficient notice if such written notice shall be mailed or served personally upon the persons whose names are shown upon the last completed village assessment roll, as the owners of the lands so affected. It shall be the duty of the board after such public notice and hearing or hearings upon such petition to decide by a majority vote upon such request or petition within ninety (90) days after such petition is filed with the clerk of the village. 
(b)  All local laws amending, supplementing, changing, or modifying the zoning map shall include a description of the boundaries on the zoning map which are to be modified. The entire test of said law or laws shall be incorporated by reference into this Code without the necessity of being fully set forth therein, and shall be reflected on the zoning map kept on file at the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XI, § III) 
State Law reference- Required notice and hearing, Village Law, § 7-706; protests, Village Law, § 7-708. 
Sec. 25-53. - Fee. 
    Each petition for an amendment to any ordinance shall be accompanied by such fee as is established by local law or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. XI, § IV) 
Secs. 25-54-25-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 25-66. - Compliance with permit, ordinances, etc. 
    No building in any residential use district shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part for any purpose other than that for which the permit covering the erection or alteration of said building was issued, or for any purpose not expressly permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § I (f)) 
Sec. 25-67. - General use restrictions. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be built or erected in residential use district no. 1 other than one-family dwellings for the residential purposes of one family only and private garages. One-family dwellings must equal or exceed the minimum dimensions established in this chapter. 
(b)  No building or structure shall be erected in residential use district no. 2 except one- and two-family dwellings, churches, schools, libraries, clubhouses for fraternal organizations, buildings, for semi-public purposes, telephone exchanges, parks, recreation areas and all structures accessory thereto, and private garages. One- and two-family dwellings must equal or exceed the minimum dimensions hereby established. 
(c)  Any use permitted within residential use district no. 1 or residential use district no. 2 shall also be permitted in a residential use district no. 3 with the addition of apartment houses. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § I(a)-(c)) 
Sec. 25-68. - Ground floor area of residences. 
(a)  A one-family residence of the one floor type or plan shall have a ground floor area, as outlined by its main exterior walls, of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet, exclusive of attached garage, and utility room if no basement is constructed, except that on Keller Avenue and Mang Avenue between Elmwood Avenue and Military Road and on Tremaine Avenue between Wilber Avenue and Military Road, the floor area as outlined by its main exterior walls shall not be less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet. 
(b)  A one-family residence, being more than one full story in height and less than two (2) full stories in height, shall have a ground floor area of not less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet, exclusive of attached garage, and utility room if no basement is constructed. 
(c)  A one-family residence, of the two (2) or two and one-half (21/2) story type, shall have a floor area, as outlined by its exterior walls, of not less than one thousand forty (1,040) square feet on the first and second floors combined, exclusive of attached garage. 
(d)  All two-family residences, and all types of the two (2) or two and one-half (21/2) story type, shall have a ground floor area, as outline by its exterior walls, of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet, exclusive of attached garage, and utility room if no basement is constructed. 
(e)  All habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet for first floors and seven (7) feet on second floors, however, the habitable rooms on the second floor of a residence having more than one story in height but less than two (2) full stories in height shall have fifty (50) percent or more clear ceiling height of seven (7) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § I (e)) 
Sec. 25-69. - Customary home occupations. 
    Offices of doctors, surgeons, dentists, lawyers, musicians, architects, dressmakers connected with their private residences, are allowed in all residential use districts with the right to place on the premises one window or one door signboard as an advertisement of the occupation carried on within the premises of a size not greater than two (2) square feet, and the accessory uses allowed customary to all of the foregoing permitted uses, including private garages. Said sign must be professionally printed. The list of customary home uses may be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the board of trustees for the village. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § II, 12-15-59; L.L. No. 5-2018, § 2, 7-3-18) 
Sec. 25-70. - Animals. 
    No person shall maintain or keep bees, chickens or other fowl, pigeons, or a dog kennel on any premises in any residential use district. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § I (d)) 
Cross reference- Restrictions on keeping animals, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 25-71. - Ground floor area of garages. 
    No private garage, except a garage attached to a dwelling, shall exceed one story or twelve (12) feet in height. No private garage shall be larger than six hundred sixty (660) square feet, nor exceed twenty-two (22) feet for one ground dimension and thirty (30) feet for the other. In the event the ground garage area on any parcel does not exceed six hundred sixty (660) square feet, then an addition for auxiliary storage purposes may be constructed on said premises, provided said addition, together with any garage on said premises, does not exceed six hundred sixty (660) square feet and provided that said addition is constructed adjacent to the rear of the house or adjacent to the side or rear of the garage. Any such addition shall be similar in exterior construction to the building to which it is attached or, in the alternative, of metal. No such addition shall be constructed or placed until after the issuance of a building permit therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § 1(f); Ord. of 12-7-65; L.L. No. 1-1987, § 1, 4-7-87) 
Sec. 25-72. - Accessory uses and requirements. 
(a)  In a residential use district no building or accessory thereto shall be used other than for a use above specified and for auxiliary uses reasonably incidental thereto. 
(b)  The term "accessory uses" as applied to such districts shall not include a business use except as is otherwise indicated. 
(c)  In addition to passenger vehicles, station wagons, or autobuses used for private purposes, it shall be lawful for a portion of premises to be occupied by a single vehicle ordinarily used for business purposes, whether or not said vehicle is in fact employed for a business purpose; provided, however, that said vehicle does not exceed a one-ton classification and said vehicle is not parked on that portion of premises lying between the front building line and the street line. 
(d)  On corner lots, no vehicle ordinarily and/or actually being used for business purposes, other than passenger vehicles, station wagons, and autobuses free of visible advertising of services, products or businesses, shall occupy that portion of premises lying between the house side building line and the side street line, unless such vehicle is contained entirely within a garage. 
(e)  No garage or portion of premises shall be used for parking of any vehicle in excess of a one-ton classification. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § I(g); Ord. of 9-21-71) 
Sec. 25-73. - Driveways. 
(a)  Building permit. A building permit shall be required before any driveway may be installed or replaced. Applications shall be made to the building department and shall contain all information and documentation required by said department. 
(b)  Driveways. 
(1)  In a residential use district, driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, bricks or pavers 
(2)  In residential use districts, no driveway shall be placed or constructed that exceeds in width ten (10) feet plus ten (10) percent of the width of the tax lot on which it is constructed or placed, but in no event shall the width exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
(3)  No part of the driveway shall be placed or constructed closer than twelve (12) inches from an adjoining lot line. 
(4)  The driveway shall not be placed or constructed so that any part of it that lies between the dwelling and the sidewalk exceeds eighteen (18) inches in width. 
(5)  The top surface of the driveway shall not exceed the average elevation of the adjoining lots and shall be so placed or constructed as to cause water to drain away from the adjoining lots. 
(6)  The provisions of subsection (3) shall apply only to any driveway placed or constructed after January 1, 2007. 
(7)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), the following provisions shall apply to multiple car garages: 
a.  If the garage is located behind the dwelling house, the width of the driveway between the rear of the dwelling house and the garage may extend the full width of the garage; and 
b.  If the garage is attached to the dwelling house, but not located behind it, the width of the driveway may extend the full width of the garage. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, §§ VI, VII; Ord. of 8-7-62; L.L. No. 14-2006, § 2, 12-5-06; L.L. No. 2-2007, § 1, 9-18-07; L.L. No. 10-2018, § 1, 12-18-18) 
Cross reference- Driveways generally, § 17-51 et seq. 
Sec. 25-74. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  The line of setback of all buildings and structures erected, constructed, or built within these residential use districts shall be not less than the average setback of all buildings for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on each side of said building, but in no event shall the line of setback be less than twenty-five (25) feet except on the northerly side of Tremaine Avenue between Melrose Avenue and Military Road, the setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet. In case of a building erected or built on a corner lot, the line of setback shall be covered by the setback line of the street on which the narrow frontage of the lot faces, but so far as possible, the building shall also conform to the line of setback of the other street, and shall not be less than five (5) feet from the side lot line. No private garage, carport, or parking pad, shall be erected or placed in the residential use districts nearer than twenty-five (25) feet back of the street line, except on the northerly side of Tremaine Avenue between Melrose Avenue and Military Road the setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from the street line. No private garage, carport, or parking pad shall be erected or placed in the residential use districts on a corner lot nearer than eight (8) feet to the side street line except lots on Melrose Avenue on which lots garages may be constructed not less than three (3) feet from Melrose Avenue. 
(b)  Wherever a front building line is established pursuant to the within section, it shall not include verandas, porches or porte cocheres, whether open, enclosed, or excavated under, but any projection as herein described shall not protrude into the restricted area a distance of more than nine (9) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § III; L.L. No. 5-1999, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 25-75. - Area of side yards. 
    Every building or structure erected, constructed or built within residential use districts shall have a side yard area on each side thereof, which said side yard shall be of the width of not less than the minimum width on each side of the building or structure set down in the following schedule: 
Width of Lot Minimum Width of Each Side Yard (feet) Not exceeding 33 feet 11/2 Over 33 feet but not exceeding 38 feet 2 Exceeding 38 feet 3 Detached garages 11/2  
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § V) 
Sec. 25-76. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  There shall be not less than one and one-half (11/2) off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit located in residential use districts 1, 2, and 3. Each space must consist of an enclosed garage or a properly drained and paved area not less than eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet, exclusive of unusable space and turn areas. No off-street parking area shall be located between the street line and the building line. 
(b)  The off-street parking area herein required may be incorporated in full or in part within the main structure of the residential building provided that detailed plans and specifications therefor be first approved by the board of trustees. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to structures currently occupied as dwelling units located in residential use districts 1 and 2, or to one- and two-family houses currently occupied in residential use district 3 which were in existence prior to June 1, 1999. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § 1(h); Ord. of 10-19-65; L.L. No. 5-1999, §§ 1, 3, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 25-77. - Parking of vehicles. 
    In residential use districts no motor vehicle shall be parked or permitted to stand on any unpaved portion of any lot. Parking of seasonal travel vehicles, boats, trailers, or recreational vehicles is also permitted within all the building setback requirements only, provided that the vehicles are not used for living purposes and do not obstruct vision nor occupy required parking space. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § VIII; Ord. of 8-7-62; L.L. No. 1 of 1989, § 1, 1-17-89) 
Sec. 25-78. - Garage and yard sales law. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Garage and Yard Sales Law of the Village of Kenmore, New York." 
(b)  Purpose. This section is enacted to control and restrict garage and yard sales to protect the public health, safety and convenience and to restrict the frequency of such sales to help preserve the character of residential neighborhoods. This section further intends to eliminate repeated, perpetual and/or prolonged garage and yard sales in residential use districts. If unregulated, garage and yard sales could result in the equivalent of commercial retail businesses operating in residential areas in violation of the village's zoning laws. 
    This section is not intended to amend any other provision or chapter of the village zoning code, also known as chapter 25 of the Kenmore Municipal Code. 
(c)  Definition. As used in this chapter, the term "garage sale" shall mean any sale of personal property which takes place at a residence or property within a residential zoning district of the village. Garage sales shall only offer used items of personal property owned by the resident(s) of the property where the sale is held, or, more specifically, items shall not be purchased specifically to be sold at a garage sale. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "garage sale" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "yard sale," "tag sale," "porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage sale," and "estate sale." 
(d)  General regulations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct more than two (2) garage sales in a single calendar year in any residential zoning district within the village without first obtaining a permit from the village clerk to conduct a third (or subsequent) sale. 
(2)  All garage sale applications shall be submitted to the village clerk. The application shall state the name and contact information of the applicant, the address where the garage sale is to take place, and the dates and times on which the garage sale is to occur. 
(3)  Each application for a garage sale permit shall be accompanied by a fee, as set by the board of trustees by resolution. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a garage sale application, the village clerk shall review the application for compliance with subsections (d)(2) and (d)(3) above. If the application complies with subsections (d)(2) and (d)(3) and the applicant has included payment of the requisite fee, the village clerk shall issue the applicant a permit to conduct the garage sale. 
(5)  The duration of any garage sale shall not last longer than one calendar day, but in any event shall comply with the time restrictions in subsection (d)(6) below. 
(6)  Garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. only. 
(7)  The provisions above notwithstanding, no resident of the village shall be permitted to conduct more than four (4) garage sales in a single calendar year, or such other number as set forth by the board of trustees by resolution. 
(e)  Signs and advertisements. Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or other media sources. On the day preceding and day(s) of the garage sale, a temporary sign no larger than three (3) feet by three (3) feet may be installed at the residence where the garage sale is occurring to advertise said sale. Any signs so erected shall be removed at the end of the sale. 
    No other signs, bills, flyers, posters, or other notices advertising a garage sale shall be placed on any telephone pole or other structure not at the residence where the garage sale is to be conducted without the express written permission of the owner of the location where the sign is to be placed. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(L.L. No. 2-2015, § 1, 10-6-15) 
Secs. 25-79-25-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III-B. - EDUCATIONAL USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 25-85. - Educational use district. 
(a)  Purpose. The educational use district allows for development and use of land for public or private educational purposes. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. The following are principal uses: 
(1)  Schools. A school is defined as a facility, either public or private, that provides a curriculum of elementary and/or secondary academic instruction, including pre-K, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high schools and/or high schools, but not including trade schools, colleges, universities, or day care centers. This includes school grounds, including sports fields, and playgrounds. 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  No building or structure shall be erected, used, or occupied, in whole or in part, nor shall any land be used or occupied, in whole or in part, other than for any purpose expressly permitted by the provisions of the article. 
(2)  No building or structure shall be erected, used, or occupied, in whole or in part, nor shall any land be used or occupied, in whole or in part, other than for the principal uses provided in subsection (b). 
(3)  Front yards. The minimum building setback line for front yards shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from the public right-of-way. Buildings on corner lots shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Side yards. The minimum width of side yards for all new construction, including additions to existing buildings and any projections thereto, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property boundary. 
(5)  Rear yards. No building or addition thereto shall extend closer than ten (10) feet from the rear property line. 
(6)  Towers and antennae shall comply with the provisions of articles XI and XII. 
(7)  Facades and exterior finishes shall conform to the surrounding neighborhood. They shall not be visually inappropriate or offensive by reason of poor quality of exterior design, workmanship or materials, by excessive similarity or striking visual discord in relation to the site or its surroundings. Vinyl or aluminum siding, asphalt, plywood or painted brick exteriors are prohibited. 
(8)  Off-street parking areas shall be constructed of approved materials (concrete, blacktop, brick or other hard surface) and shall be adequately and appropriately drained. Off-street parking areas shall be located at the rear of the lots only, shall have direct access to a public street or right-of-way, and shall be screened with buffering and landscaping. 
(9)  Off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length and served by aisles not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width for two-way traffic nor less than twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic. 
(L.L. No. 3-2014, § 1, 2-18-14) 
Secs. 25-86-25-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV-A. - RESTRICTED BUSINESS USE DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. 6-2006, § 1, adopted June 20, 2006, amended Art. IV in its entirety as set out herein, and also in Art. IV-B, titled "General Business Use District." The former Art. IV, titled "Restricted Business Use District," derived from Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. V, §§ 1, II, IV, 11; Ord. of 10-3-61; Ord. of 10-20-65; Ord of 1-4-66; Ord. of 3-21-72; L.L. No. 1-1975, adopted April 1, 1975; and L.L. No. 3-2000, § 1, adopted May 15, 2000. 

Sec. 25-91. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  No building, structure or premises shall be created, remodeled or used within the restricted business use district which are intended, arranged or designed to be used for other than for one or more of the following: 
(1)  Store for retail sales. 
(2)  Business, professional or medical offices. 
(3)  Restaurant. 
(4)  Theater limited to one hundred (100) seats. 
(5)  Specialty shop for making articles for retail sale on premises that does not emit noxious fumes or odors or excessive noise. 
(6)  Banks. 
(7)  Funeral homes without cremation facilities. 
(8)  Residential uses not occupying first floors provided that the livable space is not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(9)  Photographic or artist studio. 
(10)  Educational facilities. 
(11)  Print and graphics shop. 
(12)  Barber shop, beauty parlor or day spa. 
(13)  Repair shops not involving automobiles. 
(b)  All activities shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed structure, or as allowed by law outside of an enclosed structure. The displaying, storing and selling of seasonal-type merchandise and products related to retail activities carried on in the structure are permitted outside of the structure provided said merchandise and products are neither subject to harm by exposure to the elements nor hazardous to abutting premises. 
(c)  Seasonal outdoor dining shall be permitted by special permit in accordance with article XIV. 
(d)  Automobile repair facilities, gasoline stations, automobile service facilities (including gas, car wash, retail shops, oil change facilities, or auto sound equipment installation facilities) are prohibited. 
(e)  Off street parking, where provided or required, shall be located in the rear of the structures only and shall be screened in accordance with section 25-95. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06; L.L. No. 5-2011, § 1, 8-16-11) 
Sec. 25-92. - Construction standards. 
(a)  No structure shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in base floor area not two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height. All rooftop mechanical equipment and antennae must be completely screened from public view. 
(b)  Towers and antennas shall comply with the provisions of articles XI and XII of this chapter. 
(c)  Facades and exterior finishes shall conform to the surrounding neighborhood. They shall not be visually inappropriate or offensive by reason of poor quality of exterior design, workmanship or materials, by excessive similarity or striking visual discord in relation to the site or its surroundings. Vinyl or aluminum siding, asphalt, plywood or painted brick or masonry exteriors are prohibited. 
(d)  Any legal, preexisting facade or exterior finish may continue for a period of ten (10) years from the date of the adoption of this article provided it conforms to all other applicable regulations of the Kenmore Municipal Code and the building code of the state. The zoning board of appeals may permit a longer amortization period upon submission of competent proof by the owner or occupant of the property that a longer amortization period is necessary to allow the owner or occupant to recover its investment. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-93. - Depth of lots in restricted business use zone. 
    The maximum depth of a lot within the restricted business use zone that may be used for approved restricted business uses shall be two hundred (200) feet measured from the Delaware Avenue right-of-way. To be in the restricted business district, a lot or tax parcel must have frontage on Delaware Avenue. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-94. - Front, side and rear yards. 
(a)  Front yards. The minimum building setback line for front yards shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from the public right-of-way. Buildings on corner lots shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Permissible projections into front yard setback. 
(1)  A vestibule may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard setback provided that the total width of such vestibule does not exceed thirty-three (33) percent of the total street frontage the building occupies. 
(2)  A canopy or decorative cornice may project up to six (6) feet but not beyond the lot line into the required front yard setback provided the canopy is installed with a minimum ten-foot clear height beneath. 
(c)  Side yards. The minimum width of side yards in the restricted business district for all new construction, including additions to existing buildings and any projections thereto shall be governed by the applicable distance separation requirements established by the building codes of the state. 
(d)  Rear yards. 
(1)  No building or addition thereto shall extend closer than ten (10) feet or the required distance separation established by the building codes of the state (whichever is greater) from the rear property line in the restricted business use district. 
(2)  Rear yards shall include necessary fencing, landscaping and buffering in accordance with section 25-95. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-95. - Landscaping and buffering. 
(a)  All buildings, yards, sidewalks, open spaces, parking areas, storage areas and service areas shall be landscaped in a manner which will harmonize with the proposed building and the surrounding commercial area. Any paved area between a building and any right-of-way shall not be covered with paint or other substance. 
(b)  Areas between street curbing or the edge of public rights-of-way and sidewalks on village-owned streets shall be landscaped. Tree planting shall be required at no more than thirty (30) linear feet between trees. Shrubs or similar materials shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and trees shall be pruned so as not to create vision obstructions or obstruction to pedestrians. 
(c)  Business properties which immediately abut residential properties or uses shall install a combination of opaque fencing and shrub plantings spaced at a maximum of five (5) feet on center, along the property lines abutting the residential properties or uses. The planning board may waive the shrub buffering requirement as part of its site plan review, on a case by case basis. Fencing shall comply with section 25-183 and shall be of a material acceptable to the building inspector. 
(d)  Within large off-street parking areas measuring ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, the paved area for parking shall be interrupted by landscaped islands placed within rows of parking spaces so that no row of parking exceeds fifteen (15) spaces without landscaped islands. Islands shall be a minimum five (5) feet in width and shall be curbed or provided with acceptable alternative edge definition. 
(e)  All plants, trees and shrubs shall be of minimum three-inch caliper for trees and two (2) feet minimum height for shrubs and be of a variety on a list maintained by the department of public works. 
(f)  Dumpsters shall be surrounded by opaque fencing to a minimum height of one foot above the dumpster unit. Wherever practicable, dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be placed in the rear of the building and landscaped. 
(g)  All landscaping is to be well-maintained, including, but not limited to, weeding, trimming, mowing, removal of grass and shrub trimmings, weeds and leaves, and removal and replacement of dead shrubs or trees. Where more than 1/4 of a bush, plant or tree is dead, said bush, plant or tree will be immediately removed and replaced with landscaping of similar species and size. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06; L.L. 6-2018, § 1, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 25-96. - Off-street parking and walkways. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas shall be constructed of approved materials (concrete, blacktop, brick or other hard surface) and shall be adequately and appropriately drained. 
(b)  Off-street parking areas shall be located at the rear of the lots only, shall have direct access to a public street or right-of-way, and shall be screened with buffering and landscaping in accordance with section 25-95. 
(c)  Off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length and served by aisles not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width for two-way traffic nor less than twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic. 
(d)  All ingress and egress driveways shall be approved specifically by the village police department, the village superintendent of public works and the state department of transportation. 
(L.L. 6-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
ARTICLE IV-B. - GENERAL BUSINESS USE DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at Art. IV-A. 

Sec. 25-97. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted as-of-right uses within the general business use district: 
(1)  Any use permitted within the restricted business use district. 
(2)  Theater, limited to three hundred (300) seats. 
(3)  Dry cleaning plant and/or pickup station using only nonflammable fluids in self-contained, solvent-reclaiming units when the work performed is directly for the owners. No subcontract work is permitted. 
(4)  Medical clinics. 
(5)  Laundromats. 
(6)  Family billiard parlor. 
(7)  Automobile repair facilities. 
(8)  Consignment stores, as defined in section 25-2. 
(9)  Antique, precious metal, and/or jewelry exchange shops, as defined in section 25-2. 
(b)  Any use not specifically listed in section 25-97(a) is not allowed within the general business use district. No land within the general business use district shall be used, intended, arranged, or designated to be used for any other use than those listed in section 25-97(a). No building, structure, or premises shall be created, remodeled, or used within the general business use district which are intended, arranged, or designated to be used for other than those listed in section 25-97(a). 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06; L.L. No. 1-2015, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 25-98. - Construction standards. 
(a)  No structure shall exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in base floor area not two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height. All rooftop mechanical equipment and antennae must be completely screened from public view. 
(b)  Towers and antennae shall comply with the provisions of articles XI and XII. 
(c)  Facades and exterior finishes shall conform to the surrounding neighborhood. They shall not be visually inappropriate or offensive by reason of poor quality of exterior design, workmanship or materials, by excessive similarity or striking visual discord in relation to the site or its surroundings. Vinyl or aluminum siding, asphalt, plywood or painted brick exteriors are prohibited. 
(d)  Any legal, pre-existing facade or exterior finish may continue for a period of ten (10) years from the date of the adoption of this article provided it conforms to all other applicable regulations of the Kenmore Municipal Code and the building code of the state. The zoning board of appeals may permit a longer amortization period upon submission of competent proof by the owner or occupant of the property that a longer amortization period is necessary to allow the owner or occupant to recover its investment. 
(e)  Off-street parking, where provided or required, shall be screened from public view in accordance with section 25-101. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-99. - Depth of lots in general business use zone. 
    The maximum depth of a lot within the general business use zone that may be used for approved restricted business uses shall be two hundred (200) feet measured from the Elmwood Avenue or Kenmore Avenue right-of-way. To be in the general business district, a lot or tax parcel must have frontage on Elmwood or Kenmore Avenue or Delaware Avenue. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-100. - Front, side and rear yards. 
(a)  Front yards. The minimum building setback line for front yards shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from the public right-of-way. Buildings on corner lots shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Permissible projections into front yard setback. 
(1)  A vestibule may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard setback that the total width of such vestibule does not exceed thirty-three (33) percent of the total street frontage the building occupies. 
(2)  A canopy or decorative cornice may project up to six (6) feet but not beyond the lot line into the required front yard setback provided the canopy is installed with a minimum ten-foot clear height beneath. 
(c)  Side yards. The minimum width of side yards in the general business district for all new construction, including additions to existing buildings and any projections thereto, shall be governed by the applicable distance separation requirements established by the building codes of the state. 
(d)  Rear yards. 
(1)  No building or addition thereto shall extend closer than ten (10) feet or the required distance separation established by the building codes of the state (whichever is greater) from the rear property line in the general business use district. 
(2)  Rear yards shall include necessary fencing, landscaping and buffering in accordance with section 25-101. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-101. - Landscaping and buffering. 
(a)  All buildings, yards, sidewalks, open spaces, parking areas, storage areas and service areas shall be landscaped in a manner which will harmonize with the proposed building and the surrounding commercial area. Any paved area between a building and a right-of-way shall not be covered with paint or other substance. 
(b)  Areas between street curbing, or the edge of public rights of way, and sidewalks on village-owned streets shall be landscaped. Tree planting shall be required with trees placed at no more than thirty (30) linear feet between trees. Shrubs or similar materials shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and trees shall be pruned so as not to create vision obstructions or obstruction to pedestrians. 
(c)  Business properties which immediately abut residential properties or uses shall install a combination of opaque fencing and shrub plantings spaced at a maximum of five (5) feet on center, along the property lines abutting the residential properties or uses. The planning board may waive the shrub buffering requirement as part of its site plan review, on a case by case basis. Fencing shall comply with section 25-183 and shall be of a material acceptable to the building inspector. 
(d)  Within large off-street parking areas measuring ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, the paved area for parking shall be interrupted by landscaped islands placed within rows of parking spaces so that no row of parking exceeds fifteen (15) spaces without landscaped islands. Islands shall be a minimum five (5) feet in width and shall be curbed or provided with acceptable alternative edge definition. 
(e)  All plants, trees and shrubs shall be of minimum three-inch caliper for trees and two (2) feet minimum height for shrubs and be one of a variety on a list maintained by the department of public works. 
(f)  Dumpsters shall not be allowed unless as part of an approved site plan. Dumpsters shall be surrounded by opaque fencing to a minimum height of one foot above the dumpster unit. Wherever practicable, dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be placed in the rear of the building and landscaped. 
(g)  All landscaping is to be well-maintained, including, but not limited to weeding, trimming, mowing, removal of grass and shrub trimmings, weeds and leaves, and removal and replacement of dead shrubs or trees. Where more than 1/4 of a bush, plant or tree is dead, said bush, plant or tree will be immediately removed and replaced with landscaping of similar species and size. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06; L.L. 6-2018, § 2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 25-102. - Off-street parking and walkways. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas shall be constructed of approved materials (concrete, blacktop, brick or other hard surface) and shall be adequately and appropriately drained. 
(b)  Off-street parking areas shall be located at the rear of the lots only, shall have direct access to a public street or right-of-way, and shall be screened with buffering and landscaping in accordance with section 25-101. 
(c)  Off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length and served by aisles not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width for two-way traffic nor less than twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic. 
(d)  All ingress and egress driveways shall be approved specifically by the village police department, the village superintendent of public works and Erie County. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Sec. 25-103. - Incentive zoning on Kenmore Avenue. 
(a)  Any lot or tax parcel that abuts Kenmore Avenue shall be part of the Kenmore Avenue corridor. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority of Village Law, § 7-703, the board of trustees finds that, because of the economic requirements imposed on developers seeking to develop property abutting Kenmore Avenue, called the Kenmore Avenue corridor, certain redevelopment goals identified in the village's comprehensive plan concerning the Kenmore Avenue corridor, justify the granting of zoning incentives or bonuses in regard to open area, height, base floor area of buildings and other bulk requirements. The board of trustees, after evaluating the effects of potential incentives which are possible by virtue of the provision of community amenities, further finds that the Kenmore Avenue corridor contains adequate resources, environmental quality and public facilities and that there will be no significant environmentally damaging consequences and that the incentives or bonuses are compatible with the development otherwise permitted in that part of the district. 
(c)  On a case-by-case basis, justified by written findings, the board of trustees may increase the base floor area of buildings, increase height allowances or decrease setback requirements by up to twenty-five (25) percent where an application for rezoning, zoning variance or site plan approval involves construction of professional, medical or general office buildings, factories for light industrial uses, or retail plazas in the Kenmore Avenue corridor where such new construction will replace existing housing or deteriorated structures. 
(d)  An applicant for such incentives or bonuses shall request such as part of an application for rezoning, a zoning variance, or site plan, subdivision or other approval. When public hearings are required, the notice of the hearing shall state clearly the incentives or bonuses requested, the existing zoning standard, the percentage deviation from the existing zoning standard and the benefits conferred on the community. The environmental review of the proposed project shall include all impacts that could result from granting the requested incentives or bonuses in whole or part, including the impact of benefits received by the community. 
In addition, the applicant shall pay a proportionate share of the generic environmental impact statement prepared by the board of trustees pursuant to Village Law, § 7-703(3)(d). The board of trustees shall evaluate the benefit to the community of the proposed project in exchange for the particular incentive requested on a case-by-case basis and may approve, approve with conditions or deny the request. 
If the board of trustees determines that a suitable benefit to the community is not immediately feasible or otherwise not practical, the board may require, in lieu thereof, a payment to the village in a sum to be determined by the board of trustees. If the cash is accepted in lieu of the community benefit, such sum shall be deposited in a trust fund to be used exclusively for the specific purpose of upgrading the Kenmore Avenue corridor. 
(L.L. 7-2006, § 1, 6-20-06) 
Secs. 25-104-25-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV-C. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 25-107. - Legislative findings, general rules, and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and goals. The purpose of planned unit development (PUD) districts is to use the authority granted by Village Law, § 7-703-a and Municipal Home Rule Law to promote flexibility in development in order to better achieve community goals and to promote consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
    The village board of trustees hereby finds that when coordinated with the comprehensive plan, planned unit development is an effective tool for guiding development in ways that support the community's goals and priorities. Planned unit development, among other things, provides a means by which different land uses within an area covered by a single development plan may be combined to achieve compatibility among such uses. Unattainable with traditional municipal zoning techniques, planned unit development provides flexibility in the regulation of land use development in order to: (a) encourage innovation in land use variety and design, in the layout and type of new structures and in their integration with existing structures; (b) enhance efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, community services, and utilities; (c) encourage open space preservation and protection of natural resources, historic sites, and structures; (d) facilitate the provision of housing and improved residential environments; and/or (e) enhance the ability of the village to promote business and employment opportunities. 
    The procedures herein established are intended to substitute procedural protections and substantive regulations in recognition of the fact that traditional density, bulk, spacing, and use regulations, which are useful in the majority of instances, may impose inappropriate pre-regulations and rigidities upon the development or redevelopment of parcels or areas which lend themselves to an individual, planned approach. 
(b)  Authority. The village zoning map may be amended from time to time, by local law duly enacted by the village board of trustees, to provide for planned unit development (PUD) districts. 
    The provisions of this article establish special procedures for amending the village code and zoning map to permit the mapping of planned unit development districts and should be read in conjunction with those articles establishing district regulations. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Planned unit development. A site upon which residential, commercial, industrial, or other land uses or any combination thereof may be authorized in a flexible manner so as to achieve the goals of or be consistent with the comprehensive plan and encourage innovation in development. 
    Planned unit development district. An independent, freestanding, overlay or floating zoning district, wherein the zoning regulations need not be uniform for each class or type of land use, but where the use of land shall be in accordance with a preliminary planned unit development plan approved by the village board of trustees. A planned unit development district is a special type of floating overlay district that does not appear on the village zoning map until a planned unit development district designation is requested and a project is approved. When a planned unit development district designation is applied, the standards are those developed that are specifically tailed to the planned unit development project, as reviewed and approved pursuant to this article. 
    Preliminary planned unit development plan. A proposal for a planned unit development prepared in a manner prescribed by this article showing the layout of the proposed project, including, but not limited to, maps, plans, or drawings relating to proposed land uses, approximate location and dimensions of buildings, all proposed facilities, including preliminary plans and profiles, at suitable scale and in such detail as is required by local regulation; architectural features, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, buffers, screening, open space areas, lighting, signage, landscaping, parking and loading, traffic circulation, protection of natural resources, public or private amenities, adjacent land uses and physical features, and such other elements as are required by this article. 
    Preliminary planned unit development plan approval. The approval with conditions, if any, of the layout of a proposed planned unit development as set forth in a preliminary plan and the simultaneous amendment of the zoning law by the village board of trustees to create and map a planned unit development district encompassing the preliminary planned unit development plan, subject to the approval of the final planned unit development plan pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
    Final planned unit development plan. An approved preliminary planned unit development plan prepared at such additional detail and showing information as is required by this article, and the modification, if any, required by the village board of trustees at the time of approval of the preliminary planned unit development plan, if such preliminary plan has been so approved. 
    Final planned unit development plan approval. The signing of a final plan by a duly authorized officer of the village pursuant to a resolution granting final approval of the plan or after conditions, if any, specified in said resolution granting conditional approval of the plan are completed. Such final approval qualifies the plan for filing in the office of the village clerk and as provided herein and in the office of the county clerk as necessary. 
(d)  General regulations. 
(1)  A planned unit development district may be mapped on the zoning map by the adoption of a local law by the village board of trustees, simultaneously with approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan. 
(2)  In planned unit development districts, land and buildings may be used for any lawful purposes, as determined by the village board of trustees in the course of its review of the applicable preliminary and final planned unit development plans, and subject to the limitations and procedures of this article. No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any land, building, or structure be used in any planned unit development district until approval of a final planned unit development plan is issued by the village board of trustees. No uses, buildings, or structures which deviate from the approved final planned unit development plan or are inconsistent with the comprehensive plan or the community character shall be allowed. The approval of a final planned unit development plan establishes the zoning regulations for the subject property, and building permits shall not be issued unless in conformity with the final planned unit development plan. 
(3)  Unless waived by the village board of trustees, a planned unit development district shall be comprised of at least one acre. 
(4)  One of the village's primary goals in authorizing planned unit development is the preservation of open space. For residential development, twenty (20) percent of the site shall be used as open space. For commercial or mixed-use development, the preservation of open space is an important goal, with the particular requirements determined in the evaluation of the preliminary planned unit development plan. Open space may include walkways, plazas, landscaped areas, and recreation areas. Parking areas and vehicle access facilities shall not be considered in calculating open space. 
(5)  The applicant shall provide for and establish a perpetual organization for the ownership and maintenance of any common property in the planned unit development district. Such organization, which shall be established prior to any permits being issued, shall not dispose of any common property by sale or otherwise except to dedicate such property to the village for public use, but nothing in this code shall require such dedication nor require the village to accept any dedication of land. 
(6)  At the time of application, preliminary planned unit development plan approval, and final planned unit development plan approval, through the completion of construction of all improvements, ownership and/or control of the development shall be in the hands of one entity, except that for each phase, if a project is done in phases, properties may be sold for completed phases, provided single control shall be maintained over each phase until the final planned unit development plan is approved and construction completed. 
(7)  Compliance with the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA"). During its review and prior to the approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan pursuant to this article, the village board of trustees shall comply with the provisions of SEQRA. 
(8)  Coordination with subdivision regulations and site plan requirements. 
a.  Subdivision review. If the applicant proposes the sale of lots as part of the planned unit development, the subdivision review will be carried out simultaneously with the review of the preliminary planned unit development plan, and the subdivision review conducted in any planned unit development district shall be conducted by the village board of trustees. 
b.  Preliminary and final plats. The plans required under this article must be submitted in a form that will satisfy, when applicable, subdivision requirements for preliminary and final plats. 
c.  Flexibility of subdivision standards. The village board of trustees may approve projects varying from the village's subdivision requirements as part of a planned development plan without the planned development plan obtaining variances from the zoning board of appeals. 
d.  Where all or part of a planned unit development would otherwise require site plan approval, the final planned unit development plan shall serve as the site plan, and no further compliance with the village site plan regulations is required. 
(9)  Management agreement or homeowners' association. In the event there is more than a single owner of the premises within the planned unit development district (other than the owners of leasehold interests), no lot or dwelling unit in the planned unit development district shall be sold, rented, or issued a certificate of occupancy unless a corporation, association, property owners' group or similar entity has been formed with the right to assess all those properties which are jointly owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the development to meet the expenses of such entity, and with authority to control, and the duty to maintain all of said mutually available features of the development. Such entity shall operate under recorded conditions, covenants and restrictions which shall include compulsory membership of all owners of lots and/or dwelling units, and flexibility of assessments to meet changing costs of maintenance, repairs and services. If there is no common ownership of facilities and areas available for use by all tenants, the single fee owner shall be required to satisfy this requirement by the recording of covenants placing the obligations upon the owner of the common property or other entity. The applicant shall submit evidence of compliance with this requirement, including the written notice of said agreement or association to be provided to renters or purchasers, prior to making any such sale or rental. 
(10)  Initial applications may be submitted for preliminary planned unit development plan approval or final planned unit development plan approval. If preliminary planned unit development plan approval is granted, final planned unit development plan approval may be requested in phases. 
(L.L. No. 4-2014, § 1, 2-18-14) 
Sec. 25-108. - Application requirements and review procedures. 
(a)  Application requirements. Applications for preliminary planned unit development plan approval shall include: 
(1)  Name of applicant(s) and address of the site (street and number, tax map block and section). 
(2)  Full environmental assessment form, part 1. 
(3)  Boundary and topographical survey of the property by a licensed engineer or land surveyor. 
(4)  A vicinity map at approximately one inch equals one thousand feet or five hundred feet (1" = 1,000' or 500'), along with a site-specific data list that includes: site address, acreage (net and gross), current zoning, existing land uses, and proposed land uses. 
(5)  A proposed site plan at a standard scale, showing intended site development and uses, all public and private streets, proposed structures and improvements, parking areas, open space, drainage improvements, and recreational features. 
(6)  Typical lot layouts showing house, garage, and driveway configurations, to scale, demonstrating proposed setbacks for the proposed project. 
(7)  A grading plan. 
(8)  Sample elevations and details of all proposed dwelling units, commercial buildings, fencing and screening walls, waterfront improvements, recreational improvements; street furniture and dumpster areas; all proposed signage and entrance treatments, (to scale, with dimension call-outs and proposed materials); and details of all proposed landscaping and lighting. 
(9)  A traffic impact analysis to indicate the trip generations from the project and any potential impacts that may occur on the surrounding road network. The analysis should discuss any possible mitigation measures that may be required. The traffic analysis should also demonstrate that adequate parking shall be provided and shall be in general conformance with the parking regulations provided for in other sections of the village code, unless changes are warranted by the particular characteristics of the proposed planned unit development plan. Adequate additional parking space for guests, customers, the handicapped, recreational vehicles, and other common storage and/or parking uses shall be demonstrated. Upon review of the impact analysis, the village board of trustees may require that a traffic impact study be performed with the scope of the report to be determined by the village board of trustees and its engineering consultant. 
(10)  Proposed number of buildings, dwelling units, and gross floor area of buildings. 
(11)  A stormwater management analysis that describes the existing runoff and hydrology of the project site and the impacts of the proposed project. The analysis should contain a description of how the runoff will be collected, treated and controlled in accordance with local and state requirements. Emphasis should be placed on the reuse of stormwater on site for irrigation and other uses of green infrastructure. Upon review of the impact analysis, the village board of trustees may require a stormwater management report containing, as a minimum, hydraulic computations, analysis and mitigation measures; additional scope of the report to be determined by the village board of trustees and its engineering consultant. 
(12)  Proposed front, side, and back yard setbacks, and building heights. 
(13)  Design requirements including requirements for streets, alleys, streetscape, public open space, setbacks, build-to lines, access points, parking and buffering. 
(14)  Number of employees. 
(15)  Proposed public utilities concept plan, including water supply, wastewater disposal and storm drainage facilities to be constructed. 
(16)  Site coverage statistics (building coverage, paved areas, green area, by percentage of site and square footage). 
(17)  Identification of which services, amenities, streets, and utilities will be public or private. 
(18)  Anticipated impact on services (quantify and discuss impacts): traffic, sewer, water, solid waste. 
(19)  Storage and disposal method of chemicals used (solvents, soaps, etc.). 
(20)  A schedule for the completion of buildings, public and private facilities and site improvements. 
(21)  Management agreement or homeowners' association required by this article and/or proposed restrictive covenants. 
(22)  Any other information that the planning board or village board of trustees may deem necessary for their review of the project. 
(b)  Preliminary planned unit development plan review procedures. The procedure for the review of a preliminary planned unit development plan shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applicants may request a pre-application meeting with village officials to review proposed planned unit development concept plans. 
(2)  The owner of the land (or agent thereof, hereafter referred to as the "owner") shall apply in writing to the village board of trustees for a rezoning to create a planned unit development district and preliminary planned unit development approval. Said application shall include fourteen (14) copies of the application materials described in subsection (a). One copy, and all supplemental material received, shall be kept in the village clerk's office for public review. 
(3)  Upon confirmation from the village clerk that all fees have been paid, the village board and its advisers shall review the application for completeness, and if complete, or upon receiving the additional information necessary to make the application complete, refer the application to the planning board for review. The village board of trustees may, at the time of initial review, determine within its sole discretion that the proposed planned unit development plan is not in accordance with the goals and plans of the village or otherwise not in the public interest, and deny the application without further review. 
(4)  If applicable, a full copy of the application materials, including a copy of the application and EAF, shall be forwarded to the Erie County Department of Environment and Planning in accordance with the general municipal law. 
(5)  The planning board shall review the application with the owner to determine if it meets the standards of this article. The planning board may recommend amendments to the preliminary planned unit development plan as are deemed reasonably necessary to protect natural resources, limit impacts, protect the established or permitted uses in the vicinity and to promote the orderly growth and sound development of the village. 
(6)  In making its recommendation on the proposed development and changes, if any, the planning board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The need for the proposed land use in the proposed location. 
b.  The existing character of the neighborhood in which the uses will be located. 
c.  The pedestrian circulation and open space in relation to structures. 
d.  The traffic circulation features within the site and the amount, location and access to automobile parking areas; the impact of the proposal on existing transportation systems. 
e.  The adequacy of the proposed public/private utilities, including water supply, sewage treatment and stormwater drainage facilities. 
f.  The height and bulk of buildings and their relation to other structures in the vicinity. 
g.  The proposed location, type and size of display signs, driveways and/or loading zones and landscaping. 
h.  The safeguards provided to minimize possible detrimental effects of the proposed use on adjacent properties and the neighborhood in general. 
i.  Impacts on the neighborhood, including preservation of resources, open space, and recreational activities. 
j.  Economic benefits and costs. 
k.  Such other matters as the planning board may consider pertinent. 
(7)  As part of the preliminary planned unit development review, the village board of trustees shall prepare a proposed local law for the creation of a planned unit development district. The proposed local law shall follow the format of a model law provided by the village board of trustees, and any recommendations of the planning board may then be incorporated into the proposed local law by the village board of trustees. 
(8)  The planning board shall recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval of the application, and shall make its recommendation to the village board of trustees within sixty-two (62) days after referral to the planning board, unless mutually extended by the applicant and the planning board. 
(9)  The village board of trustees shall hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning (draft local law) and preliminary planned unit development plan with public notice as provided by law as in the case of an amendment to a zoning law. The village board of trustees, in reaching its decision on the proposal, should consider the standards of this section, and any other factors it deems reasonable. 
(10)  Upon receipt of the planning board's recommendation, or sixty-two (62) days after referring the application to the planning board, whichever is later, the village board of trustees may act on the application by approving, approving with conditions, or disapproving the application. The village board of trustees may attach to its approval any additional conditions or requirements it feels are necessary to fully protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(11)  Any conditions imposed by the village board of trustees shall run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change in the tenancy or ownership of any or all of said area. 
(12)  If the village board of trustees denies the application, it shall state its reasons in writing. 
(13)  If after one year from date of a preliminary planned unit development plan approval a final planned unit development plan approval has not been received, or if after one year from date of a final planned unit development plan approval substantial site work has not begun, the approvals given under the terms of this local law shall terminate. The land shall remain zoned as a planned unit development district until removed by subsequent adoption of a local law by the village board of trustees, but no building permits may be issued or construction activity occur until a new or amended final planned unit development plan approval is approved pursuant to the provisions of this article. However, the applicant may, for valid reasons, request an extension of time from the village board of trustees from these deadlines, which may be granted in the sole discretion of the village board of trustees. 
(14)  Final planned unit development plans and issuance of permits. 
(15)  Final planned unit development plans. Any final planned unit development plans shall be in substantial conformance with the preliminary planned unit development plans. Prior to the issuance of any permits for the erection or enlargement of any buildings within an planned unit development district, final precise site and elevation plans for all buildings and landscaping within the district or approved phase of the development, shall be submitted to and approved by the village board of trustees. If the initial application for approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan included final precise plans for the complete development, as provided in this subsection (c), building permits may be issued in accordance with those plans. In connection with the review of final planned unit development plans, deviations in any of the conditions previously established may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of this subsection (c). 
(16)  Final planned unit development plan approval. If the preliminary planned unit development plan did not include all details, or if the applicant wishes to construct in phases or to modify the preliminary planned unit development plan, including modifying conditions, final planned unit development plans, with all required detail, shall be submitted, including: 
a.  Engineering plans showing how the site is to be serviced with sewer, water, well, and/or septic systems (as approved during the preliminary planned unit development plan stage). 
b.  Lighting plans. 
c.  Final drainage and stormwater retention and detention plans. 
d.  Road plans, including curbs and gutters, on-site/off-site signalization, acceleration, deceleration lanes, etc. 
e.  Sidewalk, paths, and cycle trails. 
f.  Landscape plans showing the type and location of plant material, berms, and other aesthetic treatments. 
g.  Any deviations from the preliminary planned unit development plan approval. 
(17)  Final planned unit development plans shall be submitted to the village board of trustees. If the proposed final planned unit development plan deviates, in the village board of trustees' determination, significantly from the preliminary planned unit development plan (for example, changes in traffic patterns, increases in density, changes in the height of buildings, reductions of proposed open space, changes in total bedroom counts of more than five (5) percent, changes in bedroom mixes of more than five (5) percent, changes in the development schedule, changes in road standards, changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants, or increased impacts on natural features, etc.), the village board of trustees may elect to treat the proposed final planned unit development plan as an amended preliminary planned unit development plan, and restart the planning board review and public input process and reconsideration of a new preliminary and/or final planned unit development plan, or relevant portion thereof. 
(18)  Permits. Except as approved by the village board of trustees, no permit shall be issued for grading, or for the erection, enlargement, or maintenance of buildings or structures in a planned unit development district, and no person shall perform any such development or construction work, except in full compliance with the final development plans approved as herein provided. 
(L.L. No. 4-2014, § 1, 2-18-14) 
Sec. 25-109. - Fees. 
(a)  A nonrefundable fee, as determined by the village board of trustees by resolution, as set forth on the village's fee schedule, shall be paid to the village upon each application. 
    The applicant shall also be responsible for reasonable expenses (legal, engineering, etc.) incurred by the village in reviewing the application. The applicant will enter into an escrow agreement with the village to provide for the payment of these expenses prior to the village reviewing the application. 
(L.L. No. 4-2014, § 1, 2-18-14) 
Sec. 25-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIAL, OFF-STREET PARKING AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 25-111. - Industrial use districts. 
(a)  Any use permitted in a residential, business and commercial use district shall also be permitted in the industrial use district, together with any industry riot prohibited by the fire prevention code and which does not constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  The building line on each street in an industrial use district shall be six (6) feet from the adjacent street line, except that on corner lots the building may extend to the side street line. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VI, § II) 
Sec. 25-112. - Off-street parking districts. 
    Any use permitted within a residential use district shall also be permitted in an off-street parking district, and in addition thereto, land in an off-street parking district may be used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VI, § III) 
Sec. 25-113. - Commercial use districts. 
(a)  No building, structure or premises shall be erected, remodeled or used within a commercial use district for any but one of the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted within a residential use district, or a business use district. 
(2)  Public garage. 
(3)  Ventures in which the repair or servicing of personal property constitutes a major portion of the business conducted, except an automobile washery or paint shop and a business engaged primarily in the repair and/or installation of automobile transmissions. 
(4)  Body piercing, tattoo and/or body massage establishments, stores and/or businesses provided said establishments, stores and/or businesses are located within five hundred (500) feet from residential use district (residential 1, 2 and 3), as measured from the property line. 
(b)  The building line on each lot in the commercial use district shall be six (6) feet from the adjacent street line, except that on corner lots the building may extend to the side street line. All buildings shall have their front wall parallel to the street line. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VI, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-66; L.L. No. 4-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Secs. 25-114-25-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROFESSIONAL OFFICE USE DISTRICT 

Sec. 25-126. - Generally. 
(a)  Within the confines of a residential use district which borders a municipal parking lot and to a distance not to exceed one hundred (100) feet into the residential use district from such border, there may be established a professional office use district. If so established, professional office use shall be permitted therein in addition to any use otherwise permitted. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "professional office use" shall mean the use of such premises for the offering and rendition of general professional services to the public by a licensed professional person or group of persons in the practice of the licensed profession only, not exceeding five (5) in number, and not residing on such premises. "Licensed professional person" shall mean a person duly licensed and qualified to practice in this state as a doctor of medicine, dentist, surgeon, chiropractor, attorney-at-law, engineer, architect, or accountant, or any combination thereof. 
(L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2 (a), 5-4-76; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 1, 7-20-76) 
Sec. 25-127. - Signs. 
    A professional office use in a professional office use district may be identified by a single nonilluminated sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the occupant or a permitted profession. Such sign may be attached to a building or may be on a separate support not more than four (4) feet in height and shall be at least five (5) feet from any property line or street line. 
(L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2(b), 5-4-76; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 3, 7-20-76) 
Sec. 25-128. - Buildings and accessory structures. 
    Any building constructed or used for professional office use in a professional office use district will substantially conform, in exterior appearance, to neighboring and adjacent buildings and no store fronts or oversized windows will be permitted. For the purposes of this subsection, windows or a window area which cover greater than thirty (30) percent of a facing wall area shall be deemed to be "oversized". All such buildings and accessory structures will meet the requirements of this chapter otherwise applicable generally in residential use districts, unless waived, varied or amended as provided by law. 
(L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2(c), 5-4-76; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 4, 7-20-76) 
Sec. 25-129. - Ownership restrictions. 
(a)  No premises shall be eligible to be operated as a professional office use in a professional office use district unless owned and occupied for professional practice by a licensed professional person. In addition, such premises shall be deemed to be "owned" by a licensed professional person if owned by a professional corporation formed and existing under state law, the holders of at least fifty (50) percent of the stock of which occupy the premises for professional practice. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, such premises shall be deemed to be "occupied" by the licensed professional owner thereof if at least one-third of the first floor area thereof is actually operated as a professional office by such professional owner. 
(L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2(d), 5-4-76; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 2, 7-20-76) 
Sec. 25-130. - Number of employees. 
    The total number of persons, professional and nonprofessional, employed at any single professional office premises shall not exceed ten (10). 
(L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2 (e), 5-4-76; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 5, 7-20-76) 
Secs. 25-131-25-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT USES 

Sec. 25-146. - Findings of facts and statement of purpose. 
    Buildings and establishments operated as adult uses are detrimental and harmful to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of a community. In order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the village, this article is intended to restrict adult uses to nonresidential, nonbusiness and noncommercial areas of the village, and otherwise regulate their operation. Moreover, in that the operational characteristics of adult uses increase the deleterious impact on a community when such uses are concentrated, this article is intended to promote the health, safety, morals, general welfare, and good order of the residents of the village by regulating the concentration of such uses. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(1), 12-5-79) 
Sec. 25-147. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises, by use of motion picture devices or any other coin-operated means and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    Adult entertainment cabaret: A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
    Adult massage parlor: A public or private establishment, store or business which is used for the provision of the service of stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating the human body with the hands or other devices, with or without the aid of oils or other lubricants, except those licensed to perform said activity under the Education Law. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theatre: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theatre: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting material having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult movie/video store: A public or private establishment, store or business which has for sale and/or rent video cassettes, DVD video discs, film, movie reels or other similar items which are used to display a movie, film, picture, or other programming on a television, computer, or other form of media, the content of which depicts, describes or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether said sale or rental is exclusive of said establishment, store or business. 
    Adult-theme business: A public or private establishment, store, or business in which more than fifty (50) percent of the advertisements, products or merchandise for sale, rent and/or display depict, describe or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Person: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or legal representative acting individually or jointly. 
    Specified anatomical areas: Specified anatomical areas are: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities: Specified sexual activities are: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(2), 12-5-19; L.L. No. 2-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-148. - General restrictions. 
    Adult uses, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theatre, adult mini-motion picture theatre, adult entertainment cabaret, adult movie/video store, adult massage parlor, and/or adult-theme business shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  No such adult uses shall be allowed within five hundred (500) feet of another existing adult use. 
(b)  No such adult use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of any zoning district which is zoned exclusively for residential use (those zones designated residential 1, 2, or 3). 
(c)  No such adult use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a pre-existing school, public park or place of worship. 
(d)  No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except the industrial use district. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § 3; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(3), 12-5-79; L.L. No. 2-2000, §§ 2, 3, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-148.1. - Permitted nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any adult use establishment, store or business, known to be in operation by the general public as of December 5, 1979, may be continued, but only to the extent, and upon the premises, and in the building or structure, where such nonconforming use existed as of December 5, 1979. 
(b)  Any permitted nonconforming adult use under this section shall be prohibited from making any additions or extensions from the existing dimensions of the business as recorded in the office of the village clerk as of December 5, 1979. 
(c)  Any permitted nonconforming building or structure which has been completely destroyed or partially destroyed may continue to maintain its nonconforming use provided that at least fifty (50) percent of its sound value, by means other than intent or design, may be rebuilt or repaired within one year thereafter. 
(d)  No structural or product changes shall be made to any permitted nonconforming use, except such changes or uses which are permitted within the district wherein the same is located. 
(e)  Any permitted nonconforming use shall cease if discontinued for a period of one year. 
(f)  Any adult use establishment, store or business, which qualifies as a permitted nonconforming use shall be required to comply with sections 25-149, 25-150 and 25-151 of this article. 
(g)  By amortization, the right to maintain a nonconforming adult use which was in existence after December 5, 1979, and before the effective date of this article shall terminate in accordance with the following schedule: 
Amount of Capital Investment as of the 
Effective Date of this Article Date Before Which Use Shall Terminate $1.00 to $10,000.00 December 31, 2001 $10,001.00 to $25,000.00 December 31, 2002 $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 December 31, 2003 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 December 31, 2004 $100,001.00 or more December 31, 2005  
NOTE: The term "capital investment" as used above, is defined to mean the initial outlay by the owner or operator of the nonconforming use as of the date of the enactment of this article exclusive of the fair market value of the of the nonconforming use. 
(L.L. No. 2-2000, § 4, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-148.2. - Severability. 
    If any provision of any section of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered, and shall not effect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section of this article or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of each section of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(L.L. No. 2-2000, § 4, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-149. - Registration-Required. 
    No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § VI; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(6), 12-5-59) 
Sec. 25-150. - Registration-Procedures. 
(a)  The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of managing or controlling or collecting rents or any other person managing or controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an adult use, shall register the following information with the village clerk: 
(1)  The address of the premises. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the premises and the names and addresses of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust. 
(3)  The name of the business or the establishment subject to the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the owner, beneficial owner of the major stockholders of the business or the establishment subject to the provisions of this article. 
(5)  The date of initiation of the adult use. 
(6)  The nature of the adult use. 
(7)  If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or person in control of any property to establish or operate thereon or to permit any person to establish or operate thereon an adult use without having properly registered said adult use with the village clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § IV; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(4), 12-5-79) 
Sec. 25-151. - Registration-Display. 
    The owner, manager or agent of a registered adult use shall display in a conspicuous place on the premises of the adult use a copy of the registration filed with the village clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § V; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(5), 12-5-79) 
Sec. 25-152. - Special use permit. 
(a)  No use as described in this article shall be established until the issuance of a special use permit by the board of trustees of the village. Application for such a special use permit shall be in writing to the board of trustees and shall consist of a description of the premises for which the permit is sought, a plain and concise statement of the use which is proposed and such additional information as shall be required by the board of trustees. The board of trustees shall call a public hearing for the purpose of considering the request for a special use permit. At least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of public hearing shall be given by the publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the village indicating the general nature of the public hearing and the fact that those persons interested therein may be heard at the time and place of such hearing. 
(b)  A special use permit issued under the provisions of this section shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. X-A, § VII; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1(7), 12-5-79) 
Secs. 25-153-25-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES, HEDGES, TREES, ETC. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-166. - Enforcement. 
    Both the police department and the building inspector shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (3(d)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Sec. 25-167. - Building permit. 
    A building permit shall be required before any fence may be erected or replaced. Applications shall be made to the proper village authority and must contain a physical description of the design and the material, and a sketch of the location of the proposed fence upon the property. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV(3(b)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Sec. 25-168. - Violations. 
    If, in the determination of either the police department or the building inspector, a violation has occurred, the police department or the building inspector shall notify the owner, in writing, and he shall be required to correct the violation within ten (10) working days, or be subject to the penalties provided for the violations of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (3(d)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Secs. 25-169-25-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FENCES 

Sec. 25-181. - use districts generally. 
(a)  No fence shall be erected in use districts between the main body of the house and the street line except as follows: 
(1)  A fence intended for decorative purposes may be erected along or next to shrubbery, flowers or other flora and/or landscaping located in a front yard, along, next to or in connection with an entrance to a building, or along or next to a driveway or corner of a front yard at the juncture of a driveway and sidewalk, but in no event shall such fence extend beyond twelve (12) feet in length; provided, however, that a decorative fence may be erected on a corner lot between the front building line and the front corner lot line. Any fence erected in accordance with this paragraph shall be at least one foot from the inside line of the sidewalk. 
(2)  Any such fence shall be in harmony with the aesthetic and character of the village in general and with the neighborhood in which such fence is erected in particular. 
(3)  Any such fence shall be erected wholly within the lot line of the property on which the fence is to be erected and at least one foot within the inside line of the sidewalk. 
(4)  In no event shall any such fence totally enclose a front yard, exceed three (3) feet in height, be made of an opaque material, or be erected between the inside line of the sidewalk and the curb line of the street. 
(b)  No fence shall be erected in use districts, which shall exceed six (6) feet in height, except as is hereinafter provided for in subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  In the event that property abuts upon property owned by Kenmore-Tonawanda Union Free School District No. 1, upon which the school district has erected a fence in excess of six (6) feet in height, then the owner of said property may erect a fence on the same boundary line, equal in height to the adjacent fence maintained by said school district. 
(d)  Where a dwelling exists on a corner lot, a fence may be erected alongside lot line, in accord with the provisions of this section, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The fence shall be erected within the subject property line and at least one foot within the inside line of the sidewalk. 
(2)  The fence may extend from the main body of the house or the front building line to the rear property line. 
(e)  Where the exterior wall of a dwelling unit in a residential use district no. 1 or no. 2 is lawfully constructed or existing parallel or approximately parallel to the side or rear lot line of such lot and within three (3) feet thereof, it shall be unlawful to construct a fence on an adjacent property parallel or approximately parallel to such dwelling unit wall and within three (3) feet thereof. This subsection shall not apply to a fence constructed after the issuance of a lawful building permit and in conformity with the provisions thereof prior to June 1, 1977. 
(f)  In the event of a re-subdivision, combining abutting parcels and/or creating a new lot, which includes a new lot rear yard consisting of portions of the front yard(s) of the former parcel(s), any fences located in the portion of the new lot rear yard that were front yard(s) of the former parcel(s) shall be limited to three (3) feet in height. 
(g)  In no event shall a fence be put up to the street. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (1)(a)-(d), (i); Ord. of 1-18-72; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 1, 7-25-77; L.L. No. 6-1980, 6-5-80; L.L. No. 9-2018, § 1, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 25-182. - Business use districts. 
    No fences shall be erected in a business use district, between the front building line and the street line, or on corner lots between the side building line and the side street line, except in those business properties used as gasoline service stations. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (1(b)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Sec. 25-183. - Restrictions on property abutting residential districts. 
    Where the rear or side of property zoned as industrial, commercial, business, off-street parking or residential use 3 abuts upon residential use 1, 2 or 3 property, the owner of the property zoned as industrial, commercial, business, off-street parking or residential use 3 shall erect and maintain a fence, six (6) feet in height above ground level of an opaque material, for the purpose of shielding the view of the business, industrial, mercantile, or apartment activity, including parking from the view of the occupants of the residential property. Said fence shall terminate at a point fifteen (15) feet from the inside sidewalk line. If that part of the industrial, commercial, business, off-street parking or residential use 3 property abutting the residential use 1, 2 or 3 property is used for vehicles in any manner, then the remaining fifteen (15) feet to the inside of the sidewalk line shall be protected by the parking lot barrier, more fully described in the Off-Street Parking Ordinance, Local Law No. 1 of 1965. The barrier shall terminate one foot inside the sidewalk line. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV(1)(q)); L.L. No. 6-1980, § 1, 6-5-80) 
Sec. 25-184. - Fencing of swimming pools. 
(a)  Swimming pools or the yards containing said pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence, at least four (4) feet in height, and said fence shall be equipped with a suitable locking device, designed to prevent unauthorized entry. It is further provided, however, that an above ground swimming pool, located four (4) feet or more above the surface, shall be considered in compliance with this subsection, if the ladder or access leading to the pool can be raised and locked, or entirely removed when not in use. 
(b)  All gates or accesses to the pool shall be locked at all times, when the pool is not in use or under supervision of the owner or his duly authorized adult agent. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV, (1(e)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Sec. 25-185. - Materials. 
    No fence shall be erected or contain barbed wire or chicken wire nor may a fence of any material have dangerously sharp, jagged or pointed edges. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (3(c)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Secs. 25-186-25-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEDGES, TREES, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Trees, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 25-201. - Height restrictions. 
(a)  No hedges in excess of three (3) feet in height shall be placed or be allowed to remain in a business use district between the front building line and the street line, or, on corner lots, between the side building line and the side street line. the measurement shall be taken from ground level. 
(b)  No hedges in excess of three (3) feet in height shall be placed or be allowed to remain in a residential use district, between the main body of the house and the street line, or on corner lots, between any part of the house and the side street line. The measurement shall be taken from ground level. 
(c)  Hedges and bushes on corner residential lots, not adjacent to the body of the house, shall be trimmed so as not to exceed three (3) feet in height. The measurement shall be taken from ground level. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV (2(a)-(c)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Sec. 25-202. - Trimming or removal. 
    Hedges, trees or shrubs, or other foliage which may not be otherwise in violation of this article shall be removed or trimmed if, in the opinion of the police department or the building inspector, the said hedge, tree, shrub or other foliage constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. IV, § IV(2(d)); Ord. of 1-18-72) 
Secs. 25-203-25-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, adopted April 3, 2012, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 25-221-25-227, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from L.L. No. 8-2006, § 1, adopted 6-20-06; L.L. No. 2-2009, §§ 1-3, adopted 5-5-09; and L.L. No. 1-2011, § 1, adopted 2-1-11. 

Sec. 25-221. - Legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the health, welfare and safety of the public by regulating the placement, location, size and types of existing and proposed signs of all types in the village. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, strengthen the ability of the village to attract sources of economic development and growth, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, and provide a more enjoyable and pleasant community. It is intended further to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting into or over public rights-of-way, provide more visual open space and curb any deterioration of the community's appearance and attractiveness. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-222. - Definitions. 
    A-frame sign: A portable sign that forms the letter "A" when in place. 
    Abandoned sign: A sign that advertises an activity, business, product or service that has not been conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days. 
    Animated sign: A sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    Awning sign: A sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, metal or other type of structural protective cover over door, entrance, window outdoor service area. 
    Banner: A sign of lightweight fabric, plastic or similar material that is mounted to a pole or building. National state or municipal flags or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
    Beacon: A light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source or any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
    Billboard: A sign which advertises a business, service, product, commodity, entertainment or similar object or activity which is or will be conducted, sold or offered on a zone lot other than the zone lot on which the sign is erected. 
    Building marker: A sign indicating the name of the building, monument or memorial and date and other incidental information about its construction and which is cut into the surface of the building, monument or memorial or attached to it on a bronze or other type of metal marker. 
    Building sign: A sign attached to any part of a building that is not a freestanding sign. 
    Changeable copy sign: A sign that has characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only change that occurs is of a mechanical or electronic display of time and/or temperature is not a changeable copy sign. 
    Commercial message: Words, logo, symbol or other representation on a sign that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or commercial activity. 
    Directional sign: A sign located on private property that is intended to direct traffic into or off it. 
    Directly illuminated sign: A sign that is designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent material from a source of light within such sign, including but not limited to neon and exposed lamp signs. 
    Electronic changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area, including a computer programmable microprocessor controlled electronic display. A sign that only displays official information or time or temperature is not an electronic changeable copy sign. 
    Electronic graphic display sign: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures with or without text information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area, including a computer programmable microprocessor controlled electronic display, where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means or fades, repixalizations or dissolved images. 
    Externally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by a light source that is not within the sign. 
    Flag: A fabric, banner or bunting that contains distinctive colors, patterns or symbols used as a symbol of a government, institution or business or of an event or occasion. 
    Freestanding sign: A self-supporting sign permanently affixed to the ground by means of an integral base or support structures that are placed solely on or anchored in the ground and are independent of support from any building or other structure. Freestanding signs include pole/pylon signs, monument signs, and ground signs. 
    Ground sign: A sign supported upon a structure or support that creates an enclosed base, of which such enclosed base extends no further than three (3) feet from the finished grade. The height of a ground sign is measured from the top of the nearest public sidewalk to the top of the sign. 
    Illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by electricity or other artificial light. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by a light source on the zone lot which source is shielded from view of pedestrians to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Informational sign: A sign that identifies only the name of a business, school, church, medical facility or other institution or that is an instructional sign. 
    Instructional sign: A sign that is intended to instruct or advise employees, customers, visitors or users of the permitted or prohibited uses on certain parts of the zone lot. 
    Marquee sign: A sign that is part of or attached to a permanent roof-like structure of a building and that projects beyond and extends along any portion of a building. 
    Memorial sign: A sign cut into the masonry surface of a building, monument or other structure or that is attached to it permanently on a bronze or other metal plaque and that commemorates its erection, historical significance, historical event or person or group of persons. 
    Monument sign: A freestanding sign consisting of dual support structures that extend along the entire vertical height of the sign and that support the sign face, or a single support structure consisting of a width that is equal to the width of the sign in which it supports. Monument signs do not consist of an enclosed base. 
    Multiple face sign: A sign that utilizes more than one surface for display purposes provided that that the surfaces are attached. 
    Neon sign: A sign, logo or design detail which has exposed glass or plastic tubing filled with fluorescent or inert gas. 
    Nonconforming sign: A sign that does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
    Pennant: A lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material that is attached to or suspended from a rope, wire or string. 
    Permanent sign: A sign that is not temporary. 
    Pole sign: A sign that is erected on a pole or poles regardless of its height. 
    Political sign: A sign that advocates action on a public issue, indicates a candidate for public office or expresses an opinion or belief. 
    Portable sign: A sign that is not securely attached to the ground and that may be moved from place to place. 
    Projecting sign: A sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its edge extends beyond the building more than twelve (12) inches. 
    Real estate sign: A temporary sign that directs attention to the rental, sale or lease of property on which the sign is located. 
    Roof sign: A sign erected on or over the roof of a building. 
    Rotating sign: A sign that wholly or in part revolves or moves in a recurring pattern including but not limited to multi-prism indexing signs. 
    Sign: Any letter or group of letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark or device intended to attract attention to a place, business, subject, person, performance, article, machine or merchandise of any kind and displayed out of doors but not including a flag, emblem or insignia of a government, school or religious group when displayed for official purposes. 
    Surface area: The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing all elements that form an integral part of the sign. The structure supporting the sign is not a part of the surface area unless it is designed in such a manner as to form an integral part or background for the display. One side of a multiple face sign shall be used to calculate the total surface area of such sign. 
    Suspended sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a surface and is supported by such surface. 
    Temporary sign: A sign, whether portable or not, intended to be displayed for a limited time, including construction, political, real estate and advertisements or announcements for special events or business promotions limited by time. 
    Wall sign: A sign attached parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the exterior wall of any building or structure and which is supported by the wall of the building or structure and which displays only one sign surface. 
    Window sign: A sign placed inside a window or placed on a window and that is visible from the exterior of the window. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-223. - Applicability. 
(a)  No sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained in the village except in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no person or entity may erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign in the village without first obtaining a permit pursuant to section 25-228 of this article. 
(c)  A sign permit shall not be required for repair, cleaning, repainting, or normal maintenance of a sign or the structure supporting the sign for which a permit has been previously issued under this article or its predecessors so long as the sign or the structure supporting it are not modified. 
(d)  The following signs are exempt from regulation under this article: 
(1)  A public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, rule or ordinance. 
(2)  A sign inside a building that is not attached to a door or window and not visible from a distance of more than three (3) feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel on which the sign is located. 
(3)  A state inspection station identification sign or state authorized repair shop identification sign which is located on an exterior or interior wall of a motor vehicle service or repair station. 
(4)  Holiday lights or decorations with no commercial message that are erected not more than thirty (30) days before the holiday. Such lights or signs must be removed no more than thirty (30) days after the holiday. 
(5)  Traffic control signs on private property which meet state department of transportation standards and which contain no commercial message. 
(6)  Real estate signs. 
(7)  Signs stating the hours of operation of a business or that it is closed or open that do not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. 
(8)  Information signs, memorial signs, building signs which do not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. 
(9)  Signs identifying the address of a building or residence. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-224. - General regulations. 
(a)  Animated signs are not permitted in any district. 
(b)  All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of material suitable for their intended use and kept in good condition and repair. 
(c)  If a nonconforming sign is removed, other than for temporary repair or maintenance, it shall be replaced only with a sign that conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(d)  An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or occupier of the property on which it stands within three (3) months after its abandonment. If it has not been removed at the expiration of three (3) months, it may be removed by the village at the expense of the owner and the cost charged to the real estate taxes assessed to the property. Notice of intent to remove the sign shall be mailed by both ordinary and certified mail to the record owner of the property on which the sign is placed or erected. Such notice shall state the date on which the sign will be removed and shall provide a date on which the owner may appear before the zoning board of appeals to contest such removal. 
(e)  No owner or occupier of property shall permit a dangerous or defective sign to remain on such property owned or occupied. 
(f)  Every sign shall be designed and placed in such manner as to: 
(1)  Not impair public safety; 
(2)  Not restrict clear vision between a sidewalk and street; 
(3)  Not be confused with any traffic signal or sign; 
(4)  Not prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape; and 
(5)  Not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(g)  Pole signs are not allowed in the village except as specifically authorized in the general business district and in the industrial district. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12; L.L. No. 4-2018, § 1, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 25-225. - General design guidance. 
    The village wishes to promote signs that enhance the character of the community and aesthetic appearance of the village's business districts while affording businesses within the village an opportunity to adequately and feasibly advertise their enterprise. The village also wishes to allow some flexibility in the design of signage and encourage applicants to be creative in the design of signage. In order to accomplish this, rather than making specific design regulations that might discourage creative signage and become burdensome to businesses, the village authorizes the planning board to promulgate sign design guidelines to offer applicants guidance in designing signage that is creative, attractive, and high quality because such signage can enhance both the village's business districts as well as the viability of the businesses. Such guidelines shall not permit signs of a type, size or quality that are not otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-226. - Incentives for increasing the maximum sign area. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  The village board of trustees has enacted a system of incentives for signage in the village and has granted the planning board the authority to review and approve incentives in the form of an increase in the maximum sign area of an establishment located in the restricted use business, general business, or industrial district (as outlined in tables 25-230.1 and 25-231.1) in exchange for the applicant providing community benefits. In order to qualify for the sign incentives, an applicant shall meet the criteria for obtaining incentives as identified in section 25-230(a)(12), restricted use business district, and section 25-231(b), general business and industrial districts. 
(b)  Intent. 
(1)  The incentive for increasing the maximum sign area is intended to encourage establishments located within the village's business districts to develop creative, high quality signage that is in compliance with the village sign design guidelines. Providing an incentive to allow an increase in the maximum sign area permitted will not result in adverse impacts to the community. The incentives will promote the viability and appearance of the village's business districts and is in compliance with the Village of Kenmore Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Application for incentives. 
(1)  Applications for sign incentives shall be made at the time of sign application, as outlined in section 25-228. At the time of application, the applicant of a sign shall indicate their desire to obtain approval from the planning board to allow an increase in the maximum sign area, up to the maximum sign area permitted in tables 25-230.1 and 25-231.1 as indicated by the incentive zoning columns. At the time of application, the planning board will review the request and determine whether the applicant as met the criteria to qualify for the sign incentives. If the planning board finds that the application meets the criteria for the sign incentives, they will conduct their routine sign review under the incentive zoning requirements. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-227. - Sign permits. 
(a)  An application for a sign permit shall be made to the building inspector in duplicate. 
(b)  The fee prescribed by the board of trustees for a sign permit shall accompany the application. 
(c)  An application for a permit for a sign shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the person or entity making the application. 
(2)  Identification of the property where the sign is to be erected or placed and the name of the owner of the property. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a statement signed by the owner acknowledging knowledge and permission for the proposed sign. 
(3)  A color drawing or rendering of the proposed sign drawn to scale, which contains the dimensions of the sign and all letters, figures, design, symbol trademark or device that will be on the sign. 
(4)  A scale drawing or rendering of the building and property on which the sign is to be erected or placed, with the proposed location indicated. 
(5)  If illuminated, the manner, source and intensity of the illumination. 
(6)  If the sign is a temporary sign, the expected duration that it will be displayed. 
(7)  Such other information, including a survey, as may be required by the building inspector to enable a classification of the sign and its conformity to the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Once the building inspector has determined that an application for a temporary sign or banner is complete, he shall issue the permit, issue the permit with conditions or deny the permit. 
(e)  Once the building inspector has determined that an application for any sign other than a temporary sign for which a permit is required is complete, he shall refer it to the village planning board. the village planning board shall recommend that the permit be issued, recommend that the permit be issued with conditions, or recommend that the permit be denied. Such decision shall be made within thirty (30) days after the building inspector has referred the application to the village planning board. 
(f)  An application for a sign permit for a window sign that exceeds the general limitation of twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the window requires approval of the board of trustees. The application shall proceed as set forth in section 25-227 and be referred to the village planning board, as set forth in section 25-227(e). The planning board shall make a recommendation to the board of trustees as to whether the application should be approved, approved with conditions, or denied, based upon the factors the board of trustees must consider. Following the planning board's recommendation, the board of trustees shall render a determination on the sign permit considering such factors as: community character, aesthetic and visual impacts, whether the proposed sign has been created by a professional sign maker, the material of the sign, the colors and appearance of the proposed sign, and any other factor the board of trustees determines is reasonable. The board of trustees may, by resolution, set forth specific design guidelines for such proposed signs. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12; L.L. No. 7-2016, § 4, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 25-228. - Violations. 
(a)  If the building inspector or any code enforcement officer shall determine that a sign does not conform to the requirements of this article, a notice shall be served on the person or entity that erected or placed the sign describing the violation and stating that the sign permit will be revoked unless the violation be cured or the sign removed within fourteen (14) days. 
(b)  The notice shall be served on the person or entity on the sign permit, or if no permit has been issued, on the owner of the property on which the sign has been erected or placed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to such person, entity or owner. 
(c)  If the person or entity that placed the sign does not cure the violation, remove the sign after fourteen (14) days of service of the notice or appeal the violation to the zoning board of appeals, the sign permit shall be revoked. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-229. - Sign regulation for residential districts (R-1, R-2 and R-3). 
(a)  The following signs are permitted in any district zoned as residential: 
1.  A building sign that does not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area that identifies the resident or the address; 
2.  Not more than one non-illuminated ground sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in total surface area that identifies the residence or the address; 
3.  In the event the premises are occupied by a place of worship, museum, library, social club or society, or government building, not more than one illuminated ground sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in total surface area and/or one illuminated wall sign not to exceed thirty (30) square feet in total surface area; 
4.  Flags; 
5.  Political signs; 
6.  Real estate signs; 
7.  Non-commercial window signs; and 
8.  Temporary signs that state the name of a contractor doing work on the premises or announce a special occasion. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 25-230. - Sign regulations for restricted business use district (RB). 
(a)  The following signs are permitted within the restricted business use district: 
(1)  Any sign permitted within any residential district except signs permitted by section 25-229(a)(3). 
(2)  On the front of the lot, not more than one non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated monument or ground sign in accordance with table 25-230.1, maximum sign area for restricted use business district, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  A monument sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the distance between the ground underneath the sign and the bottom of the sign shall not be more than three (3) feet. 
b.  A ground sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
c.  Monument and ground signs must be sufficiently secure to prevent movement from wind. The area around the sign shall be landscaped. If indirectly illuminated, the glare from the source of illumination shall be screened from public view as much as practicable. 
(3)  On the front of a building, not more than one wall sign in accordance with table 25-230.1, maximum sign area for restricted use business district, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  For the purposes of this subsection, if the sign is comprised of individual letters, the total square footage of the individual letters shall be considered the square footage of the sign. 
b.  If the building is located at the intersection of streets, a sign may be placed on each side of the building facing a street so long as the cumulative area of the signs does not exceed the maximum permitted. 
c.  A wall sign shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the wall surface on which it is erected and shall not extend beyond the ends or above the top of the wall. 
d.  If the wall sign is illuminated, it should be illuminated either through the use of individually illuminated words, letters, symbols, or logos, back-lighting, reverse channel lighting, or decorative external illumination. Cabinet type lighting is permitted so long as their sign panels are opaque so that when illuminated, only the individual letters, symbols, or logos are illuminated and not the entire background or cabinet. Translucent panels or panels with reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
e.  If illuminated, the glare from the source of illumination shall be screened from public view as much as practicable. 
(4)  On the front of a building, not more than one projecting sign in accordance with table 25-230.1, maximum sign area for restricted use business district, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  Projects not more than six (6) feet from the vertical surface of the building. 
b.  If the projecting sign is illuminated, it should be illuminated either through the use of individually illuminated words, letters, symbols, or logos, back-lighting, reverse channel lighting, or decorative external illumination. Cabinet type lighting is permitted so long as their sign panels are opaque so that when illuminated, only the individual letters, symbols, or logos are illuminated and not the entire background or cabinet. Translucent panels or panels with reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
c.  If illuminated, the glare from the source of illumination shall be screened from public view as much as practicable. 
(5)  On the front of a building, not more than one awning sign in accordance with following: 
a.  Signage does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the surface area of the awning on which the sign is placed. 
b.  The awning sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in surface area per linear foot of frontage of the building to which it is attached. 
(6)  On the front of a multiple tenant building, not more than one fascia sign in accordance with table 25-230.1, maximum sign area for restricted use business district, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  For the purposes of this subsection, if the sign is comprised of individual letters, the total square footage of the individual letters shall be considered the square footage of the sign. 
b.  A fascia sign shall not extend more than four (4) inches from the wall surface on which it is erected and shall not extend beyond the ends nor above the top of the wall. 
c.  If the wall sign is illuminated, it should be illuminated either through the use of individually illuminated words, letters, symbols, or logos, back-lighting, reverse channel lighting, or decorative external illumination. Cabinet type lighting is permitted so long as their sign panels are opaque so that when illuminated, only the individual letters, symbols, or logos are illuminated and not the entire background or cabinet. Translucent panels or panels with reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
d.  If illuminated, the glare from the source of illumination shall be screened from public view as much as practicable. 
(7)  One window sign per window provided in accordance with the following: 
a.  The sign does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the window, without approval of the board of trustees as set forth in section 25-227(f). 
b.  When the sign is composed of individual letters and/or symbols or does not otherwise have a defined background, the size of the sign shall be determined by multiplying the length of all components of the sign by the height of the largest component. 
c.  A sign that is unregulated under section 25-223(d) shall not be considered in determining the size of a window sign. 
d.  A divided light window shall be considered a single window for purposes of determining the total size of the window. 
e.  The window sign must be affixed to the window and composed of vinyl letters or other material approved by the planning board. 
(8)  Not more than one A-frame sign in accordance with the following: 
a.  The height of the sign shall not exceed three (3) feet as measured from the finished grade of the sidewalk. 
b.  The width of the sign shall not exceed two (2) feet. 
c.  The sign shall be constructed of wood or metal and shall not be hand-painted. 
d.  Any sign placed pursuant to this section shall be positioned so as to not to interfere with pedestrian traffic and shall not be displayed when the business is not open. 
(9)  Electronic changeable copy sign. 
a.  Electronic changeable copy signs are not permitted within the restricted use business district. 
(10)  Temporary banner or temporary illuminate portable sign. 
a.  Not more than one temporary banner or temporary illuminated portable sign advertising the opening of a new business or that is intended to be used as a substitute for a sign that is being repaired or replaced. The sign permit for such sign shall specify that the sign may be in place for no more than sixty (60) days. If connected to a power source, such signs shall be placed next to the building on the lot. The surface area of such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
b.  Not more than one temporary banner or temporary illuminated sign advertising a special event, promotion or activity that does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area. 
c.  Permits for a temporary banner or temporary illuminated sign advertising a special event shall specify that the sign shall be in place for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
d.  No more than four (4) permits for a temporary banner shall be issued to the same applicant during any one calendar year. 
e.  No more than two (2) permits for a temporary illuminated sign shall be issued to the same applicant during any one calendar year. 
(11)  Not more than one wall sign placed on any part of a building not fronting on Delaware Avenue in accordance with the following: 
a.  Is no more than fifteen (15) square feet in surface area. 
b.  The sign shall not extend more than four (4) inches from the wall surface on which it is erected and shall not extend beyond the ends nor above the top of the wall. 
c.  If the sign is illuminated, it should be illuminated either through the use of individually illuminated words, letters, symbols, or logos, back-lighting, reverse channel lighting, or decorative external illumination. Cabinet type lighting is permitted so long as their sign panels are opaque so that when illuminated, only the individual letters, symbols, or logos are illuminated and not the entire background or cabinet. Translucent panels or panels with reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
(12)  The following criteria shall be considered by the planning board in order for a sign within the restricted business use district to qualify for the increase in maximum sign area incentive: 
a.  Signs shall be constructed of high quality materials including metal, masonry, stone, hardwood, structural glass or other material deemed as high quality by the planning board. 
b.  Signs shall be constructed of materials, finishes, and colors that complement the building and to a scale that compliments the building. 
c.  Signs shall contain variations in dimension and shape. 
d.  Signs that are illuminated shall be done so either through the use of external fixtures (goose neck), back-lighting, or reverse channel lighting. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall be either a monument or ground sign, with the base and/or support structures constructed of or clad in masonry or stone, hardwood, decorative metal, or other material deemed as high quality by the planning board. 
f.  With a freestanding sign, landscaping must be provided around or near the base of the sign. The planning board may consider the use of planters or other hardscaped area that improves the pedestrian streetscape in place of the required landscaped area. 
g.  Providing off-street parking that can be used by the general public for businesses [along Delaware Avenue]. 
h.  Providing a sidewalk where none exists, replacing an asphalt sidewalk with a concrete sidewalk, or improving a substandard sidewalk or sidewalk in poor condition. 
i.  Replacing a nonconforming use with a conforming use. 
j.  Providing landscaping at places other than at the base of a freestanding sign, including specifically replacing pre-existing impervious surfaces with softscaping. 
k.  Providing street trees where none exist or replacing street trees that are in poor condition. 
Table 25-230.1 
Maximum Sign Area for Restricted Use Business District 
Sign Type Maximum Sign Face Area Permitted Maximum Sign Face Area Permitted with Incentive Buildings with Less than 50 Feet of Frontage Buildings with 50 Feet or More of Frontage Buildings with Less than 50 Feet of Frontage Buildings with 50 Feet or More of Frontage Wall Sign 40 square feet 60 square feet 75 square feet 100 square feet Projecting Sign 15 square feet 25 square feet 25 square feet 35 square feet Fascia Sign for Multiple Tenant Buildings 15 square feet 25 square feet 20 square feet 30 square feet Awning Sign 50% of the surface of the awning 50% of the surface of the awning NA NA Window Sign 25% of the area of a window. Exceeding the 25% limitation requires approval of the board of trustees, as set forth in section 25-227(f). 25% of the area of a window. Exceeding the 25% limitation requires approval of the board of trustees, as set forth in section 25-227(f). N/A N/A Freestanding Sign 20 square feet 30 square feet 40 square feet 60 square feet A-Frame Sign 6 square feet 6 square feet NA NA  
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12; L.L. No. 7-2016, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 25-231. - Sign regulations for general business and industrial districts. 
(a)  The following signs are permitted within the general business and industrial districts: 
(1)  Any sign permitted in a residential district or in the restricted business use district. Pole signs are permitted, but only on property fronting Elmwood Avenue in the general business district and in the industrial district. 
(2)  Not more than one non-illuminated or illuminated freestanding sign per tax parcel in accordance with table 25-231.1, maximum sign area for general business and industrial districts, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  Where a pole sign is allowed, the sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. 
b.  When a monument or ground sign is used, the sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall be located so that no portion of the sign is less than two (2) feet from any property line. 
d.  No freestanding sign shall be located so as to create a visual obstruction for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. 
e.  The area around the base of the sign shall be landscaped, unless after review and recommendation of the planning board it is determined that there is a lack of ample space accommodate said landscaping. Any landscaping plan must be approved by the planning board. 
(3)  One non-illuminated or illuminated sign per business placed on the front of the building in accordance with table 25-231.1, maximum sign area for general business and industrial districts. 
(4)  Not more than one non-illuminated or illuminated wall sign that identifies an entrance to a business and that is placed on any part of a building not fronting on Elmwood Avenue, Kenmore Avenue or Military Road in accordance with the following: 
a.  The sign shall not be more than fifteen (15) square feet in surface area. 
(5)  Not more than one electronic changeable copy sign provided that its face is no more than twenty (20) square feet. If the electronic changeable copy sign is attached to a freestanding sign, the area of its face added to the area of any other freestanding signage cannot exceed the maximum permitted sign as identified in table 25-231.1, maximum sign area for general business and industrial districts. 
a.  Electronic changeable copy signs shall consist of a black background/backdrop with single color display only. 
b.  The frequency of any change in the message displayed shall not be less than one minute. 
c.  The message displayed shall be presented in instantaneous alphanumeric format only without scrolling, fading-in, dissolved images or repixalizations. 
(b)  The following criteria shall be considered by the planning board in order for a sign within the general business and industrial districts to qualify for the increase in maximum sign area incentive: 
(1)  Signs shall be constructed of high quality materials including metal, masonry, stone, hardwood, structural glass or other material deemed as high quality by the planning board. 
(2)  Signs shall be constructed of materials, finishes, and colors that complement the building and to a scale that compliments the building. 
(3)  Signs shall contain variations in dimension and shape. 
(4)  Signs that are illuminated shall be done so either through the use of external fixtures (goose neck), back-lighting, or reverse channel lighting. 
(5)  Freestanding signs shall be either a monument or ground sign, with the base and/or support structures constructed of or clad in masonry or stone, hardwood, decorative metal, or other material deemed as high quality by the planning board. 
(6)  Subject to the requirements of 25-231(a)(2)e., the planning board may consider the replacement of blacktop areas between the sidewalk and street or within the front yard with grass and other landscaping. 
(7)  Providing a sidewalk where none exists, replacing an asphalt sidewalk with a concrete sidewalk, or improving a substandard sidewalk or sidewalk in poor condition. 
(8)  Replacing a nonconforming use with a conforming use. 
(9)  Providing landscaping at places other than at the base of a freestanding sign, including specifically replacing pre-existing impervious surfaces with landscaping. 
(10)  Providing street trees where none exists or replacing street trees that are in poor condition. 
Table 25-231.1 
Maximum Sign Area for General Business and Industrial Districts 
Sign Type Maximum Sign Face Area Permitted Maximum Sign Face Area Permitted with Incentive Buildings with Less than 50 Feet of Frontage Buildings with 50 Feet or More of Frontage Buildings with Less than 50 Feet of Frontage Buildings with 50 Feet or More of Frontage Wall Sign 40 square feet 60 square feet 75 square feet 100 square feet Projecting Sign 15 square feet 25 square feet 25 square feet 35 square feet Fascia Sign for Multiple Tenant Buildings 15 square feet 25 square feet 20 square feet 30 square feet Awning Sign 50% of the surface of the awning 50% of the surface of the awning NA NA Window Sign 25% of the area of a window. Exceeding the 25% limitation requires approval of the board of trustees, as set forth in section 25-227(f). 25% of the area of a window. Exceeding the 25% limitation requires approval of the board of trustees, as set forth in section 25-227(f). N/A N/A Freestanding Sign 30 square feet 40 square feet 60 square feet 75 square feet A-Frame Sign 6 square feet 6 square feet NA NA  
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12; L.L. No. 7-2016, § 3, 9-20-16; L.L. No. 4-2018, §§ 2-5, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 25-232. - Amortization. 
    Any legal, preexisting sign in the restricted business use district, in the general business use district or in the industrial district may continue until there is a change of ownership of the business, change in the name of the business, whether or not said change in name or ownership is due to bankruptcy or foreclosure; and/or a change in the type of business. In the event there has been no change in business ownership, business name and/or a change in the type of business, any legal preexisting sign in the restricted business use district, in the restricted business use district, general business use district or in the industrial district may continue for a period of no more than seven (7) years from the date of the adoption of this article provided it conforms to all other applicable regulations of the Kenmore Municipal Code and the building code of the state. The zoning board of appeals may permit a longer amortization period upon the submission of competent proof by the owner of the sign that a longer amortization period is necessary to allow the owner to recover its investment. 
(L.L. No. 3-2012, § 1, 4-3-12; L.L. No. 4-2018, § 5, 6-5-18) 
Secs. 25-233-25-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BULK AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 25-266. - Measurement of height. 
    The height of a building or structure shall be measured from the average natural ground level within ten (10) feet of the building or structure up to the average level of the highest roof thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VIII, § I) 
Sec. 25-267. - Residential use districts. 
    No building or structure located within a residential use district shall have a height exceeding thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VIII, § II) 
Sec. 25-268. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to church spires, cupolas, flag poles, radio aerials, or, if not occupying an area greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area, to domes, ornamental towers, observation towers, water tanks or hose towers. 
(Ord. of 12-15-59, Art. VIII, § II) 
Secs. 25-269, 25-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SATELLITE ANTENNAS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, adopted June 19, 2007, amended Art. XI in its entirety as set out herein. The former Art. XI derived from L.L. No. 2-1992, §§ 1-9, adopted June 16, 1992. 

Sec. 25-271. - Purpose. 
    The village has become concerned about the appearance and impact of satellite antennas, also commonly referred to as "dish antennas." Unless regulated, such antennas can be installed in an unsafe and aesthetically unpleasant manner with an adverse impact on the inhabitants of the village and on surrounding properties. The intent and purpose of this article is to establish a procedure and the criteria to avoid the adverse impacts of the installation of such antennas and to preserve the character, beauty and general welfare of the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-272. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed thereto: 
(1)  Satellite antenna means any parabolic dish or other antenna, apparatus or device which is designed to receive television, radio, microwave or other electronic signals, or any combination thereof, from a transmitter or transmitter relay in outer space. 
(2)  Usable satellite signal means a satellite signal when viewed on a television set is at least equal in picture quality to that received from a local commercial television station or by way of cable television. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-273. - Applicability of zoning provisions. 
    A satellite antenna in all respects shall be considered an accessory structure and, except as otherwise provided in this article, shall be subject to all the zoning regulations contained in this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-274. - Building permit required: placement of antenna. 
(1)  No owner, lessee or occupant of any property within the village shall cause, suffer, or permit the erection and/or maintenance of a satellite antenna, except as set forth in this article. 
(2)  Any satellite antenna of at least thirty-two (32) inches in diameter shall be considered a structure requiring a building permit and, as such, shall not be located forward of the rear wall of the main structure on the lot. No such satellite antenna or any of its cables, guy wires, supports or any other above ground appurtenances shall be built, erected or maintained nearer than five (5) feet of the side or rear lines of the lot upon which it is located. On any corner lot, no satellite or any of its cables, guy wires or other above ground appurtenances shall be built, erected or maintained nearer to the street line than is allowed for other structures. 
(3)  An application for a building permit shall be made to the building inspector. The application shall contain the name and address of the owner of the land on which it is to be placed, the name and address of the applicant, the address of the property on which it is to be placed and such other information as shall be required by the building inspector. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-275. - General requirements. 
    The following requirements apply to the installation and maintenance of satellite antennas in all zoning districts: 
(a)  No installation shall be allowed over, under or upon land affected by a public or private easement. 
(b)  The diameter of such satellite antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet along its longest axis and the height of such antenna above ground level on which it is placed shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  The color of the antenna shall be in solid tones of beige, brown, black, grey or green and said color tones shall not be altered. 
(d)  To the extent consistent with its ability to receive a useable satellite signal, a satellite antenna shall be located and designed to reduce or eliminate its visibility from surrounding properties when viewed at street level and from public streets. Nothing in this article, however, shall be construed to permit a fence or other screening structure that is otherwise prohibited by the Code of the Village of Kenmore. 
(e)  All installations shall be accomplished in a workmanlike manner and shall be so installed and secured as to give reasonable assurance of the absence of potential hazard from wind, electrical or other factors giving rise to an unsafe condition. 
(f)  Satellite antennas shall meet manufacturer's installation specifications and shall be of noncombustible and corrosive resistant material. 
(g)  Every satellite antenna must be grounded for protection against a direct lightning strike. 
(h)  No satellite antenna may be located on any trailer or other portable device. 
(i)  Littering, symbols or other graphic matter placed on any part of a satellite antenna or structure may consist of the manufacturer's identification only and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in total area. 
(j)  If a satellite antenna is remove or abandoned, all components appurtenant to such antenna, including but not limited to the foundation, structures, guy wires and cables, connected to it shall be removed. The building inspector shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of completion of the removal. 
(k)  All satellite antennas, supports and attachments and the installation of such antennas shall comply with the applicable provisions of the state uniform fire prevention and building construction code. 
(l)  Multiple dwellings and commercial or industrial buildings shall be allowed no more than two (2) satellite antennas. 
(m)  One- and two-family dwellings shall be allowed one satellite antenna not exceeding thirty-two (32) inches in diameter for each dwelling unit or one satellite dish of thirty-two (32) inches or more. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-276. - District and dealer regulations. 
(1)  No satellite antenna that is thirty-two (32) inches or more in diameter may be installed above, mounted on or attached to any building, tower or other structure in any residential district. Such antenna shall be installed freestanding on the ground. If a reasonably satisfactory television signal cannot be obtained by such ground level installation, the zoning board of appeals may permit the antenna to be located on the roof of the building but in no event may any satellite antenna extend more than three (3) feet above the highest part of the roof of the dwelling on the lot. 
(2)  Satellite antennas not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in diameter that serve one- and two-family dwellings shall be permitted to be attached to the dwelling or an accessory structure on the lot provided that the antenna does not project higher that the highest apart of the roof of the dwelling on the lot and no part of such antenna extends into the area between the front of such dwelling and the sidewalk. 
(3)  In residential districts, satellite antennas of at least twenty-four (24) inches but no more than thirty-two (32) inches in diameter shall be located no more than twelve (12) feet from the rear of the dwelling on the lot and may not project higher than the highest point of the roof of the dwelling. 
(4)  A satellite antenna may be mounted on, attached to or adjacent to a building in a business, commercial or industrial district provided its height does not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of the building. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-277. - Nonconforming use. 
    Any satellite antenna installed and operating prior to the effective date of this article, or the amendments thereto, if otherwise in compliance with existing law but not in compliance with this article, or the amendments thereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 25-278. - Reserved. 
Sec. 25-279. - Variance. 
    The zoning board of appeals in appropriate cases may grant a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this article consistent with the requirements of the Village Law. 
(L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Secs. 25-280-25-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 25-290. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for establishing communication tower and antenna sites. The goals of this article are: 
(1)  Protect residential areas and land uses from any adverse impacts of telecommunications facilities. 
(2)  Encourage location of towers in nonresidential areas. 
(3)  Encourage the use of pre-existing sites when establishing a telecommunication facility site. 
(4)  Consider the public health and safety of telecommunication towers and antenna. 
(5)  Encourage users of telecommunication facilities to establish sites which minimize adverse visual impact of the site through the establishment of careful design and siting. 
(6)  Encourage users of telecommunication facilities to locate sites in areas where there will be minimal adverse effect upon the community. 
(7)  Work with telecommunication providers in selecting and developing telecommunication sites so that the community may benefit from more efficient and effective service. 
(8)  Maintain safety to the community, especially adjacent properties through careful inspection of telecommunication sites. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-291. - Applicability. 
(a)  New telecommunication facilities. All new towers or antennas and all relocated, rebuilt or extended telecommunication facilities in the village shall be subject to these regulations. 
(b)  Pre-existing telecommunication facilities. Pre-existing towers and antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, except for those requirements under section 25-293(a), (b), (k), (l), (m), (n) and (o). 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-292. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings described thereto: 
    Co-location means the presence of a telecommunication facility on a pre-existing structure or building. Co-location also refers to the presence of more than one telecommunication facility located on the same tower, land, building or structure. 
    Facility means any telecommunication facility or part thereof. 
    Telecommunication facility means any commercial equipment used in connection with the provision of wireless communication services, including cellular telephone services, personal communications services, radio and television broadcast services and private radio communications services, which are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission in accord with federal law and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, including any amendments thereto. A telecommunications facility shall include antenna(s), principal and accessory telecommunication equipment and supporting masts, monopoles and structures, towers, buildings and appurtenances servicing same. 
    User means any telecommunications provider which enters into a lease with the village for purposes of establishing a telecommunications facility on land, buildings or structures owned by the village. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-293. - General requirements. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all applicants wishing to locate, rebuild, relocate or extend a telecommunications facility in the village: 
(a)  Building permit required. All applicants must obtain a building permit from the village building department. The building inspector, or any person designated by the board of trustees, is hereby authorized to issue building permits under this article if the inspector determines that the applicant has met all requirements established under this article. 
(b)  FCC license required for process of permit application. Applications for permits will only be processed when the applicant demonstrates that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission as a telecommunications provider or that the applicant has agreements with an FCC-licensed telecommunications provider for the use or lease of the support structure or tower already in existence. 
(c)  Submission of site plan. All applicants under this article will be required to submit a site plan to the village building department for review. The site plan review will include an evaluation of the plans, examination of the specifications for the site, including, but not limited to, the number and type of antenna(s), frequency(ies), dimensions and location of the antenna, tower and/or accessory structure(s), the structural integrity and suitability of the facility and/or the pre-existing structure, a description of how the antenna will be affixed, details of all fixtures and couplings, and a visual environmental assessment form (visual EAF). The applicant will also provide a landscape plan which will demonstrate the visibility of the facility from key viewpoints. The building department may require the applicant to provide a report, prepared by a state-licensed professional engineer detailing the information contained within this paragraph. 
(d)  Demonstration necessary height and location. All applicants proposing construction of a tower or the increase in height of an existing tower, and any applicant proposing to mount an antenna on an existing structure, must demonstrate that the tower or antenna height is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the site's function within the network. In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that the telecommunication facility's location is needed to satisfy the applicant's network. Technological evidence must be submitted to verify this information. 
(e)  Agreement to remove. All applicants must agree, in writing, to remove the tower, antenna, accessory buildings, etc., if such facility becomes technically obsolete or ceases to be used for the purpose originally intended for twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(f)  Good faith effort to establish on existing structure. All applicants are required to make a good faith effort to establish a telecommunication facility on an existing structure and/or public property. Failure to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(g)  Response to inquiry for co-location. Any owner of a telecommunications facility located on a pre-existing structure or building must respond to any inquiry for the village building department or legal department concerning the availability of the site for co-location. 
(h)  Demonstration that facility cannot be accommodated on existing structure. If the applicant does not seek a permit for establishment of a telecommunications facility site on a pre-existing structure, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed telecommunications facility cannot be accommodated on an existing site due to one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned equipment which cannot reasonably be prevented. 
(2)  The existing structures do not have space on which the proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably. 
(3)  The property owner or owner of the existing tower, building or other structure refuses to allow co-location. 
(4)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing site. 
(5)  Other technical reasons make it impracticable to place the equipment proposed by the applicant on the existing structure. 
(i)  Aesthetics. New towers and antennas or rebuilt, relocated or extended towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The telecommunication facility is designed and constructed in a manner which minimizes its visual impact to the surrounding community to the extent practicable. 
(2)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. Any antenna or tower affixed to a pre-existing structure is to be designed and/or painted in a neutral color, or in the identical or similar color as the existing or supporting structure so as to blend in with the existing structure. 
(3)  The telecommunications facility shall be separated from residential dwellings, schools, and designated historical landmarks and historical sites by the distance of five hundred (500) feet; provided, however, that a reduced distance may be allowed where the applicant seeks a permit on a pre-existing site. 
(4)  No tower located in residential use 1 and residential use 2 districts may have towers or antennas which exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(j)  Fencing. The tower or antenna shall be surrounded by a chain link or masonry fence, not less than six (6) feet in height from finished grade. No barbed wire shall be used. This shall not apply to telecommunication facilities established on a pre-existing site where the building inspector determines that the location of the telecommunication facility is not readily accessible and where the building inspector determines that the safety of the public will not be compromised by the absence of a fence. 
(k)  Lighting. Towers shall be lighted as prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. Towers shall not otherwise be lighted. If lighting is required, the lighting design and type chosen must cause minimal disturbance to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(l)  State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FCC, FAA and any other agency with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. The owners of the telecommunications facility will take all necessary steps to bring the facility into compliance with any changes in the regulations and/or standards governing telecommunication facilities within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, provided the regulations and standards do not mandate a different compliance schedule. 
(m)  Building codes. The facility shall be maintained in good order and repair at all times according to village Code requirements. The owner of the telecommunication facility shall also maintain the site in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal, state and local building codes. In addition, the owner of a telecommunication facility shall ensure that it is in compliance with standards established by the Electronic Industries Association. The building department shall conduct routine inspections of the telecommunications facility and the site, and, where the telecommunications facility is situated upon a pre-existing structure or building, upon the building or structure. If upon inspection, the village should conclude that the telecommunications facility, the site, or the pre-existing building or structure, fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, notice shall be given to the owner of the telecommunications facility and the owner of the pre-existing building or structure. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner of the telecommunications facility and/or pre-existing building or structure shall be given thirty (30) days to correct any violations and to bring said property into compliance with such standards and requirements. Failure to bring said telecommunications facility and/or pre-existing building or structure into compliance shall constitute grounds for removal of the telecommunications facility at the telecommunications facility owner's expense. 
(n)  Advertising. The use of any portion of a facility for signs or advertising purposes, including company name, banner, streamer, etc., is prohibited. 
(o)  Compliance with state environmental quality law. All applicants under this article must comply with the state Environmental Quality Review Act. 
(p)  Bond. The owner of the telecommunications facility shall provide to the village clerk a demolition bond equal to twice the cost of removal of the tower, antenna and any accessory structure. Said bond shall list the village as assignee. The applicant shall submit an analysis, certified by a state licensed professional engineer, outlining the cost of removal of the telecommunications facility and restoration of the surrounding area. The sufficiency of the bond shall be confirmed every five (5) years. If the bond amount in force is insufficient to cover the costs of removal of the telecommunications facility, it shall be immediately increased to cover such amount. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-294. - Use of premises owned by the village. 
    All applicants wishing to locate a telecommunications facility on village property must submit a completed application and detailed site plan to the building inspector. The applicant must comply with section 25-293 above. The applicant will also supply, within a reasonable time, all pertinent information requested by the village. Applications will be submitted with a non-refundable application fee, the amount of which will be determined by resolution by the board of trustees. The building inspector shall issue a permit within sixty (60) days of receipt of the completed application and fee provided the building inspector is satisfied that the applicant is in compliance with the requirements contained within this section. If the building inspector does not believe, after careful review, that the applicant is in compliance, the building inspector shall deny such application. 
(a)  Location. Telecommunications facilities may be located on village property, provided that a lease agreement is approved by the village board of trustees and that the applicant complies with all provisions of this section. 
(b)  Priority of users. The following priority of users is given to the following in descending order: 
(1)  Village of Kenmore. 
(2)  Public safety agencies including police, fire and ambulance services and private entities which have a public safety agreement with the village. 
(3)  Governmental agencies. 
(4)  Companies providing telecommunications services including Internet, paging, data, enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), cellular, personal communication services (PSC). 
(c)  Placement. Placement of a telecommunications facility on village land must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Telecommunications facility will not adversely impact on the surrounding private property. 
(2)  Telecommunications facility will not interfere with the purpose for which the village land was intended. 
(3)  Telecommunications facility will not interfere with other persons using village land. 
(4)  The applicant must secure necessary land use permits and approvals. 
(5)  The applicant will work with the village's objective to promote co-locations. 
(6)  The applicant will continue to comply with the requirements of section 25-293. 
(d)  Termination: 
(1)  The village board of trustees may terminate any lease if one of the following conditions exist: 
a.  A potential user with higher priority as described in section 25-294(b) is unable to locate another adequate location and its desired use is incompatible with the current use. 
b.  A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with the uses of a higher priority, as established in section 25-294(b). 
c.  A user violates any of the standards in this article or the conditions established in a village lease agreement. 
(2)  The village will provide written notice to the user of its intent to terminate any lease. The notice will contain the reasons for such termination and provide an opportunity for the user to address the village board of trustees. This procedure may not be used in emergency situations. 
(e)  Right to deny use. The village reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all village land. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-295. - Buildings or other equipment storage. 
    Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure used in connection with antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Cabinet or structure shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. For any buildings less than sixty-five (65) feet in height, shall locate the related equipment structure on the ground and not on the rooftop if the zoning board of appeals should allow for an equipment structure exceeding three hundred (300) square feet or exceeding twelve (12) feet in height. 
(2)  If the equipment cabinet or structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of said structure, including other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area. 
(3)  Any storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-296. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
    Any telecommunication facility which is not operational for a twelve-month period shall be deemed abandoned. The owner of the telecommunication equipment shall remove all equipment and structures, including storage cabinets and sheds, antenna and towers within ninety (90) days of receipt of a notice from the village informing the owner of such abandonment. 
(L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 25-297. - Amateur (HAM) radio antennas 
(a)  Purpose and intent. These regulations apply to amateur radio antennas within the village. These regulations are adopted to balance the federal interest in amateur radio operation and the village's interest in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, and character of the community. The purposes of this section are: 
(1)  To establish an application process and standards for installation of amateur radio antennas, while preserving the community character and ensuring safety. 
(2)  To promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, and to protect and preserve community character. 
(3)  To accommodate reasonably the needs of licensed amateur radio operators in accordance with federal law. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Amateur radio antenna. Any equipment or device that is used for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The term amateur radio antenna is interchangeable with the term HAM radio antenna. 
(2)  Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devises used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to both vertical and horizontal arrays. 
(3)  Antenna structure. The supporting mast, pole or tower of one or more antenna(s). 
(4)  Antenna/antenna structure. Collectively the antenna and its supporting structure, if any. 
(5)  Antenna/antenna structure height. The distance from the highest point of the antenna/antenna structure to the natural grade at the point the structure touches, or if extended, would touch the ground. 
(c)  Regulations generally. 
(1)  No amateur radio antenna or support thereof shall be erected, installed, placed or maintained upon any lot or upon any building or structure except in compliance with this section. 
(2)  No signage shall be allowed on any antennas and/or antenna structure, expect for requisite safety text and other labeling required by federal law. 
(3)  No portion of any antenna and/or antenna structure shall be allowed within any required setback area. Any directional antenna that could extend across a property line when rotated is prohibited. 
(4)  No more than one antenna structure shall be permitted on any lot or structure. 
(5)  There shall be no maximum height established in this section for amateur radio antennas. However, the applicant is required to demonstrate that the established tower height is the minimum height necessary to achieve the stated objectives. In addition, in evaluating an application and in setting height limitations as conditions on any approval under this section, the village's reviewing boards must take into account the public health, safety, welfare, and community character. Factors such as height of surrounding structures, lot sizes, setbacks, impacts from tower collapse, alternatives available to the applicant, aesthetics, and safety concerns will be considered. The height for each tower will be dependent upon the balancing of federal and local interests required by federal law. 
(d)  Special use permit/site plan review required. 
(1)  The installation of an amateur radio antenna shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts within the village, subject to the issuance of a special use permit by the village board of trustees. 
(2)  Pursuant to section 17-151 of the Village Code, site plan review is required. 
(3)  The factors to be considered by the village board of trustees in evaluating an application for a special use permit will include those factors set forth in subparagraph (c)(5) above. In addition, the board shall consider the following: 
a.  Whether the antenna, including the antenna structure and accessory equipment, is located, sized, and designed so as to minimize the amount of the antenna that is visible from surrounding properties, public streets, and all public rights-of-way, recognizing that complete screening may not be possible; 
b.  Whether there is adequate space on the property for the antenna and antenna structure without conflicting with buildings on the property or encroaching into required setback areas; 
c.  Whether the antenna/antenna structure is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood with respect to, including, but not limited to, scale and massing in comparison to lot size, impact on adjacent properties, and aesthetic impacts; 
d.  Whether the permit and any conditions of approval attached thereto would accommodate reasonably the amateur radio operator's desire for communication, while at the same time requiring the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the village's legitimate purpose of protecting the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics and compatibility with the neighborhood. The village board of trustees may also consider other factors deemed relevant and appropriate by the board. 
(4)  Both the village board of trustees and the planning board must conduct a balancing analysis, taking into account the federal interest in amateur radio operation and the village's interest in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, and community character. In doing so, the boards shall accommodate reasonably amateur radio communications, while taking into account the village's legitimate objectives. 
(5)  Review of applications for a special use permit and site plan review under this section must comply with the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act. 
(6)  The reviewing boards shall have the power to impose conditions, consistent with applicable law. 
(e)  Application requirements. 
(1)  An application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is required for applications for a special use permit under this section. The village board has evaluated the costs of hiring a technical consultant to aid it in its evaluation and has determined that this amount is reasonable and designed to cover the costs of review. 
(2)  The name, address, and call letters of the amateur radio operator. 
(3)  Manufacturer's specifications of the antenna structure. 
(4)  Visual representation to scale of the antenna structure and array through the preparation of project specific elevations drawn to scale and dimensioned so as to fully describe the proposed project. 
(5)  A description of the intended use, including information explaining the need for the proposed antenna (for example, if an antenna of a certain size is needed to communicate with a particular location). 
(6)  A demonstration of the technical and practical necessity for the height of the tower, including a demonstration that the tower is the minimum height necessary to provide a technologically practical and feasible facility. 
(7)  A copy of licenses issued by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including station and operator licenses. 
(8)  All documentation submitted to and/or required/requested by the FCC. 
(9)  For site plan review, the applicant shall comply with the application requirements found in article V of chapter 17 of the Village of Kenmore Municipal Code. 
(L.L. No. 2-2013, § 1, 12-3-13) 
Secs. 25-298-25-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TATTOO, BODY PIERCING AND MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 25-306. - Purpose. 
    The village hereby finds that, based upon the experience of other municipalities, the process of tattooing involves certain health risks, including increases in serum hepatitis and increased risk of transmission of disease and further involves increased risks to the public as a result of waste disposal. The village further finds that mere regulatory measures have proven ineffective in the elimination of such health risks. In addition, businesses and establishments operated to provide tattoos, body piercing and body massage have an adverse secondary effect on a community, including depreciated property values and deteriorated community character. Such establishments are also detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of a community, especially minors. In order to maintain property values and community character, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the village, this article is intended to restrict such businesses to nonresidential, nonbusiness, noncommercial areas of the village, and to otherwise regulate their operation. In addition, because the deleterious secondary effects of such businesses and establishments increase when such uses are concentrated, this article is intended to promote the health, safety, morals, general welfare, and good order of the residents of the village by regulating the concentration of such uses. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-307. - Definitions. 
(a)  Tattoo parlor. Any private or public establishment, store or business which provides as all or part of its business the application of tattoos on the human body through the injection of dye by needle or other method so as to form indelible marks, figures or designs, excluding permanent makeup. A tattoo parlor also includes any establishment, store or business that provides indelible marks or figures to the human body through the production of scars. 
(b)  Body piercing parlor. Any private or public business, store or establishment that provides the service of piercing the human body, excluding ear piercing, through use of any piercing device or method. 
(c)  Massage parlor. Any public or private establishment that is used for the provision of services of stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating the human body with the hands or other devices, with or without the aid of oils or other lubricants, except for medical purposes operated by a person licensed in the state or otherwise authorized pursuant to the Education Law to practice medicine or osteopathy. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-308. - General restrictions. 
    Tattoo, body piercing and massage establishments shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  No such use shall be allowed within five hundred (500) feet of an existing adult use. 
(b)  No such use shall be allowed within five hundred (500) feet of another tattoo, body piercing and/or body massage establishment, store or business. 
(c)  No such use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of any residential use zoning district (residential 1, 2, or 3). 
(d)  No such use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a pre-existing school, public park, or place of worship. 
(e)  No such use shall be located in any zoning district except the industrial use district. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-309. - Body piercing/tattooing of minors prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly pierce or offer to pierce, for compensation, any part of the human body of an individual under the age of eighteen (18) years. Proof of age shall be determined upon presentation of two (2) forms of valid identification. Valid identification shall include a driver's license, picture sheriff's identification or birth certificate. 
(2)  If the body piercing is offered in conjunction with the sale of an item of jewelry actually being used in connection with the body piercing, then that service or act shall be deemed to have been provided for compensation. 
(3)  No person shall knowingly tattoo or offer to tattoo for compensation any part of the human body of an individual under the age of eighteen (18) years. Proof of age shall be determined upon presentation of two (2) forms of valid identification. Valid identification shall include a driver's license, picture sheriff's identification or birth certificate. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-310. - Exceptions. 
(1)  The prohibition contained in section 25-309 shall not apply where written consent is provided by at least one parent or legal guardian of the minor. 
(2)  The prohibition contained in section 25-309 shall not apply to any body piercing and/or tattooing performed by a duly licensed physician or nurse practitioner or persons acting under the supervision of a physician or nurse practitioner. 
(3)  The prohibition contained in section 25-309 shall not apply to the piercing of ears. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-311. - Special use permit. 
(a)  No use as described in this article shall be established until a special use permit is issued by the board of trustees. Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall consist of a description of the premises and such additional information as shall be required by the board of trustees. The board of trustees shall call a public hearing for the purpose of considering the request for a special use permit. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given by publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. Said notice will indicate the general nature of the public hearing and the fact that those persons interested therein may be heard at the time and place of such hearing. Notice will be issued at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing date. 
(b)  A special use permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be personal to the holder and shall terminate upon the transfer of title or ownership of the property or use so affected. 
(c)  A special use permit that has terminated upon the transfer of title or ownership must be reapplied for by the subsequent applicant within sixty (60) days of the purchase of transfer. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-312. - Penalties. 
    Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Any person who willingly violates this article after having previously convicted of such offense shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In construing this article, each day that a business for tattooing and/or body piercing is operated shall constitute a separate offense and, in addition, each act of tattooing and/or body piercing shall be considered a separate offense. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Sec. 25-313. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not effect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section of the article or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of each section of this local law are hereby declared severable. 
(L.L. No. 5-2000, § 1, 5-15-00) 
Secs. 25-314-25-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - OUTDOOR DINING 

Sec. 25-326. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter [article] is designed to permit outdoor dining in areas where it is appropriate and to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. This legislation is intended to accomplish the following: 
(a)  To ensure adequate space for pedestrians on sidewalks adjacent to outdoor dining areas. 
(b)  To preserve and enhance the character of the neighborhoods where such outdoor dining is permitted in the village. 
(1)  To provide requirements for bars, restaurants, take-out food, and other related establishments desiring to provide outdoor dining to patrons. 
(2)  To promote the best use of land. 
(3)  To promote the best interest of the business and residential districts. 
(4)  To promote the scope and vision of the comprehensive plan for the village. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-327. - Definition of outdoor dining area 
    An outdoor dining area is any space outside the walls of the bar, restaurant, takeout food store or related establishment that is designated by the proprietor of the establishment for consumption of food or beverages, regardless of whether it has a roof or awning over it or whether it is enclosed by screens, curtains, plastic or similar materials which set it off from the open air. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-328. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  No outdoor dining shall be allowed by any business or establishment unless a permit has first been obtained from the village clerk. 
(b)  The fee for such permit shall be in such amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(1)  In the event that a permit application is denied prior to any outdoor dining area being established, the applicant may receive one-half of the permit fee paid upon making a written request to the office of the village clerk, and with the clerk's approval. 
(2)  In the event an application for a permit is denied, and the applicant has already established such outdoor dining area, the permit application fee will not be refunded and the applicant and/or establishment will be required to remove any outdoor dining furniture and/or fixtures. 
(c)  The permit may be conditioned on modifications or restrictions intended to ensure compliance with all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, local laws and statutes and the general protection of health, safety and welfare and the intent of this legislation. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-329. - Eligible establishments. 
(a)  Only commercial establishments with a proper certificate of occupancy for restaurant use which has heretofore been duly issued by the Erie County Department of Health, which takes orders for food and/or drink, and which maintains table service within its establishment, may take orders and serve food and beverages in such outdoor dining areas. 
(b)  Other commercial establishments that are not restaurants referred to in subsection (a) above, which sell food, may apply for an outdoor dining permit but may not take orders or serve food and beverages at such outdoor dining areas. 
(c)  All other commercial establishments, with the permission of the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-330. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any application for outdoor dining shall be made to the village clerk in writing on a form prescribed by the office of the village clerk/treasurer. 
(b)  Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner and the address for service of process of the partnership. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the address for service of process. If the applicant is doing business under an assumed name, the names and addresses of the principals and the address for service of process of the business. If the applicant is a corporation, the address for service of process. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the establishment to be the subject of the application and the name and telephone number of the owner and/or operator of the establishment. 
(3)  If alcoholic beverages are to be served or sold, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the appropriate liquor license issued by the state and a statement showing the precautions to be taken to restrict consumption of alcoholic beverages to the premises and to those of legal age. 
(4)  A survey or site plan of the subject property that also indicates the adjacent property, including property owned by the village, county and/or state. The survey or site plan must show the complete sidewalk area, with the location of all furniture and fixtures to be used, including a fully dimensioned seating plan, the location of entrances, exits, driveways, and the location of all refuse containers, including dumpsters and cans, both proposed and existing. 
(5)  A description of all furniture and fixtures to be used, including color, size, materials, seating capacity, and how such furniture and fixtures shall be stored or secured during non-operational hours. 
(6)  Proof of insurance. 
(7)  Hours of operation for outdoor dining proposed. 
(8)  Any other information that the village clerk and/or building inspector may find reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  The application shall be signed and acknowledged under oath by the applicant, if an individual or sole proprietorship, or by a duly appointed agent if a limited liability company or partnership, or by a duly authorized officer of a corporation, if the applicant is a corporation. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-331. - Standard for issuance of a permit. 
    The following standards shall apply in all instances: 
(a)  The permit application will be reviewed by the building inspector, police chief and village clerk before any approval is issued. Any permit application may also be reviewed by the planning board, if deemed necessary by the building inspector. 
(b)  In determining whether to approve or deny the application, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  Whether the proposed outdoor dining will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or use of the public right of way adjacent to the establishment. 
(2)  Whether the applicant and the property are in compliance with and have met all other applicable provisions, codes, laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Whether the proposed outdoor dining will promote the ideas and concepts of the comprehensive plan. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-332. - Liability of permit holder. 
    The applicant and the establishment listed on the permit application, which has been issued, shall be liable to and shall indemnify the village for any loss, damage, or injury or expense sustained by the village arising out of any claim or cause of action instituted or commenced by any person or persons arising out of the issuance of such permit or the direct or indirect result of the operation of such outdoor dining area. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-333. - Insurance. 
    No permit shall be issued until the village clerk is in receipt of a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general liability naming the village as additional insured, for combined single limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate and umbrella limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). If the establishment will be serving or selling alcoholic beverages, the applicant must also provide proof of dram shop insurance coverage. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-334. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    The building inspector shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a permit when, in his or hers discretion, the building inspector finds a violation of any applicable rule, regulation, ordinance, local law or statute, or that a continuation of said permit would constitute a hazard, nuisance, or upon a showing of good cause. 
(a)  Written notice of such revocation or suspension will be mailed to the applicant and to the establishment via certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  Said notice will inform the applicant and/or establishment of the right to appeal and the procedure for making said appeal. 
(c)  Any revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-335. - Appeal from denial, revocation or issuance of permit. 
    Appeals from the issuance, denial, revocation or other condition of a permit may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any aggrieved person within thirty (30) days from the date of the issuance, denial, or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the village clerk. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-336. - Maintenance of premises. 
    Outdoor dining areas and that of the adjacent areas shall be maintained and kept free of debris, refuse, and food/drink. The outdoor dining areas shall be swept each night just prior to closing and washed down as needed, but no less than once a week, and at other times as needed. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-337. - Hours of operation. 
    The; hours of operation of outdoor dining shall be specified on the permit. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-338. - Lighting and outdoor cooking. 
    Lighting must be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations with approval by the building inspector. No outdoor cooking is allowed. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-339. - Furniture fixtures and signage. 
    All furniture and fixtures used in conjunction with outdoor dining must be of a temporary nature, and must be brought in at closing time, unless enclosed by a properly approved porch area. No signage shall be affixed to any temporary structures. All furniture and fixtures shall be approved by the building inspector in conformity with guidelines established by the planning board with approval of the board of trustees. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-340. - Permit term and renewal. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued on or after January 1 of each year and shall be valid for one year, expiring December 31 of the following year. 
(b)  Applications for renewal of permits shall be made in the same manner as the original application. 
(c)  Permits shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the interior of the establishment. 
(d)  Permits are not assignable or transferable. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-341. - Restrictions. 
(a)  No tables, benches, seats, planters, decorations or signs shall occupy or block any existing parking spaces, parking meters, trees, utility poles, mail boxes, exits or entrances, or be located so as to block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  All furnishings and fixtures are to be maintained in a satisfactory state of repair, cleanliness and appearance. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Furnishings are limited to tables, table umbrellas, chairs, and planters. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property. 
(f)  No outside music or speakers shall be permitted. 
(g)  Activities of any nature conducted now or hereafter by any commercial establishment, enterprise, business, venture or shop in the village, may not take place in conjunction with outdoor dining. 
(h)  Such outdoor dining activities shall be limited to areas directly in front of each store or establishment and shall not extend beyond the property lines. There shall be a minimum of five (5) feet total sidewalk width clearance to provide adequate and unobstructed pedestrian movement, such width to be measured from the outermost point of the outdoor dining area to the nearest obstruction. 
(i)  Activities conducted now or hereafter by any commercial establishment, otherwise prohibited by all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, local laws or statutes are not changed, amended, suspended or altered in any respect because of this article. 
(j)  Other such restrictions as determined by the building inspector and/or clerk. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
Sec. 25-342. - Severability. 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective. 
(L.L. No. 5-2004, § 1, 6-1-04) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LOCAL LAWS 
    This table shows the location of the Local Laws included herein. 
Local Law 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 1-1943 4-5-43 1, 2 2-1 1-1950 11-7-50 1 20-29 2 20-21 3 20-30 4 20-24 5 20-25 6 20-26 10 20-27 11 20-28 12 20-29 13 20-30 14 20-31 11-1953 12-15-53 1 24-1 1-1955 11-1-55 1 19-1 1-1965 4-20-65 1 17-51 (Amended 2-1-72) 2 17-52 3 17-71 4 17-56 5(a) 17-72 17-73 5(b), (c) 17-74 6(a)-(c) 17-53 6(d) 17-54 7 17-55 8 17-56 10 17-56 2-1965 10-19-65 1 7-111 2 7-112 3 7-113 5 7-114 6 7-115 7 7-116 8 7-117 9 7-118 10 7-119 1-1970 3-10-70 101 11-1 102 11-2 104 11-3 105 11-8 106 11-62 108 11-4 201 11-4 201(a) 11-61 202 11-81 203 11-82 204 11-83 205-1 11-96 205-2 11-97 205-3 11-98 205-4 11-99 206-1 11-126 206-2 11-127 207-1 11-111 207-2 11-112 207-3 11-113 208 11-63 209 11-64 301 11-312 302 11-313 303 11-314 401 11-141 402 11-142 403 11-143 404 11-144 501 11-62 502-1 11-171 502-2 11-172 502-3 11-173 502-4 11-174 502-5(a) 11-171 502-5(b)-(f) 11-175 502-6 11-175 502-7 11-176 503-1 11-246 503-2 11-247 503-3 11-248 503-4 11-249 503-5 11-250 503-6 11-251 504-1 11-201 504-2 11-202 504-3 11-203 504-4 11-204 504-5 11-205 504-6 11-206 504-7 11-207 504-8 11-208 504-9 11-209 504-10 11-210 505-1 11-296 505-2 11-297 505-3 11-298 506-1 11-281 506-2 11-282 507-1 11-186 507-2 11-187 507-3 11-145 508-1 11-236 508-2 11-237 509 11-221 510-1-510-5 11-222 511-1 11-266 511-2 11-267 511-3 11-268 512-1 11-157 512-2 11-158 512-3 11-159 512-4 11-160 513 11-65 601 11-311 602 11-315 603 11-312 604 11-67 605 11-4 11-66 701(a)-(d) 11-31 702(a), (b) 11-32 702(c), (d) 11-33 703 11-34 704 11-35 705 11-9 801 11-5 802 11-6 803 11-7 901 11-46 902 11-21 903 11-47 904 11-48 905 11-49 906 11-21 2-1970 11-10-70 I 18-1 II 1 18-2 II 9 18-4 III 18-3 IV 1, 2 18-21 IV 3 18-22 IV 4 18-23 IV 5 18-24 IV 6 18-25 IV 7 18-26 IV 8 18-27 IV 9, 10 18-28 IV 11 18-29 IV 12 18-30 V 1, 2 18-61 V 3 18-62 V 4 18-63 V 5 18-64 V 6 18-65 V 7 18-66 V 8 18-67 V 10 18-68 VI 1 18-5 VII 18-6 VIII 18-7 1-1972 4-15-72 3 18-47 4 18-48 5 18-49 2-1972 6-27-72 18-48 1-1974 3-19-74 2 21-66 3 21-2 21-67 4 21-68 6 21-70 7 21-71 8 21-69 9 21-72 10 21-73 1-1975 4-1-75 25-91 2-1975 7-1-75 1 17-52 1-1976 5-4-76 1 25-3 2(a) 25-126 2(b) 25-127 2(c) 25-128 2(d) 25-129 2(e) 25-130 3-1976 6-1-76 2(A) 7-35 2(B) 8-40 2(C) 7-38 2(D) 7-75 7-76 2(E) 12-58 2(F) 7-90 2(G) 19-21 2(H) 23-40 23-63 2(J) 5-28 2(K) 24-2 2(L) 9-24 3 5-28 3 19-21 5-28 7-35 7-38 7-75 7-76 7-90 8-40 9-24 19-21 23-40 23-63 24-2 4-1976 6-1-76 2 21-70 5-1976 7-20-76 1 25-126 2 25-129 3 25-127 4 25-128 5 25-130 6-1976 7-20-76 1 11-9 7-1976 10-26-76 1 7-90 2 19-21 2-1977 7-25-77 1 25-181 3-1977 10-4-77 1 4-16 2 4-17 3 4-18 4-24 4(a) 4-19 4(b) 4-20 4(c) 4-21 4(d) 4-22 5 4-19 4-23 6 4-24 7 4-25 3-1977 10-4-77 8, 9 4-26 10 4-25 11 4-26 1-1978 1-3-78 1-3 19-2 2-1978 1-16-78 3 20-1 1-1979 2-20-79 1(2) 21-3 2-1979 3-27-79 1 18-46 2 18-46 18-48 3-1979 8-7-79 1 17-16 2 17-31 2(a)-(d) 17-32 3 17-33 3(a)-(d) 17-34 3(e) 17-35 4(a)-(c) 17-17 4(d) 17-18 5 17-18 6 17-19 4-1979 12-4-79 1-5 13-2 5-1979 12-5-79 1(1) 25-146 1(2) 25-147 1(3) 25-148 1(4) 25-150 1(5) 25-151 1(6) 25-149 1(7) 25-152 6-1979 12-18-79 1 4-36 2 4-37 3 4-38 4 4-39 5(A)-(C) 4-41 5(D) 4-42 4-43 4-44 6 4-40 7 4-45 8 4-45 9 4-46 10 4-47 11 4-48 7-1979 12-18-79 1 4-16-4-26 1-1980 3-4-80 1-4 2-16 3-1980 4-16-80 1 2-26 2 2-27 3 2-29 4 2-30 5 2-31 6, 7 2-28 4-1980 6-17-80 1 8-16 2 8-17 3 8-19 4 8-22 4(A) 8-18 5 8-20 6 8-23 7 8-21 5-1980 7-15-80 1 12-16 2 12-17 3 12-26 4(A) 12-27 5(A) 12-29 5(B)-(D) 12-28 5(B) 12-30 5(C) 12-29 5(D) 12-31 12-32 6 12-18 7 12-19 6-1980 6-5-80 25-181 1 25-183 1-1981 1-20-81 8-2 3-1981 4-22-81 1, 2 7-30 4-1981 10-6-81 1 12-17 2 12-17 3 12-27 12-28 12-31 12-32 4 12-28 5 12-29 12-30 5-1981 10-6-81 1 3-16 2 3-17 3 3-32 4(A) 3-33 4(B)-(D) 3-34 5(A) 3-35 5(B) 3-18 5(C) 3-38 5(D) 3-20 5(E) 3-22 5(F) 3-23 5(G), (H) 3-19 5(I) 3-21 6(A) 3-36 6(B) 3-37 7 3-24 8 3-25 6-1981 11-3-81 1 12-27 12-28 2 3-17 3-33 3-34 1-1982 7-1-82 1-8 Adopting ordinance, p. ix 1-1983 6-22-83 1 8-3 2-1983 12-6-83 1 9-20 3-1985 10-8-85 14.5-16-14.5-29 4-1985 10-29-85 1, 2 20-3 1-1986 5-6-86 1-3 20-2 2-1986 8-5-86 1(1-5) 20-41-20-45 3-1986 10-7-86 1(1-4) 18.5-1-18.5-4 4-1986 11-4-86 1(A) 7-35 2(A) 7-88 5-1986 12-16-86 1(1-4) 20-71-20-74 1-1987 4-7-87 1 25-71 3-1987 6-2-87 1.1-1.8 24-1-24-8 2.1-2.7 24-21-24-27 3.1-3.5 24-28-24-32 4.1-4.5 24-41-24-45 5.1, 5.2 24-33, 24-34 6.1 24-61 7.1, 7.2 24-62, 24-63 8.1-8.5 24-71-24-75 9.1-9.4 24-91-24-94 10.1-10.3 24-101-24-103 11.1, 11.2 24-10, 24-11 12.1-12.3 24-111-24-113 4-1987 7-7-87 1(A)       Rpld 7-16 1(B)       Rpld 8-16-8-23, 
8-36-8-51 1(C)       Rpld 11-1-11-19, 11-21 11-31-11-35, 
11-46-11-49, 
11-61-11-67, 
11-81-11-83, 
11-96-11-99, 
11-111-11-113, 
11-126, 11-127, 
11-141-11-145, 
11-156-11-160, 
11-171-11-176, 
11-186, 11-187, 
11-201-11-210, 
11-221, 11-222, 
11-236, 11-237, 
11-246-11-251, 
11-266-11-268, 
11-281, 11-282, 
11-296-11-298, 
11-311-11-315 2       Added 8-16-8-26 5-1987 11-3-87 1       Rpld 9-24(a)-(d)       Rltd 9-34(e) as (a) 1-1989 1-17-89 1 25-77 2-1989 5-2-89 1 20-4 3-1989 6-6-89 1 18-61.1 4-1989 12-19-89 1 7-76(b) 1-1990 11-20-90 1 2-17 1-1991 5-7-91 1 24-26(c) 2-1992 6-16-92 1-9 25-271-25-279 3-1992 9-1-92 IV-XXIX       Added 9-16-9-35.6 XXXI       Rpld 9-16-9-26 1-1993 10-19-93 1 8-21(e) 1-1995 5-16-95 1, 2 9-25(d) 3, 4 9-25(e) 2-1995 9-9-95 1, 2 9-25(d) 4-1995 11-21-95 2 18-50 5-1995 12-5-95 9-51, 9-52 6-1995 1-2-96 1 4-41(d) 1-1996 1-2-96 1 4-41(d) 2-1996 3-19-96 1, 2 4-45(a) 3-1996 5-7-96 7-113-7-118 1-1997 7-1-97 1 20-5 2-1999 2-16-99 10-1-10-8 3-1999 3-16-99 1-9 20-81-20-89 4-1999 6-1-99 1, 2 8-17(b) 3, 4 8-21(b) 5 8-25.5 5-1999 7-6-99 1       Rpld 25-74(a), 25-76(a) 2       Added 25-74(a) 3       Added 25-76(a), (c) 1-2000 1-4-00 1 25-290-25-296 2-2000 5-15-00 1 25-147, 2       Rpld 25-148 3       Added 25-148 4 25-148.1, 25-148.2 3-2000 5-15-00 1 25-91(d), (e) 4-2000 5-15-00 1 25-113(a)(4) 5-2000 5-15-00 1 25-306-25-313 6-2000 8-3-00 1-5 2-2 7-2000 11-21-00 1       Rpld 7-31-7-39 2       Added 7-31-7-37, 7-37.1, 7-38-7-44 1-2002 2-5-02 1, 2 19-3 2       Added 19-5 3       Added 19-6 2-2002 2-5-02 4-39 2, 3 4-40 4, 5 4-41(a) 3-2002 3-20-02 1       Added 17-85-17-149 4-2002 8-6-02 1       Added 17-150-17-154 5-2002 8-12-02 1, 2 2-2 6-2002 8-30-02 1, 2 2-2 7-2002 10-1-02 1, 2 18-61.1 3       Added 18-61.2 2-2003 7-2-03 1       Added 9-60-9-70 4-2003 12-17-03 1, 2 7-32 3, 4 7-33 5, 6 7-37.1 7, 8 7-38 9, 10 7-39 11       Added 7-40.1 12       Added 7-40.2 13       Added 7-40.3 1-2004 5-4-04 1       Added 21-85-21-91 2-2004 5-4-04 1       Added 12-62-12-68 3-2004 5-4-04 1 7-90 4-2004 5-4-04 1       Added 8-19(d) 5-2004 6-1-04 1       Added 25-326-25-342 6-2004 6-1-04 1       Added 18-27.1 2, 3 18-61.1 7-2004 8-3-04 1       Added 3-50-3-59 8-2004 8-3-04 1       Added 3-60-3-64 9-2004 10-5-04 1 9-16 2 9-18(a) 3       Added 9-18(d) 4 9-18A 5 9-25(c) 2-2005 6-7-05 1 9-35.6 3-2005 12-6-05 1 9-25(c) 1-2006 4-11-06 1, 2 9-18(a), (d) 3 9-25(c) 2-2006 4-18-06 1 8-21(b) 3-2006 4-18-06 1 12-62 5-2006 6-20-06 1 25-3 6-2006 6-20-06 1       Dltd 25-91-25-94       Added 25-91-25-96 7-2006 6-20-06 1       Added 25-97-25-103 8-2006 6-20-06 1       Dltd 25-221-25-252       Added 25-221-25-227 9-2006 8-1-06 1 8-19(a) 10-2006 8-1-06 1, 2 9-18(a), (d) 3 9-18A 11-2006 8-15-06 1 7-112 12-2006 11-7-06 1 25-4 13-2006 12-5-06 1-11 8-16-8-26 12-17       Added 8-27-8-32 14-2006 12-5-06 2 25-73(a), (b)       Added (c)-(f) 1-2007 6-19-07 1 25-271-25-279 2-2007 9-18-07 1       Added 25-73(g) 1-2008 1-15-08 2       Added 17-155-17-162 3 15-153(b) 4       Added (b)G. 5       Added 17-154(a)(12) 6       Added (b)(22) 2-2008 1-15-08 2       Added 18-69-18-84 3 18-7 4 18-61(b) 5 18-62 6 18-63 7 18-64 3-2008 3-4-08 1       Added 13-8 4-2008 6-3-08 1 17-151(1)       Added (2)(f) 5-2008 12-12-08 1       Added 20-6 1-2009 2-3-09 1       Added 17-175-17-177 2-2009  5- 5-09 1 25-222 2, 3       Added 25-226(C)(5), (6) 4-2009 10- 6-09 1 16-1 16-2       Added 16-2.1 16-5 16-22 16-26 16-30 16-31 16-32 16-33       Added 16-65-16-68 5-2009 10- 6-09 1 7-40.2 6-2009 10- 6-09 1 7-77 1-2010  4- 6-10 1 18.5-3(b) 2-2010  5- 4-10 1       Added 16-2(k) 3-2010  6- 1-10 1 12-62 4-2010  6- 1-10 1 8-19(a) 5-2010  6- 1-10 1 9-63       Added 9-65(b)(3) 9-64 9-67 9-68 7-2010  9-21-10 1, 3       Added 9-75-9-83 9-2010 10-19-10 1       Added 21-53 10-2010 10-19-10 1 9-25(d)(1), (2)       Added 9-35.6(d) 1-2011  2- 1-11 1       Added 25-226(b)(9) 2-2011  2-23-11       Added 20-100-20-105 3-2011  3-15-11 1       Added 12-81-12-87 4-2011  4- 5-11 1, 2 19-3, 19-4 5-2011  8-16-11 1 25-91(a)(8) 2-2012  2-21-12 1       Added 21-92-21-95 3-2012  4- 3-12 1       Rpld 25-221-25-227       Added 25-221-25-232 4-2012  4- 3-12 1       Added 13-9 5-2012  6- 5-12 1       Rpld 7-115 2       Added 7-115 6-2012  8-21-12 1       Rpld 25-23 2       Added 25-23 2-2013 12- 3-13 1       Added 25-297 2-2014  1-21-14 1       Added Ch. 25, Art. VII, 20-120-20-122 3-2014  2-18-14 1       Added Ch. 25, Art. III-B, 25-85 2       Added 25-3(9) 4-2014  2-18-14 1       Added Ch. 25, Art. IV-C, 25-107-25-109 2       Added 25-3(8) 5-2014  6- 4-14 1 8-30(c) 7-2014  9- 2-14 1       Added 17-37 1-2015  2- 3-15 1 25-97 2 25-2 2-2015 10- 6-15 1       Added 25-78 3-2015 12- 1-15       Added Ch. 20, Art. VIII, 
20-133-20-138 1-2016  1-19-16 1 9-35.6(a) 2-2016  3- 1-16 1       Added 18-21(c) 2       Added 18-51 4-2016  6-21-16 20-137 7-2016  9-20-16 1 25-230(a)(7)a. 2 25-230(table 25-230.1) 3 25-231(table 25-231.1) 4       Added 25-227(f) 8-2016 10-18-16 1 21-90 2 21-91 1-2017  3-21-17 1 9-16 2       Added 9-18B 3       Added 9-19(3) 4 9-20 5 9-25(c) 3-2017  7-18-17 2       Added 7-120-7-128 4-2017  8-15-17       Added 9-51(b)(11) 1-2018  1-16-18 1 20-6 3-2018  3- 6-18 1 25-4 4-2018  6- 5-18 1 25-224(g) 2-5 25-231 25-232 5-2018  7- 3-18 2 25-69 6-2018  7-17-18 1 25-95(c), (g) 2 25-101(c), (g) 7-2018 11-20-18 1       Added 17-178-17-183 8-2018 11-20-18 1 21-53 9-2018 12- 4-18 1 25-181(f), (g) 10-2018 12-18-18 1 25-73  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1918 COMPILED ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1918 Compiled Ordinances, which are included herein. Sections of the 1918 Compiled Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Compiled 
Ordinances 
1918 Section Section 
this Code Compiled 
Ordinances 
1918 Section Section 
this Code 1 21-1 24 13-5 4 13-1 13-6 6 4-1 33 13-4 4-2 Ch. 48, § 1 7-1 11(1) 6-1 2 21-2 6-16 11(2) 6-17 5(3) 21-51 11(3) 6-18 12 21-47 11(4) 6-20 21-49 11(5) 6-18 Ch. 49, § 1 21-31 11(6) 6-19 2 21-32 11(7) 6-22 Ch. 52, § 1 19-36 11(8) 6-21 19-37 12 19-4 2 19-39 14 19-22 21-50 19-23 3 19-40 19-24 4 19-38 15 19-22 19-40 16 9-19 19-41 5 19-42  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1918 Compiled Ordinances, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1918 Compiled Ordinances, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code  7-27-25 1 3-1  3-19-28 7-35 7-38 11-27-28 1-3 9-36  6-15-31 1 16-21 16-27 16-29 16-30 16-35 2 16-21 3 16-27 4 16-32 16-33 5 16-37  7- 5-32 13-3  1- 6-34 2 12-57 3 12-58-12-60 4 12-46 12-56 5 12-61  3- 5-40 1 5-1 2 5-26 3 5-27 5-29 5-30 4 5-28 5-31 5 5-3 5-4 5-9 6 5-4-5-6 7(2) 5-9 8 5-8 9 5-2 5-3 9(1)-(3) 5-10 9(4) 5-11 9(5) 5-7 9(6) 5-4 9(8), (9) 5-8 10 5-12 12- 8-44 1 15-16 15-17 15-18 2 15-1 15-19 15-20  6- 1-48 21-31 21-32 4 21-33 6 21-34 7 21-35 10-19-48 21-1 21-2 21-47 21-51 6 21-46  5-17-49 15-1 15-20  7-28-49 1 9-51  3-21-50 7-1 11-24-53 1, 2 13-7  6-22-54 21-4 21-49  6-22-54 1 19-56 2 19-57 12-20-55 1 23-16 2 23-17 3 23-36 4 23-37 23-39 5 23-44 6 23-21 23-37 23-38 7 23-41 8 23-42 9 23-43 10 23-40 11 23-61 23-62 12 23-65 13 23-23 23-66 14 23-44 15 23-22 23-25 23-61 16 23-20 17 23-63 23-64 18 23-19 19 23-24 23-40 23-63 22(5) 23-20 23 23-18  4-17-56 8-36 8-37 8-39 8-40 8-41 8-44  6-19-56 8-40 8-51  9- 4-56 1 21-2  1-15-57 1 7-86-7-88 7-90  4- 1-57 1 21-2  9- 2-58 1 23-17 2 23-36 Art./Sec. 12-15-59 I I 25-1 III I 25-3 IV I(a)-(c) 25-67 IV I(d) 25-70 IV I(e) 25-68 IV I(f) 25-66 25-71 IV I(g) 25-72 IV I(h) 25-76 IV II 25-69 IV III 25-74 IV IV(1)(a)-(d) 25-181 IV IV(1)(b) 25-182 IV IV(1)(e) 25-184 IV IV(1)(i) 25-181 IV IV(1)(q) 25-183 IV IV(2)(a)-(c) 25-201 IV IV(2)(d) 25-202 IV IV(3)(b) 25-167 IV IV(3)(c) 25-185 IV IV(3)(d) 25-166 25-168 IV V 25-75 IV VI, VII 25-73 IV VIII 25-77 V I 25-91 V II 25-92 25-93 V IV 25-94 VI I 25-113 VI II 25-111 VI III 25-112 VII I 25-36 VII II 25-37 VII IV 25-36 VIII I 25-266 VIII II 25-267 25-268 IX II 25-38 X III 25-24 X-A 1 25-146 X-A 2 25-147 X-A 3 25-148 X-A 4 25-150 X-A V 25-151 X-A VI 25-149 X-A VII 25-152 XI I 25-51 XI II 25-39 XI III 25-52 XI IV 25-53 XII 1-3 25-21 XIII I 25-22 XIII II 25-5  2- 2-60 19-36-19-42  2- 2-60 1 7-31 2 7-34 3 7-32 4 7-33 5 7-36 7-37 7 7-31 8 7-39  8- 8-61 1, 2 8-1 10- 3-61 25-93  2- 5-62 21-50  4-17-62 1 7-71 3 7-75 4 7-72 7-73 5 7-77 6 7-76 7 7-78  8- 7-62 25-73 25-77 11- 6-62 7-1 R-9-24-63 7-30 10- 9-64 25-37  1- 5-65 21-48 10-19-65 25-76 10-20-65 25-94 12- 7-65 25-71  1- 4-66 25-91 25-113 12- 2-69 1 14-16 2(A)-(D) 14-17 2(E) 14-18 2(F)-(H) 14-17 3 14-19 4 14-20 5 14-21 6 14-22 7 14-23  9-21-71 25-72  1-18-72 25-166-25-168 25-181 25-182 25-184 25-185 25-201 25-202  3-21-72 25-91  9- 5-72 6-1 6-16-6-22  1-16-73 1 9-16 2 9-18 3 9-21 4 9-22 5 9-23 6 9-20 7 9-17 8 9-24 9 9-25 10 9-26 12 9-17  2- 6-73 1 25-221 3, 4 25-223 5 25-225 6 25-226 7 25-228 8 25-229 9 25-246 10 25-249 11 25-247 12 25-248 13 25-250-25-252 14 25-224 25-227 25-233 15 25-230 16(c) 25-231 19 25-232 22(a) 25-222  3-20-73 1 22-16 2, 3 22-17 4 22-18  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Agriculture and 
Markets Law 
Section Section 
this Code Art. 7 4-40 4-48 106 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. III(note) 108 4-39 4-41 114 4-40 4-46 118 4-45 118, subd. 4, 5 4-45 124 4-41 4-42 4-43 4-44 4-46 4-47  
Corrections Law 
Section Section 
this Code Art. 23-A 12-28  
Criminal 
Procedure Law 
Section Section 
this Code 150.20 4-24 4-46  
Education Law 
Section Section 
this Code 807-b 8-26  
Environmental Conservation Law 
Section Section 
this Code Art. 17 18-69 19-0101 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. III(note) 19-0709 Ch. 9, Art. III(note) 23-0101 et seq. Ch. 15(note)  
Executive Law 
Section Section 
this Code 156-e 8-26 381, subdiv. 2 8-30 382 8-21 396 8-18  
General Business Law 
Section Section 
this Code 14 Ch. 19, Art. V(note) 15 3-1 21 et seq. Ch. 5(note) 32 Ch. 16(note) 16-2 Art. 36-A 12-68 52 25-2 392-f 23-20 396-p 23-19 771 12-64  
General 
Construction Law 
Section Section 
this Code 12 1-2 13 1-2 13-a 1-2 14 1-2 15 1-2 19 1-2 20 1-2 22 1-2 23 1-2 24 1-2 25-a 1-2 29 1-2 30 1-2 31 1-2 32 1-2 34-36 1-2 38, 39 1-2 40 1-2 41 1-2 46 1-2 48 1-2 54 1-2 55, 56 1-2 58 1-2 60 1-2 80 1-2 90-96 1-6  
General Municipal Law 
Section Section 
this Code 32 et seq. Ch. 16(note) 78-b 7-117 85-a Ch. 16(note) 16-21 16-26 16-27 180 Ch. 6(note) 6-17 6-18 6-22 181 Ch. 23, Art. II(note) Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 186 3-51 188 3-50 190 3-52 370 21-31 Ch. 21, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 371 21-32 21-33 21-34 372 17-56 373 21-33 476 3-61 477 3-60 480 3-62  
Lien Law 
Section Section 
this Code 5-516 19-1 5-518 19-1 71-a 12-64  
Local 
Governments Law 
Section Section 
this Code 10, para. 6, 7 Ch. 17(note)  
Mental Hygiene Law 
Section Section 
this Code 21.09 13-1  
Municipal Home Rule Law 
Section Section 
this Code 10 17-150 10, subd. 1, para. (i) 2-16 10, subd. 1, para. (ii)a.(1) Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 10, subd. 1, para. (ii)a.(11) Ch. 3(note) Ch. 3, Art. II(note) Ch. 3, Art. II, Div. 2(note) Ch. 4(note) Ch. 5(note) Ch. 5, Art. II(note) Ch. 7(note) Ch. 8(note) Ch. 9(note) Ch. 9, Art. II(note) Ch. 9, Art. III(note) Ch. 9, Art. IV(note) Ch. 12(note) Ch. 12, Art. II, Div. 2(note) Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 2(note) Ch. 13(note) Ch. 14(note) Ch. 15(note) Ch. 16(note) Ch. 18(note) Ch. 19(note) Ch. 22(note) Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 3(note) 10, subd. 4, para. a. 4-25 10, subd. 4, para. b. 1-7 4-26 4-47 6-22 19-3 20-30 20, subd. 3 1-1  
Penal Law 
Section Section 
this Code 55.10 1-7 4-26 4-47 6-22 19-3 20-30 21-4 70.15 1-7 4-26 4-47 6-22 19-3 20-30 21-4 80.05 1-7 4-26 6-22 19-3 20-30 21-4 80.15 4-47 140.00 et seq. 16-3 240.20 19-4 Ch. 19, Art. IV(note) 240.20, para. 2 9-51 240.40 13-1 265.35 13-5 270.10 13-7  
Personal Property Law 
Section Section 
this Code 425 et seq. Ch. 16(note)  
Public Health Law 
Section Section 
this Code 2801 20-88  
Public Officers Law 
Section Section 
this Code 17 2-26 17, subd. 1 2-27 17, subd. 2 2-29 17, subd. 3 2-30 17, subd. 4 2-31 17, subd. 5, 7, 9 2-28 84 et seq. 7-73 17-34 95 et seq. 7-73 17-34 100 et seq. 17-98  
Real Property Tax Law 
Section Section 
this Code 458 20-3 20-6 458-a 20-122 20-6 458-a, subd. 2(c) 20-122 458-a(2)(a)-(c) 20-5 458-a(2)(d)(ii) 20-5 458-a.7. 20-120 458-b 20-6 458-b(iii) 20-6 458(c) 20-122 459 20-4 459-c 20-81 467 20-86 485-a Ch. 20, Art. VIII(note) 20-134 20-135 485-b 17-176 17-177 20-6 485-b, subd. 2 17-176 485-b, subd. 12 17-176 1402(3) 20-41 Art. 19 20-17 1902 20-74 1903 20-71 20-72  
Tax Law 
Section Section 
this Code 186-a Ch. 20, Art. II(note) 186-a, subd. 2 20-21 20-31 186-a, subd. 3 20-23 186-a, subd. 4 20-24 186-a, subd. 5 20-25 186-a, subd. 7 20-27  
Transporation Corporation Law 
Section Section 
this Code 60 23-36  
Vehicle and 
Traffic Law 
Section Section 
this Code 100 21-2 102 6-1 1110 subd. (a) 21-21 1192 13-1 1200 Ch. 21, Art. III(note) 1224 Ch. 14, Art. II(note) 21-93 21-95 1227 13-2 1230 et seq. Ch. 6(note) 1236 6-17 1604 Ch. 19, Art. V(note) Ch. 23, Art. II(note) Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 1640 Ch. 21(note) 1640, subd. (a), para. 6 Ch. 21, Art. III(note) 1640, subd. (a), para. 9 Ch. 21, Art. III, Div. 2(note) 21-73 1640, subd. (a), para. 10 21-3 1640, subd. (a), para. 12 Ch. 19, Art. V(note) 1640, subd. (b) 21-50 21-51 Ch. 21, Art. III, Div. 2(note) 1680 21-21 1683 21-21 1800 21-4  
Village Law 
Section Section 
this Code 4-412, subd. 1 2-16 Ch. 3(note) Ch. 3, Art. II(note) Ch. 4(note) Ch. 5(note) Ch. 7(note) Ch. 8(note) Ch. 9(note) Ch. 9, Art. II(note) Ch. 9, Art. III(note) Ch. 9, Art. IV(note) Ch. 13(note) Ch. 14(note) Ch. 15(note) Ch. 16(note) Ch. 18(note) Ch. 19(note) Ch. 22(note) 4-414 7-114 7-117 7-119 14-21 15-1 19-42 22-18 5-500 Ch. 20(note) 5-516 7-114 7-119 14-21 15-1 19-1 19-42 22-18 5-518 7-119 14-21 15-1 19-1 19-42 22-18 5-530 Ch. 20, Art. II(note) 20-22 5-530, subd. 1, 2 20-21 5-530, subd. 5, 6, 7 20-26 6-600 et seq. 2-1 Ch. 19(note) 6-628 19-3 6-632, subd. 1 Ch. 19, Art. II(note) Ch. 19, Art. III(note) Ch. 19, Art. IV(note) 7-700 Ch. 17(note) Ch. 17, Art. II(note) Ch. 25(note) 7-702 25-3 7-703(3)(d) 25-103 7-703-a 25-107 7-706 25-51 25-52 7-708 25-52 7-712 25-23 10-1110 et seq. 2-17 10-1012 2-17 11-1100 2-1 Ch. 24(note) 11-1118 24-91 14-1400 et seq. 2-1 Ch. 18(note) 14-1438 18-3 20-2006 1-7 4-26 4-47 6-22 19-3 20-30  
